# Archivo original: 2021-tuna-retailer-scorecard-the-high-cost-of-cheap-tuna.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:53 -03 2025

The High 
Cost of 
Cheap 
Tuna
US Supermarkets, 
Sustainability, and 
Human Rights  
at Sea

2 TUNA RETAILER REPORT
Greenpeace is an independent campaigning 
organization that uses peaceful protest and creative 
communication to expose global environmental 
problems and to promote solutions that are 
essential to a green and peaceful future.
Published November 2021 by  
Greenpeace USA*  
702 H Street NW Suite 300  
Washington, DC 20001  
Tel: 202.462.1177
Written by: Josh Stride
Edited by: J. Park
Design by: Kyle Mckibbin
Cover © Alex Hofford / Greenpeace 
Acknowledgement & Special thanks to:  
John Hocevar, Maggie Ellinger-Locke,  
Tegan Gregory, Tanya Brooks, Perry Wheeler,  
Katie Meyer, Diego Johansen, Tim Aubry,  
Yuton Lee, Moffy Chen, Elsa Lee, Andy Shen,  
James Mitchell, Pavel Klinkhammers,  
and Arifsyah Nasution
greenpeace.org
* Greenpeace Inc. is a registered Internal Revenue 
Service 501(c)(4) nonprofit entity that operates in 
the United States of America.

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  3
Table of Contents
4 2021 Tuna Retailer Scorecard
5 Introduction
6 Survey Overview
9 Global (Over)fishing Industry
13  Forced Labor & Distant-Water Fishing
17  Issues and Findings
27  Conclusion
28  Retailer profiles
45  Endnotes
© Alex Hofford / Greenpeace

4 TUNA RETAILER REPORT2021 Tuna Retailer Scorecard
16th2/149HR13th36.2/112Enviro
12.35%Total
#1610th19/149HR16th22.9/112Enviro
14.63%Total
#1515th6/149HR12th36.3/112Enviro
16.95%Total
#1414th6.5/1 49HR11th36.9/112Enviro
17.24%Total
 #137th33.5/149HR15th31.9/112Enviro
20.01%Total
 #1213th10.5/1 49HR10th47.8/1 12Enviro
23.75%Total
 #119th31.5/1 49HR14th35/112Enviro
24.29%Total
 #1012th16.5/1 49HR5th58.5/112Enviro
25.50%Total
 #9
11th18/149HR8th51.2/1 12Enviro
25.93%Total
#86th35.5/1 49HR9th48.7/1 12Enviro
34.34%Total
#7Tied with Target3rd59/149HR7th51.5/112Enviro
42.74%Total
#65th48.5/1 49HR3rd63.9/112Enviro
42.92%Total
 #58th32.5/149HR1st85.5/112Enviro
46.45%Total
 #4Tied with Walmart3rd59/149HR6th53.5/112Enviro
47.92%Total
 #32nd65/149HR4th62.1/112Enviro
52.8%Total
 #21st82.5/149HR2nd76.5/112Enviro
59.77%Total
 #1

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  5When Greenpeace USA published the first edition of 
Carting Away the Oceans  (CATO) in 2008, not a single 
company out of the 16 major US retailers ranked on 
seafood sustainability received a passing score. Most 
of the companies surveyed had hardly given a thought 
to sustainable seafood; many had weak or non-existent 
policies, and commonly stocked highly problematic 
species such as Chilean seabass, parrotfish, and orange 
roughy. Ten years and ten editions later, 90 percent 
of the companies surveyed in 2018 received at least a 
passing score. This success is a testament to a decade 
of hard work by Greenpeace supporters and volunteers, 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), scientists, 
governments, retailers, and suppliers, as well as the value 
of corporate accountability in driving positive change.
However, as scrutiny has illuminated the complex and 
interconnected nature of global seafood supply chains, 
a range of further, often poorly understood issues have 
emerged. From weaknesses and gaps in certification 
schemes and the continued prevalence of Illegal, 
Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) fishing, to the 
exploitation and abuse of often vulnerable crew aboard 
vessels beyond the reach of authorities and regulators, 
seafood supply chains are rife with risk.In response to 
the increasingly central role that labor and human rights 
have come to share alongside environmental concerns in seafood sourcing, Greenpeace has expanded the focus of 
our retailer survey to give equal weight to how companies 
address human rights and environmental issues in their 
sourcing policies. As the most popular wild caught 
seafood – both in the US and worldwide – this report 
focuses specifically on sourcing policies for tuna, both 
canned and fresh/frozen.
As with the first CATO report, the results do not make for 
comfortable reading. Not a single company passed, with 
nearly half of the 17 companies contacted choosing not 
to complete a survey and well over one-third failing to 
respond at all. In light of the complexity of these issues 
and their potential to cause serious reputational damage, 
it is unsurprising that retailers with inadequate human 
rights policies would choose to remain silent.
However, considering the example of the positive 
change driven by a decade of CATO reports, this report is 
ultimately optimistic. Ten years ago, the few companies 
with sustainable seafood policies were conspicuously 
progressive; now, the few without them look degenerate 
and sadly out of step with wider industry and social 
trends. We hope this report can provide a benchmark 
for improvement that, a decade from now, will help to 
highlight how far we’ve come.Introduction
© Pierre Baelen / Greenpeace

Survey Overview
© Tommy Trenchard / Greenpeace

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  7Since 2008, Greenpeace has been inviting major US retailers to complete our survey and ranking 
them based on their responses. Previously, these surveys have focused exclusively on retailers’ 
environmental and sustainability policies, driving measurable change over the decade they have 
been employed.
This year’s survey involved many of the same companies, but included equal weighting for questions related to human 
rights aspects of their sourcing policies. While response rates for our most recent environmental survey were high, 
with nearly 90 percent of companies completing a survey, the addition of a human rights category appears to have 
made many companies uneasy. Of the 16 companies invited, 9 (56%) chose to complete a survey, while 7 (43%) did not. 
However, this reflects a similar pattern to the early exclusively environmental surveys, where unprepared companies 
chose to remain silent, reengaging a few years later once they had put their house in order. The poor response rate 
reflects the lack of development in this area by many companies, as we hope this will be one area where improvements 
will be made in future.
The poor response rate also reflects other, similar surveys undertaken by different organizations, including the Business 
and Human Rights Resource Centre (BHRRC). In 2021, the BHRRC invited 35 companies from around the world to complete 
a survey on their human rights policies, receiving 22 (62%) responses. The BHRRC’s survey included Asian, Australian, 
European, Middle Eastern, and North American companies; while all of the nine European companies responded, less 
than half (6) of the 13 US and Canadian companies responded. 1 While many of the larger, international brands chose to 
complete the Greenpeace survey, many of the smaller, US-based brands did not.
Finally, this survey aims to produce a picture of the current situation and provide a contemporary benchmark against 
which future improvements can hopefully be measured. As a result, points were only awarded for policies and activities 
currently in place and did not consider future plans. There are encouraging signs amongst some retailers and we hope 
that these will be reflected in improved scores in future editions.
Despite more than a decade since the introduction of 
the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and 
Human Rights (UNGP), as well as a series of high-profile 
and severe cases of labor and human rights abuse in 
tuna supply chains, the results of this survey confirm that 
supermarkets continue to fail on human rights. With the 
exception of a few standout examples of leadership in 
particular areas, the retail industry as a whole has taken 
inadequate steps to address the human rights impacts 
of their business operations. This is reflected in the fact 
that none of the retailers surveyed managed to achieve a 
passing grade.
The results of this survey also broadly reflect the findings 
of other recent work to assess the human rights efforts of 
large companies. In 2018, Oxfam assessed 16 international 
supermarkets on transparency and treatment of workers, 
small-scale farmers, and women in their supply chains 
– including some of those covered by this survey – and 
found failure across the board. 2 The World Benchmarking 
Alliance’s annual Corporate Human Rights Benchmark 
(WBA) report 3 for 2020 saw its worst results since the 
benchmark was first published in 2017, with nearly half 
of the over 200 companies surveyed failing to score any points for their human rights due diligence work. According 
to the WBA “only a minority of companies demonstrate 
the willingness and commitment to take human rights 
seriously. ” One of the key challenges identified by the 
Benchmark was the gulf between commitments made at 
an executive level and implementation at a practical level, 
a disparity further confirmed by the results of this survey.
Finally, in 2021, the findings of a survey of 35 global tuna 
brands by the Business and Human Rights Resource 
Centre (BHRRC) – again including some of the companies 
covered in this survey – confirm “a pattern of policy 
over practice” and “expose glacial progress” on issues 
related to modern slavery in tuna supply chains. 4 Despite 
some positive signs of limited progress centred on a few 
progressive brands, practical and meaningful action has 
been largely inadequate, and details remain scarce.
The findings of our survey add further weight to calls 
for supermarkets to do more to tackle labor and human 
rights abuses in their supply chains. The limited actions 
taken by retailers thus far have been widely considered 
inadequate by advocates.Supermarkets Failing on Human Rights

8 TUNA RETAILER REPORTSurvey Methodology
The survey results are based on retailers’ answers to 38 
questions in the following categories: tuna procurement 
policy, traceability, advocacy and initiatives, human 
rights and labor protections, current sourcing, and 
customer education and labeling. Retailers who chose not 
to respond to our survey were graded based on publicly 
available information.
Responses to questions in the six categories named above 
were given raw point scores, which were then weighted 
and aggregated to provide a final percentage score. The 
following table reflects the distribution of raw points and 
percentage weighting for each category:
CategoryMax 
raw 
points Weighting
Tuna procurement policy 84 20%
Traceability 27 20%
Advocacy and initiatives 29 10%
Human rights and  
labor protections51 25%
Current sourcing 53 20%
Customer education/labeling 14 5%
The intention of this report is to provide an assessment 
of retailers’ tuna supply chain policies that gives 
consideration to both environmental and human rights 
concerns. We categorized our questions in the manner 
described above in order to give appropriate emphasis 
to qualitatively distinct areas of retailer responsibility. 
In doing so, we hope to highlight for both retailers and 
customers the problems with existing supply chain 
policies, as well as the solutions that must be implemented 
to correct them.
Survey Scoring
Human rights and environmental policy are complex 
and evolving fields that touch a broad range of issues – 
including domestic and global politics, socio-economics, 
migration, climate change, and resource management – and impact a wide spectrum of actors – from small-
business owners and corporations to migrant fishers, 
seafood processors and western consumers. There are 
different, occasionally competing, schools of thought 
and approaches to policy with results often difficult or 
impossible to measure.
As a result, we recognize that there is always subjectivity 
involved in policy decisions and the assessment of those 
decisions. With this in mind, we have endeavoured to be 
as fair as possible and, where appropriate, give companies 
the benefit of the doubt, particularly where clear effort 
and engagement has been made.
“Responsive companies” were those companies who 
chose to complete a survey themselves, a positive 
engagement which should be commended. In recognition 
of this, we have taken answers in good faith and not 
sought to rigorously verify statements or claims made in 
response. Policies and their contents were verified — but 
verifying detailed, supply chain specific information is 
beyond the scope of this report.
“Non-responsive companies” were those who chose not 
to complete their own survey and were instead scored 
on publicly available information. Significant efforts 
were made to find and reference relevant policies, but 
the number of companies and amount of information 
available mean some may have been missed. In categories 
requiring specific information – such as inventory and 
catch methods – educated guesses were made using 
online inventory searches, publicly available policies 
and statements, working group membership, and other 
factors. Again, this work was undertaken in a spirit of 
good faith and desire for accuracy, but would have been 
greatly aided – and perhaps produced more favourable 
results – by full engagement from more retailers.
© SBMI / Afriadi Hikmal

© Paul Hilton / GreenpeaceGlobal (Over)fishing Industry

10 TUNA RETAILER REPORTThe scale of global capture fisheries can be difficult to fathom. In 2018 alone, nearly 100 million 
tons of fish were harvested from our seas – an increase of more than five percent in just three years 
– with a total first sale value of more than $150 billion. 5 That’s around 22 pounds of wild caught fish 
for every person on the planet. 6 In addition, as much as 26 million tons, worth a further $23 billion, 
are lost to illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing every year. 7
According to the UN, global fish stocks have been in continuous decline since the ‘70s, with around one-third now being 
fished at biologically unsustainable levels, a three-fold increase since 1974. 8/9 However, recent historical modelling now 
suggests that annual global catch between 1950 and 2010 was underestimated by at least one-third, and has been 
declining faster than previously thought. 10
The decline can be partly explained by the fact that the global fishing fleet has more than doubled from 1.7 million in 
1950 to 3.7 million in 2015, with around 4.6 million today. 11/12 Concurrently, engine power has increased significantly 
since the 1950s, leading to more vessels capable of going further out to sea for longer, placing greater pressure on 
the oceans. 13 Worryingly, the growth in fleet size and engine power appears to be continuing. If trends continue, it is 
estimated that a further one million powered vessels could be added to the global fishing fleet over the next twenty 
to thirty years, piling pressure onto already stressed ocean resources, increasing fuel emissions and contributing to 
climate change. 14
Harmful fisheries subsidies, including tax breaks and fuel subsidies, have been identified as a primary driver of continued 
and expanding overcapacity, as well as overfishing. 15 Handed out primarily by wealthy countries, harmful subsidies also 
inflate profitability and drive more fishing. In 2018, a total of $22.2 billion was spent on harmful fisheries subsidies, 
with the top 10 countries accounting for around 70 per cent of the total. 16 It is estimated that more than half of high 
seas fishing grounds would be rendered unprofitable if subsidies were eliminated. 17 The countries and regions with 
the highest harmful subsidies are also some of those responsible for the largest proportion of global catch, including 
China, Russia, the USA, Taiwan, and Spain. 18 By fuelling overfishing, increasing competition, and distorting the true 
profitability of particular fishing activities, high levels of harmful subsidies are now considered to be a key contributing 
factor to labor abuse at sea. 19
Finally, in addition to fishing pressures, ocean warming driven by climate change is estimated to have reduced marine 
catches by nearly 5 percent between 1930 and 2010 – a period of much slower ocean warming than we are currently 
experiencing – and has already seen a shift in the distribution of many species, including tuna. 20 Continued overfishing 
by large and largely unaccountable industrial fleets, harmful government subsidies, weak regulation, and increased 
demand has seen fish stocks steadily decline, while fishing has continued to increase over the same period. The result 
is that fishing vessels must now work twice as hard to catch the same amount as they did in the 1950s. 21
“The sustainability of many of the 
world’s capture fisheries continues 
to be hampered by overexploitation, 
overcapacity, ineffective management, 
harmful subsidies, by-catch…and illegal, 
unreported, and unregulated fishing, with 
ongoing habitat degradation and loss of 
gear creating further pressures on the 
marine environment.”  
     — UN World Ocean Assessment Vol I22Tuna (Over)fishing Industry
Tuna is one of the most popular and high-value seafoods 
in the world. 23 Taken together, tuna and tuna-like species 
represent more than ten percent of global catch, or just 
under eight million tons. 24 However, the tuna industry 
primarily focuses on seven species – skipjack, yellowfin, 
bigeye, albacore, and Atlantic, Pacific, and southern bluefin 
– which accounted for 5.2 million tons in 2018, or seven 
percent of all fish landed for human consumption. Catch 
volumes for 2018, the most recent recorded year, were up 
more than 12 percent compared with six years earlier. 25
Just one species – skipjack, primarily used for canning – 
accounts for nearly 60 percent of tuna catch, and almost 
five percent of all fish caught globally; in fact, skipjack 
has been the third most caught fish in the world for nearly 

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  11ten years in a row. Together with the second most landed 
tuna species – yellowfin – these two accounted for over 
85 percent of all tuna landed in 2018. 26 In the US, canned 
tuna is the third most popular seafood, with the average 
American consuming more than two pounds annually. 27/28
Tuna and the industry that relies on them are valuable, 
with catches of the seven species netting fishers $11.7 
billion in 2018. 29 However, the end market value of these 
products paid by the consumer is estimated to be worth 
almost four times as much at more than $40 billion. 30 
Such large sums attract fierce competition for the biggest 
share, with power in the industry concentrated in the 
hands of a few. FCF, one of the top three tuna trading 
companies in the world with a history of severe labor 
abuses within its supply chain 31, accounts for more than 
500,000 tons of tuna annually and touches nearly every 
aspect of the global tuna supply chain.
The use and value of these species varies considerably, 
from lower value skipjack and yellowfin for canning to 
more valuable bluefin species for high-end sushi and 
sashimi. Despite accounting for nearly 60 percent of catch 
volume, skipjack represents less than 40 percent of the 
total end value for all tuna. 32 Conversely, the three bluefin 
species – Atlantic, Pacific, and Southern – represent just 
1.3 percent of total catch but more than six percent of 
value.
Despite 2018’s catch being 12 percent larger than 2012, 
the amount paid to fishers was half a billion dollars 
less, leading some to suggest that ideal catch levels for 
maximum economic benefit may in fact be lower than 
the determined maximum sustainable yield (MSY). 33 In 
addition, over capacity and excessive fishing pressure 
– driven by high market demand for tuna – threaten a 
number of important tuna species across the planet. 
As of 2018, stocks of eastern Pacific yellowfin, Pacific 
bluefin, Atlantic bigeye, Indian Ocean yellowfin, and 
southern bluefin were overfished, while other stocks 
are severely depleted and unable to sustain any further 
increase in fishing. 34 Many place the blame for this on 
poor management, a lack of oversight and a prioritization 
of short-term profits over the long-term health of fish 
populations. 35 As a result, around one third of tuna stocks 
are fished at biologically unsustainable levels. 36
Gear, Bycatch and Wider  
Environmental Impact
Tuna are a vitally important species, ecologically as well 
as economically. Occupying the top end of the food chain, 
tuna are a key predator, as well as providing prey to larger 
species such as sharks and killer whales. As eggs, larva, and young fish they are also a vital food source for a wide 
range of animals, including invertebrates and other fish. 37 
In order to protect themselves from sharks and other 
predators, yellowfin tuna schools are known to associate 
with dolphin pods. In fact, in some fisheries dolphins 
have historically been used to locate schools of tuna; nets 
located this way are known as “dolphin sets. ” 38 Despite 
improved regulation of dolphin sets, the International 
Seafood Sustainability Foundation (ISSF) reports that 
three percent of tuna globally, or nearly 160,000 tons, is 
still caught this way. 39
Dolphin sets are one strategy employed by purse seine 
vessels, which deploy massive encircling nets dropped 
onto schools of fish and are cinched at the bottom like 
a purse. More than two-thirds, or 3.4 million tons, of 
all tuna are still caught using this method, despite its 
association with high levels of bycatch. In the open 
ocean, where resources and shelter are scarce, often 
rudimentary floating rafts act as Fish Aggregation Devices 
(FADs), attracting animals from far and wide, alongside 
the target tuna. Nets are set around these FADs, capturing 
a host of other species with the tuna. These are known as 
“associated” catch and account for more than one third of 
all tuna caught; “unassociated” catches set without FADs 
account for around a quarter of tuna caught globally. 40
The second most common fishing method – longlining 
– accounts for ten percent of all tuna caught and is also 
fraught with risk to other important species, including 
sharks, turtles, and seabirds. Thousands of baited hooks 
are dragged through the water on lines stretching around 
30 miles long, inevitably catching other hungry animals in 
the process. This method is also extremely labor intensive, 
with many hands working many hours required to bait, 
set and retrieve the lines. Industrial tuna longliners – 
usually between 30 and 70 metres long – often stay away 
from their home ports for between 10 and 24 months. 41 
Perhaps unsurprisingly, longliners have been involved in 
a number of serious cases of labor abuse, including those 
documented in a 2020 report by Greenpeace East Asia, 
detailing the abuse of Indonesian migrant fishers aboard 
Taiwanese longliners. 42“Stock depletion, lack of recovery, 
and associated loss of value are 
often driven by fisheries managers’ 
prioritization of short-term profits 
over the long-term health of fish 
populations.”  
 — PEW

12 TUNA RETAILER REPORTTuna behaviour and unselective gear make bycatch a 
serious problem in tuna fisheries, with an unquantified and 
perhaps unquantifiable ecological impact. Unfortunately, 
the most selective gears – pole and line, and handline – 
have seen catches decline by almost half in the six years 
from 2012 to 2018, from 9.5 percent to 5.6 percent of total 
catch, accompanied by a 40 percent drop in earnings. 43 
One of the reasons cited is a reduction in the number of 
pole and line vessels in Indonesia – which catches most of 
the world’s tuna – due to declining profitability. 44
Transhipment-at-sea
Transhipment-at-sea is a key concern for both 
environmental and human rights protection in supply 
chains. In many ways, the now widespread use of 
transhipment enables many of the commercial fishing 
industry’s most damaging practices, including IUU fishing 
and human rights abuse, and has been identified by the 
ILO as facilitating IUU fishing, forced labor and human 
trafficking. 45 In fact, transhipment-at-sea of tuna catches 
has increased rapidly over the past decade, including a 67 
percent rise between 2012 and 2017 in the area managed 
by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission 
(IATTC). 46 Many of the same drivers of abusive labor 
practices – diminished stocks requiring longer, further, 
more expensive fishing trips and reduced profitability 
– are also behind an increase in transhipments-at-sea. 
By transhipping catch onto refrigerated cargo vessels 
(Reefers) at sea, vessels can avoid returning to port for 
extended periods, sometimes for years, reducing costs 
and maximizing fishing time.The catches of many vessels are amalgamated onto one 
reefer, often beyond the reach of authorities, increasing 
the potential for fraud and laundering of illegally caught 
fish. By remaining far at sea and failing to report their 
locations, vessels can avoid official scrutiny of their 
activity and transhipments. Fishers aboard these vessels, 
in addition to spending extremely long periods at sea, will 
find it difficult to report abuse, injuries, or deaths, and 
seek assistance. 47
Monopoly Traders, Centralized 
Power and Rights Abuses
Behind the brands on the shelf is a long, complicated and 
largely hidden chain leading from can to catching vessel. 
A range of companies operate all levels of this chain, while 
some large companies and their subsidiaries are active 
throughout its entirety. The three largest tuna traders 
– FCF (Taiwan), Tri Marine (Italy), and Itochu (Japan) – 
dominate the tuna supply chain, with involvement in 
catching, processing, distribution, and on-shelf brands. In 
2020, FCF-owned Bumble Bee, Thai Union-owned Chicken 
of the Sea and Dongwon Industries-owned Starkist were 
named in a class-action lawsuit over price fixing, with 
Bumble Bee fined USD 25 million. 48
With so few companies controlling or supplying so much 
of the market, illegal or abusive practices in just one can 
spread far across the supply chain and make it very easy 
for tainted catch to enter global markets. FCF alone deals 
with over 500,000 tons of tuna annually, supplying its 
own brands, as well as the world’s largest tuna canner 
– Thai Union, which produces 
around 18 percent of global canned 
tuna – as well as Thailand’s other 
two largest tuna canneries. 49 FCF 
requires some 600 different fishing 
vessels to provide it with sufficient 
volume. An extensive investigation 
by Greenpeace East Asia found that 
a number of vessels supplying FCF 
were involved in IUU fishing and 
labor abuse. 50
Such a degree of centralisation – 
with long, winding chains linking 
just a few companies to most of 
the tuna consumed in wealthier 
countries – increases the likelihood 
of fish caught illegally or under 
abusive conditions ending up on 
supermarket shelves.
© Jeremy Sutton-Hibbert / Greenpeace

Forced Labor & 
Distant-Water Fishing
© Paul Hilton / Greenpeace

14 TUNA RETAILER REPORT11 Forced Labor Indicators
	|Abuse of vulnerability
	|Deception
	|Restriction of movement
	|Isolation
	|Physical and sexual violence
	|Intimidation and threats
	|Retention of identity documents
	|Withholding of wages
	|Debt bondage
	|Abusive working and living conditions
	|Excessive overtimeThe International labor Organization (ILO) has outlined 11 key forced labor indicators, designed 
to help frontline officials, NGOs, and others to more easily identify situations that may constitute 
forced labor. According to the ILO, the presence of just one indicator may imply forced labor, but it 
may also be necessary to identify several indicators in order to accurately assess the situation.
arrangement of coastal, flag, port, and other states make 
it unlikely they would know who to contact for assistance, 
even if that was possible at all. 54 The frequent use of flags 
of convenience – where a vessel flies a flag other than 
that of the country where it is owned in order to take 
advantage of reduced regulation, including on labor – 
make it difficult to regulate a vessel’s activities. 55/56
All of these factors mean that the ILO’s fourth indicator 
– Isolation – is present in the conditions of employment 
for most of those working aboard tuna fishing vessels. 
According to the ILO, “victims of forced labor are often 
isolated in remote locations, denied contact with the 
outside world. ” 57 In addition, “workers may not know 
where they are, the worksite may be far from habitation 
and there may be no means of transportation available. ” 58 
On top of making crew more vulnerable to forced labor, 
isolation associated with distant-water fishing also makes 
it very difficult to quantify the extent of labor abuse at sea 
or enforce regulations.
The ILO’s final indicator – Excessive Overtime – is not 
necessarily an intrinsic aspect of tuna fishing, but 
is a common complaint of fishers and an issue the 
international community continues to grapple with. Even 
in fairly well-regulated, near-water fisheries, such as 
Ireland, migrant fishers report regularly working 20 hours 
a day. 59 In order to maximize the return on investment 
in fuel, labor, and maintenance, take full advantage of 
limited fishing days and pressure to fill allocated quotas, 
fishers all over the world work very long hours while at 
sea. On longline vessels, which catch around ten percent 
of the world’s tuna, it can take up to eight hours to set the 
net and 12 to retrieve it. 60In fishing – particularly distant-water tuna fishing – the 
nature of the industry and those who work in it mean a 
number of indicators are circumstantial and inherently 
present. The industry is heavily reliant on migrant workers, 
meaning many of those employed in distant-water fishing 
will likely “lack knowledge of the local language and laws, ” 
making them susceptible to “Abuse of Vulnerability” , the 
ILO’s first indicator. 51 Additionally, the nature of long-
distance fishing – including dangerous and arduous work, 
long periods at sea, and poor living conditions – makes 
the work unattractive to those with other options. 52 As a 
result, those working in fishing may “have few livelihood 
options…or have other characteristics that set them apart 
from the majority population, are especially vulnerable 
to abuse and more often found in forced labor, ” putting 
them at higher risk of abuse. 53
Tuna fishing also involves long periods spent at sea in 
remote parts of the world, including on the high seas 
where official jurisdictions can be unclear. Tuna vessels 
regularly make trips of many months and, in extreme 
cases, even years. At any given time, the average fisher 
working aboard a tuna vessel is extremely unlikely to 
know where they are. Even if they did, a complicated As a result of these realities, attempts to establish hard 
and fast regulations around working and rest hours 
are often impractical and impossible to enforce. While 
the ILO’s Work in Fishing Convention (C.188) – arguably 
the most robust and high-profile attempt at regulation 
– stipulates required hours of rest in daily and weekly 
periods, ratification remains scandalously low. According 
to the ILO, “the slow pace of ratification of conventions 
inhibits effective flag and port State control of safety and 
labor standards in the fisheries sector, and undermines 

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  15
“All over the world, human and labor 
rights violations and abuses in the 
sector have been documented, and 
despite commendable efforts by many 
governments and the industry, there 
are still too many cases of unacceptable 
practices taking place. These occur not 
only in developing countries but also in 
the developed world, and at all stages 
along value chains. ”  
 – UN F AO61
© Adhi Wicaksono / Greenpeace

16 TUNA RETAILER REPORTimportant opportunities to prevent and detect instances 
of forced labor and human trafficking on board fishing 
vessels. ” 62 Since 2007, just 19 countries have ratified 
the convention, including the Democratic Republic of 
Congo and Bosnia Herzegovina, with 35 miles of coastline 
between them. None of the major tuna fishing nations 
have ratified and, while seven of the 19 countries are in 
the EU, Europe’s largest tuna fleet and the world’s fifth 
largest tuna nation – Spain – is conspicuously absent. 
These regulatory failings mean that excessive hours 
remain a reality for many fishers around the world.
With two of 11 indicators inherent in tuna fishing work, 
and another a common reality for many, it is clear that 
the nature of the work puts the largely migrant crew at 
significant risk.
Forced Labor & Overfishing
Until recently, the majority of fisheries research has 
focused on environmental and economic considerations, 
with limited attention given to human rights issues. While 
the links between environmental damage and human 
rights abuses are well-established in industries such as 
agriculture, mining, and logging, those in fisheries are 
less well explored. 63 The transient and remote nature 
of fishing makes research challenging, but a number of 
high-profile reports and media investigations in recent 
years have brought increased focus to labor issues in 
fishing. 64/65
Fisheries have long been plagued by precarious forms of 
employment, including forced labor and slavery at the 
most extreme end of the spectrum. 66 The nature of off-
shore and long-distance commercial fishing – including 
long periods spent far out to sea in areas of complex 
jurisdictional overlap – makes monitoring and oversight 
extremely challenging. Large segments of the industry 
rely on refrigerated cargo vessels (reefers) to transfer 
catch and resupply crew and provisions, meaning many 
vessels can stay at sea for months without returning to 
port. 67
As awareness and understanding has evolved, it has 
become increasingly clear that the consequences of 
overfishing – driven by demand for cheap seafood in 
wealthy, largely Western countries – go far beyond 
threats to particular species or the destruction of marine 
ecosystems. The lives and livelihoods of hundreds of 
millions of people, mostly in less developed countries, 
are intrinsically connected to the health of our oceans. 
According to the Intergovernmental Science-Policy 
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES), 
alterations to biodiversity, such as that resulting from overfishing, often erode economies, livelihoods, food 
security, health, and quality of life worldwide. 68
One group that has felt the impacts of overfishing more 
sharply than most are the millions employed in global 
capture fisheries. With vessels forced to travel further 
and fish for longer, crew must inevitably spend more 
time at sea. The increased effort means lower returns for 
operators, creating a strong incentive to reduce overheads. 
With other costs relatively fixed, labor – which accounts 
for between 30-50 percent of fishing costs – is an obvious 
target for reductions. Substandard living conditions, poor 
health and safety standards, and arbitrary deductions or 
even withholding of pay are well-documented in both 
developing and developed countries. 69/70
Increased scrutiny and closer analysis in recent years 
– including improved utilization of technology – has 
yielded a more detailed and accurate understanding of 
commercial fishing work. Predominantly migrant crews, 
far from their homes, work long, arduous hours aboard 
commercial vessels where poor conditions and low 
healthy safety standards make an already dangerous job 
even more risky. 71 In addition to the risks inherent with 
the job – consistently ranked as one of the most dangerous 
in the world – numerous cases of extreme labor abuse 
have emerged in recent years. Some cases have involved 
hundreds of crew subjected to shocking treatment, 
including forced confinement and physical abuse, and 
there are even allegations of suspected murder. 72
While overfishing is just one of a range of factors 
contributing to an increased risk of labor and human 
rights abuses at sea, it is clear that more effort for less fish 
places operators under financial pressures that are easily 
offset onto their crew. The drive to maximize productivity 
means excessive hours are commonplace and the need to 
travel further means some crew spend months or more 
at sea.
The fishing industry is diverse, constituting many 
different types and sizes of vessel deploying a range of 
gear to catch a wide array of species over a vast area. 
Levels of governance and oversight also vary considerably 
and involve many actors, including Port, Flag, Market 
and Coastal States, Regional Fisheries Management 
Organisations (RFMOs) and other international regulatory 
and certification bodies such as the United Nations and 
Marine Stewardship Council (MSC), presenting a range of 
governance challenges. Many factors contribute to the 
relative risks associated with any individual vessel, and 
as understanding of these issues has improved it has 
become clear that certain segments of the industry where 
particular conditions prevail present a higher risk than 
others.

Issues and Findings
© Jiri Rezac / Greenpeace

18 TUNA RETAILER REPORTFindings Overview
Overall, none of the retailers surveyed received a passing 
score. While some – including Whole Foods, Aldi, and Hy-
Vee – continued their good performance on Environmental 
issues, no one managed to make a passing grade for their 
Human Rights work. As a result, even the highest overall 
scores were short of a passing mark.
The strongest performances, particularly on Human Rights, 
were generally associated with the larger companies, 
while smaller and more regional retailers lagged some 
way behind. The top four - Aldi, Ahold Delhaize, Target, 
and Walmart - were all large, multinational corporations, 
while the bottom four - Southeast Grocers, Meijer, Publix, 
and Wegmans - were mostly much smaller, regional 
retailers. Greenpeace recognizes that larger companies 
have the resources and expertise to dedicate to many of 
these issues, which can be costly and time consuming. 
It is also worth noting that the size and profile of larger 
companies has previously made many of them the focus 
of damning supply chain investigations and exposés; a 
fact that goes some way to explaining their considerably 
more advanced positions on these issues. However, it 
is the responsibility of all businesses to consider the 
potential human rights impacts of their operations, and 
the lack of engagement by some companies seems as 
much a problem of culture as it is of resources.
Poor performance in the Human Rights category was 
disappointing, though not surprising. Despite the UNGPs 
being widely accepted for over a decade, incorporation 
into the policies and practices of many businesses has 
been slow and often incomplete. The gulf between some 
of the larger companies at the top and rest of the retailers 
meant the competition was extremely one-sided in the 
Human Rights category, though all scores were poor and 
a high ranking should not be conflated with adequate work in these areas. While even the highest Human Rights 
scores (Aldi, Ahold Delhaize, Target) fell well below a 
passing grade, those at the bottom (Southeast Grocers, 
Publix, Wegmans) appear to have barely considered the 
issue.
The Environment category was more competitive, where 
considerable awareness raising and work means that 
even some of the worst laggards have made steady 
improvements on their environmental sourcing policies. 
While some companies maintained a strong performance 
on environmental issues, others dropped points for a 
failure to incorporate key developments into their sourcing 
policies. All companies had seafood sustainability policies 
in place, but many had developed or improved little since 
last surveyed in 2018.
Aldi US  took the top spot overall, receiving the highest 
score in the overall Human Rights category, as well as 
across a range of sections, including Tuna Procurement 
and Advocacy. In combination with historically strong 
performance on environmental issues (3rd in CATO 2018), 
Aldi’s comprehensive, stand-alone forced labor policy — 
which draws on a number of internationally recognized 
standards, including the UN Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human Rights (UNGP) — helped push them 
into first place overall.
Ahold Delhaize  came second, building on an average 
historical performance on environmental issues (9th in 
CATO 2018) with the second highest Human Rights score, 
putting them in second place overall. Ahold Delhaize’s 
Human Rights commitments were clear and easy to 
find, and help to form the core of their ethical sourcing 
practices. Target  and Walmart tied for third place in 
the Human Rights category, with Target’s supply chain The supermarket survey consists of a range of questions covering fundamental human rights and 
environmental concerns associated with global tuna supply chains. Since 2008 Greenpeace has 
surveyed and ranked US supermarkets based on their commitment to sustainable sourcing from a 
largely environmental point of view. While this survey continues the focus on environmental issues, 
it also seeks to establish a benchmark for how human rights issues are integrated into corporate 
social responsibility.
The human rights questions in the survey are based on the UNGPs, which were unanimously endorsed by the UN Human 
Rights Council over a decade ago. The UNGPs set out a clear and robust framework for ensuring businesses respect the 
human rights of everyone affected by their business activities, including those working at all tiers of their supply chain. 
Despite being endorsed over a decade ago, many companies are still failing.

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  19policies scoring highest in the Human Rights section of 
the survey and Walmart’s just behind. Both stood out, 
though in a field where the bar was already fairly low; 
nearly one-third of companies scored zero or worse on 
Human Rights. Importantly, labor practices at retail stores 
themselves are not part of our rankings.
Southeast Grocers  came dead last overall, scoring just 
two points for the overall Human Rights category — 
compared with Aldi’s 82.5 —and minus four points in the 
human rights section of the survey, one of four companies 
to receive a negative score in this section. Meijer  finished 
15th out of 16 despite completing their own survey, a fact 
that gave most other companies an advantage, taking 
the lowest scores in a number of sections, including Tuna 
Procurement and traceability. Publix  also ended up in the 
bottom three, narrowly losing out to Wegmans, scoring 
just six in the human rights category and performing 
similarly poorly to a number of other retailers of similar 
size and character on environmental issues.
Policies
Policies provide the foundation for a company’s 
commitment to ethical sourcing and should articulate 
a practical framework to achieve its goals. All of the 
companies included in this report had some form of policy 
covering environmental and human rights aspects of 
their businesses. All but one company had a responsible 
sourcing policy that covered tuna procurement across all 
categories and stores. The majority also state that their 
policies cover 100 percent of the tuna they sell, while 
the remainder covered between 90 and 99 percent. Only 
Meijer, whose policy does not cover canned tuna, failed to 
cover at least 90 percent.
While having a policy is important, it is their 
content and implementation that matters 
most. A number of international frameworks 
and principles exist, which provide a 
sound basis on which to build an effective 
policy. In order to embed these principles 
into practice, it is important that they are 
referenced explicitly as part of best practice. 
As a result, some key survey questions 
required policies to make specific reference 
to a number of these instruments, including 
the International Bill of Human Rights, the 
ILO Work in Fishing Convention (C188) and 
the UN Guiding Principles on Business and 
Human Rights (UNGP). Unfortunately, when 
examined more closely, most policies lacked 
the specificity and detail to make them truly effective, particularly on human rights issues. While most 
policies had concrete environmental commitments, such 
as not sourcing from “red” fisheries or requiring MSC 
certification, only two explicitly referenced important, 
internationally recognized human rights frameworks, 
including the UNGP .
The lack of specific and detailed commitments is reflected 
in the failing grades across the board, despite widespread 
adoption of policies. On important questions related to 
these principles, no company scored full points, while the 
vast majority scored zero.
Transhipment-at-sea
In order to strengthen monitoring and oversight, and 
ultimately put an end to transhipment-at-sea, strong 
industry leadership is required. Unfortunately, none of 
the companies surveyed had policies completely banning 
tuna sourced from vessels engaged in transhipment-at-
sea. Half of the companies allowed the practice where 
there was 100 percent observer coverage. However, 
observers are usually deployed on carrier vessels, 
meaning fishing methods, locations, and conditions 
aboard catching vessels are largely unmonitored. 73 In 
addition, observers are not mandated or trained to deal 
with crew welfare issues and observer coverage does not 
address many of the human rights concerns associated 
with transhipping. Most importantly, significant risk 
of human rights and environmental abuses remains 
wherever transhipment-at-sea persists. Worryingly, over 
one third of retailers did not have a publicly available 
stance on the issue which – given its longstanding 
association with damaging environmental and human 
rights practices – is unacceptable.
© Pierre Gleizes / Greenpeace

20 TUNA RETAILER REPORTContracts and Recruitment
Contracts, or their lack, and fraudulent recruitment have 
been a significant issue related to the treatment of fishers, 
and can serve as indicators of forced labor. According to 
the ILO, “migrant workers often do not have an adequate 
written contract” and “once on board, fishers may find the 
conditions of their employment contract not respected 
or their contracts substituted. ” 74 Migrant workers have 
often been found to have inadequate contracts, making 
their situation ambiguous and subject to the whims of 
those in charge. Many in the fishing industry are subject 
to debt bondage as a result of predatory fees imposed by 
employment agencies. Out of desperation or as a result 
of coercion, migrant workers regularly sign contracts 
that are not in their native language or which they do 
not otherwise fully understand. 75 This practice suggests 
the presence of the ILO’s second forced labor indicator, 
“deception” . When combined with the already existing 
indicators of “abuse of vulnerability” , and “isolation” 
inherent for migrant fishers in distant-water fleets, this 
situation could easily turn into one of forced labor.
In a sector characterized by informality, a high proportion 
of migrant workers and regular labor shortages, the 
recruitment and employment of crew is often poorly 
regulated and can involve a significant power imbalance. 
Recruiters, brokers, agents, and middlemen are frequently 
used to match workers with employers across regions and 
countries, and often charge fees for placement, travel or 
other services. 76 These fees and their deductions can be 
unclear or deliberately hidden, leaving fishers vulnerable 
to the ILO’s ninth indicator of forced labor, “debt bondage. ” 
According to the ILO, “forced laborers are often working 
in an attempt to pay off an incurred…debt. The debt can 
arise from wage advances or loans to cover recruitment or 
transport costs. ” 77As a result, significant international effort has been 
directed towards improving and legitimizing recruitment 
channels for migrant fishers and ensuring they are 
provided with clear contracts written in their native 
language. 78/79/80
Retailers must take an active role in ensuring the 
recruitment and employment of fishers on supplier 
vessels is fair, equitable and legitimate, which should 
be reflected in their sourcing policies. Unfortunately, 
only two companies explicitly required their suppliers 
to provide contracts in compliance with ILO core labor 
standards, signed by both the worker and vessel owner, 
and in a language the employee is fluent in. Five of 16 
companies also had explicit requirements for the way 
suppliers recruit workers, including the exclusive use 
of officially sanctioned channels, and abiding by the 
“employer pays principle” , which places the burden of 
any recruitment fees onto the employer, reducing the risk 
of debt bondage. Unfortunately, two-thirds of companies 
surveyed failed to include contracts and recruitment in 
their policies or supplier requirements.
Freedom of Associat ion & 
Collective Bargaining
Freedom of association and collective bargaining 
represent essential tools for workers to gain and exercise 
their rights. These freedoms are even more important 
where there is a significant power imbalance between 
employers and employees, such as migrant workers in 
global supply chains, and particularly aboard fishing 
vessels. With a disparate community of workers, from a 
range of often poor countries, spread across the globe on 
a variety of vessels flying many different flags, working 
long hours in an extremely dangerous job, unions and 
similar organizing tools represent a key method for fishers 
to gain, understand and exercise their rights. According 
to the FAO, despite the fact that “far too many cases of 
unacceptable practices persist…the voices of fishers and 
fishworkers are simply not heard. ” 81
The ILO also recognizes that “the right to join unions in 
host countries is an effective way to help prevent migrant 
labor abuse, ” but membership is low, with one estimate 
suggesting that organized fishers accounted for less than 
0.25 percent of the workforce. 82 As a result, this survey 
and report seek to move this issue onto the agenda of 
major retailers, even if most will require a concerted 
effort to receive credit for these questions in the future. 
Well over a third of companies were unable to confirm 
their commitment to collective bargaining in their own 
facilities, let alone their wider supply chains. In fact, 
some companies, like Walmart, 83 and Target, 84 have been 
© Jurnasyanto Sukarno / Greenpeace

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  21actively engaged in anti-union activity and propaganda at 
home, which doesn’t bode well for those further afield. 
However, two of the largest companies (Aldi & Ahold) 
expressed explicit protection for collective bargaining in 
their policies, including for those not directly employed 
by either company. This encouraging leadership should 
be commended and will hopefully lead to wider support 
in this area.
Unionized Vessels
The ILO asserts that trade unions are important for 
protecting fishers’ rights, but that union membership is 
extremely low amongst fishers. As a result, we want to 
encourage retailers to preferentially source from vessels 
with democratic and independent trade unions. We 
recognize that organizing fishers remains limited and 
challenging; however, incentivizing those that do through 
preferential sourcing will have a positive impact on the 
wider industry. Purchasing from unionized vessels is 
also another way for retailers to minimize exploitative 
practices in their supply chains.
Despite points being awarded for retailers who sourced 
“Less than 5%” of their tuna from unionized vessels, no 
retailers managed to score any points in this area, with 
many stating that they do not hold this information. We 
want to encourage this to become more widespread and 
look forward to future progress in this area .
Living Wage
The complex and often ambiguous chain of custody for 
overseeing vessels, their operations and their crew has led 
to a grey area in terms of wages. A vessel may be owned 
or based in one country, flagged to 
another, fish in the waters of many – or 
none in the case of the high seas – and 
be crewed by a range of nationalities 
employed in different roles. The issue 
of a living wage – in fishing as well as 
global supply chains more broadly – 
remains poorly developed. A number 
of methodologies exist, but a global 
consensus on the necessity, the 
methodology and implementation is 
in its early stages.
Greenpeace believes that all workers 
deserve a fair and living wage in 
exchange for their hard work, and 
that it is the responsibility of major 
western brands and retailers to 
drive this change by enshrining 
this requirement in their policies. Unfortunately, just one brand (Aldi) makes any mention 
of a living wage for those working in its supply chain in its 
policy. Aldi’s commitment as the only retailer to explicitly 
advocate for a living wage for workers in its supply chain 
by signing the German Living Income Commitment is 
commendable, and we hope will inspire other brands to 
follow suit.
Migrant Workers
The working conditions and treatment of migrant 
workers in companies’ supply chain requires specific 
attention as a result of their inherently vulnerable status, 
including being at increased risk of forced labor. Migrant 
workers make several sacrifices that also make them 
more vulnerable to exploitation, including leaving behind 
family and support networks, moving to a country where 
they might not speak the language, and often shouldering 
the burden of travel and registration costs.
The UN Guiding Principles on Business Human Rights 
(UNGP) suggests that, during human rights impact 
assessments, businesses “should pay special attention to 
any particular human rights impacts on individuals from 
groups or populations that may be at heightened risk of 
vulnerability or marginalization. 85
According to the ILO, migrant workers as a whole are 
“especially vulnerable in terms of limited rights and 
protection” , while “a lack of training, inadequate language 
skills, and lack of enforcement of safety and labor standards 
make [migrant] fishers particularly vulnerable to forced 
labor and human trafficking. ” 86/87 Poor conditions and 
low pay are commonplace throughout the industry, 
© Adhi Wicaksono / Greenpeace

22 TUNA RETAILER REPORTand even vessels operating within the law may still be 
exploiting their migrant crew, whose status makes them 
more vulnerable. But low standards and limited oversight 
means that exploitative conditions can easily drift into 
more severe forms of abuse.
Rising living standards in more developed fishing countries 
has led to domestic labor shortages, while a surplus of 
domestic and migrant labor in developing countries has 
“polarized labor supply and demand” , pushing many to 
seek work in other countries as migrant fishing crew. 88 
The higher wage demands of domestic labor combined 
with long hours, dangerous conditions, and diminishing 
financial returns mean that the commercial fishing 
industry has come to rely heavily on cheap migrant labor 
from these lower-income countries. 89
Research suggests that, as well as creating a heavy 
reliance on cheap migrant labor, reduced productivity 
and financial returns resulting from depleted fish stocks 
is also linked to illegal, unreported, and unregulated 
(IUU) fishing. 90 According to the UN FAO, “there are strong 
indications that human trafficking, forced labor and other 
labor abuses on board fishing vessels are associated 
with IUU fishing, with migrant workers identified as a 
particularly vulnerable group. ” 91
As a result, the respect of migrant workers and their labor 
is identified as a key aspect of addressing forced labor 
in supply chains. Despite the importance of this issue in 
fulfilling companies’ responsibility to respecting human 
rights – as outlined in the UNGPs – few have explicit 
commitments to protecting the rights of migrant workers. 
Just three companies – Aldi, Hy-Vee, and Walmart - had 
specific commitments to ensure migrant workers are 
treated and paid equally, regardless of local laws or 
exemptions; over 80 percent did not.
According to the UN, businesses “should make particular 
efforts to track the effectiveness of their responses to 
impacts on individuals from groups or populations 
that may be at heightened risk of vulnerability or 
marginalization” but that “human rights due diligence can 
be included within broader enterprise risk-management 
systems. ” 92 Despite this, 75 percent of companies 
surveyed did not engage directly with migrant workers 
during risk and impact assessments. 93
Payslips
Documentation of pay is also a longstanding issue for 
workers in the fishing industry. The ILO notes that fishers, 
particularly migrants, are subject to a range of pay-related 
issues, including arbitrary or excessive deductions, punitive and illegal deductions, pay discrepancies, and 
withholding or non-payment of wages. Withholding of 
wages is one of the ILO’s 11 indicators of forced labor. 94
One of the challenges in identifying these issues is the 
widespread informality of payment methods in the global 
fishing industry. Many are still paid in cash, either on board 
or on shore, with remittances paid to family at home. 
Legitimate deductions may be made for advances, while 
illegal deductions for a range of reasons have also been 
regularly documented. Without adequate contracts it can 
be unclear what a worker is owed, and without adequate 
documentation it can be impossible to guarantee what 
has been paid.
It is therefore long overdue that seafood policies include 
a requirement for suppliers to document wages paid 
through regular pay stubs with itemized explanations of 
any deductions. Again, Aldi was the only retailer to engage 
directly on wages for workers within its supply chain, 
with explicit requirements for documentation of worker 
payments, which must include regular and overtime 
hours worked, payment for regular and overtime work, 
and any incentives and deductions. Disappointingly, no 
other companies received any points for these questions.
Traceability and Fish Fraud
Traceability is fundamental to improving both 
environmental and human rights impacts associated with 
the tuna industry. Illegal fishing remains a significant 
challenge in all fisheries, but particularly in high-value 
tuna fisheries, and inadequate traceability measures 
make it possible for illegally caught fish to find its way 
into otherwise legitimate supply chains. Retailers and 
consumers also pay a premium for fish caught using 
more selective gear such as hand troll or pole and line, 
but an inability to trace products back to the catching 
vessel means fish caught using damaging, unselective 
methods such as FAD-assisted purse seines or longlines 
can masquerade as a more environmentally-friendly 
alternative. In fact, an inability to trace a product back to 
its source significantly undermines almost every aspect 
of a sustainable seafood policy.
Thanks to advances in technology, increased consumer 
awareness of seafood fraud and other developments, 
significant improvements have been made in traceability 
across the industry. Three-quarters of the companies 
surveyed claimed to be able to trace at least 90-99 percent 
of their tuna back to the vessel that caught it, but only 25 
percent were able to do this 100 percent of the time.

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  23Vessel Lists
One of the most persistent yet fundamental challenges to 
effective monitoring, control, and oversight of the global 
fishing fleet is vessel registration. An absence of binding, 
international legal frameworks makes it easy to conceal or 
distort a vessel’s identity, ownership or movements. 95 The 
lack of clear, public information undermines transparency 
and makes detecting illegal fishing, as well as forced labor 
and human trafficking on board fishing vessels, extremely 
difficult. The severity of environmental and human rights 
abuses documented in the fishing industry make the need 
for publicly available information even more pressing.
In 2018, after more than a decade of development, the 
FAO launched the Global Record Information System, an 
up to date register of vessels involved in fishing – including 
reefers and supply vessels – based on information received 
from State authorities and regional fisheries management 
organizations (RFMOs). 96 Its stated aim is to “combat 
illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing by 
enhancing transparency and traceability” through a 
public vessel list. The International Sustainable Seafood 
Foundation (ISSF) also operates a number of different 
vessel lists, including the ProActive Vessel Register 
(PVR), a voluntary registry of vessels to demonstrate best 
practice. 97
As the FAO and ISSF recognize, making more information 
publicly available can help to reduce IUU fishing and labor 
abuse at sea through improved transparency. While these initiatives represent positive developments, retailers also 
need to take a more active role in fostering much needed 
transparency within their supply chains, and the tuna 
industry at large. With this in mind, we asked retailers to 
make public their supplier vessel lists. Unfortunately, all 
but one refused. Only one retailer, Hy-Vee, was able to 
commit to this, and we commend their leadership and 
commitment.
Advocacy
Retailers have long been aware that their buying power 
puts them in a strong position to change things they 
don’t like, whether placing quality requirements on 
their suppliers or lobbying governments over tariffs. 
Increasingly many retailers have joined together under 
a range of organizations and associations to advocate 
for changes and improvements to the tuna industry, and 
these moves are welcomed.
In order to encourage this work generally, and promote 
advocacy to key policy-makers on specific pivotal issues, 
Greenpeace scored companies for their involvement in 
advocacy. This included letters sent to the Taiwanese 
Government, Regional Fisheries Management 
Organisations (RFMOs), the UN and the US Government, 
and included advocacy conducted as part of larger 
associations, such as the Global Tuna Alliance (GTA) or 
Sustainable Fisheries Partnership (SFP).
© Alex Hofford / Greenpeace

24 TUNA RETAILER REPORT
We do, however, recognize that advocacy and membership 
of working groups requires time and resources, and 
therefore favors larger companies able to do so. The 
scoring reflects this, with the top four companies in this 
category – Aldi, Ahold Delhaize, Walmart, and Whole Foods 
– representing four large, international corporations. 
This fact makes the poor performance of other large 
companies such as Target and Costco stand out, scoring 
seven and two respectively compared to Aldi’s 24. Overall, 
scores in this category were poor and more effort needs to 
be made by all companies to advocate for improvements 
to the tuna industry.
While we recognize that this work favors larger companies, 
it is worth observing that working groups and alliances 
work as an effective tool for pooling collective resources 
and amplifying the voices of individual companies 
through their collective agenda. We believe strongly that 
anyone with a stake in the tuna supply chain should be 
finding some way to utilize their position and influence to 
push for positive change in an industry from which they 
directly benefit.
Human Rights Due Diligence
The failure of social audits to detect, address, and 
remediate human rights abuses has been well-
documented. 98 Social audits provide a limited picture 
of a particular moment in time, lack detail or ongoing monitoring, encourage “ticking lists [in order] to issue 
compliance statements” , are easily compromised and 
focus more on the reduction of reputational risks than 
those to people or the environment. 99 Despite this, 
social audits are still heavily relied upon by businesses to 
manage human rights issues in their supply chains and 
evidence corporate social responsibility.
The UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights provides detailed and robust guidance for how 
companies who respect human rights should engage with 
their supply chains. In particular, they promote a detailed 
understanding and proactive engagement with supply 
chains as part of companies’ responsibility to respect 
human rights. Importantly, the UNGPs emphasize that 
complex and evolving supply chains require a close and 
ongoing relationship in order to successfully mitigate 
human rights impacts.
The questions in this section are designed to reward 
companies who go beyond social audits to take an 
engaged and active responsibility for the potentially 
adverse human rights impacts caused by their business 
operations and supply chain. These questions relate to the 
specifics and practice of company policies and other work 
to address human rights impacts. While all companies 
surveyed had policies in place, few contained the details, 
processes or mechanisms outlined by the UNGPs over ten 
years ago.© Dhemas Reviyanto / SBMI / Greenpeace

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  25On the question of human rights due diligence, no 
company managed to score full points (5) for having 
a UNGP aligned process covering all tuna suppliers, 
though a quarter were implementing this in most of their 
supply chain. Well over half of the companies scored 
zero points for relying on third party audits and supplier 
documentation instead of close engagement, but only 
one scored minus one point for not having any due 
diligence process at all.
Taking, Tracking, and Talking Action
In addition to assessing human rights impacts, perhaps 
the most vital aspect of human rights due diligence 
is how companies integrate and act upon findings, 
track responses, and communicate how impacts are 
addressed. 100 According to the UNGPs, “tracking is 
necessary in order for a business enterprise to know 
if its human rights policies are being implemented 
optimally, whether it has responded effectively to the 
identified human rights impacts, and to drive continuous 
improvement. ” 101 This is particularly important where 
groups within the supply chain may be at heightened 
risk of vulnerability, as in the case migrant workers. 
Finally, in order to improve the effectiveness of this work, 
businesses should be prepared to publicly communicate 
their work to identify and address human rights impacts 
in their supply chains.
The survey asked companies to describe this process, 
giving full points for those who did or were willing to share 
their results publicly and just one point to those who would 
do so privately. Over forty percent of companies were 
unable to describe their due diligence, were unwilling to 
share their results either publicly or privately, and scored 
zero points. Just over thirty percent had a clear process 
in place, but were still unwilling to publish their findings, 
showing that there is a long way to go before human due 
diligence across the industry is in line with the UNGPs. As 
a result, more than three-quarters of companies scored 
one point or less, with twenty-five percent receiving full 
points. These four companies – Target, Kroger, Ahold 
Delhaize, and Aldi – should be commended for their 
leadership and transparency in this area.
Grievance Mechanism
Grievance mechanisms represent a vital conduit of 
information and an essential aspect of any meaningful 
human rights policy. A grievance, according to the UN, 
is perceived injustice against an individual or group; a 
grievance mechanism is the routine process through 
which grievances concerning business-related human 
rights abuse can be raised and remedied 102.While there are many forms this can take, the UNGPs 
establish six key characteristics of effective grievance 
mechanism:
	|Legitimate
	|Accessible
	|Predictable
	|Equitable
	|Transparent
	|Rights-Compatible
	|A source of continuous learning
In view of the importance of grievance mechanisms to 
the effectiveness of human rights due diligence and 
other work, it is vital that they are well-considered, fit 
for purpose and accessible. Unfortunately, the majority 
of companies had no grievance mechanism at all, while 
some of those who did had opted for off-the-peg products 
that take a one size fits all approach. In practice, however, 
these solutions fail to consider the realities of life for 
vulnerable workers in global supply chains, particularly 
fishers. Many of them do not contain sufficient language 
choices and the web-based nature of them makes access 
very difficult for those without a computer.
This survey focused on whether there was a grievance 
mechanism in place and how closely it followed the 
guidance set out by the UNGPs, and unfortunately 
everyone fell short. No company managed to score full 
points for any of the grievance mechanism questions, 
and only the larger companies (Ahold Delhaize, Walmart, 
and Aldi) managed any more than two points out of five. 
Details were also sparse and none of the mechanisms 
in place covered any more than four of the UN’s seven 
characteristics of an effective grievance mechanism.
Simply establishing a hotline or online reporting portal 
represents a top down approach and fails to consider how 
workers in the supply chain - in factories or aboard vessels 
- are most likely to report issues. Hotlines and other tools 
should not be considered to be an end in themselves, 
but without statistics it is difficult to make a meaningful 
assessment of the utility of such hotlines.
In practice, grievance mechanisms must be well-
considered, constantly monitored, regularly assessed and 
adapted as necessary in order to be truly effective. When 
used in this way, they help to identify key indicators of 
forced labor, as well as mitigating important issues such 
as isolation.

26 TUNA RETAILER REPORTRemediation
Remediation is the third of three core aspects of business 
enterprises’ responsibility to respect human rights, and 
represents an essential step for human rights policies and 
due diligence to truly be effective. Without remediation 
there is little prospect of resolution, leaving aggrieved 
parties feeling unrespected and guilty ones unpunished.
For remediation to be effective and represent a resolution 
for all, it is vital that companies are actively engaged in 
this process and that remedies accord with internationally 
recognized human rights.
“Where business enterprises identify 
that they have caused or contributed 
to adverse impacts, they should 
provide for or cooperate in their 
remediation through legitimate 
processes.”  
                       — UNGP
The survey focused on whether and how companies 
engage in remediation for those who have been adversely 
affected by their business operations and whether this 
is done through direct consultation with the aggrieved 
parties, in line with the guidance of the UNGPs. 
Unfortunately, no companies scored full points in this 
area. The importance of this issue was reflected in the 
possibility of scoring a minus one for failing to cooperate 
on remediation; unfortunately, this was the score received 
by 10 out of the 16 companies.
Inventory, Catch Methods,  
and Labelling
The products that retailers stock should represent the 
end point of the thought and hard work that has gone 
into their sourcing policies and supply chain oversight. 
Unfortunately, for all of the supermarkets surveyed, 
many of the products available to consumers serve 
to undermine the work they have done. Endangered 
species, destructive catch methods and associations with 
severe human rights abuses on the shelves in many ways 
invalidate well-meaning policies on paper.
Many retailers take seriously their relationship with and 
responsibility to their customers, yet require them to 
make decisions between sustainable and unsustainable, 
abusive or fairly produced seafood. While consumers have 
a responsibility to educate themselves and make better purchasing choices, this somewhat lets retailers off of the 
hook. Through better purchasing decisions, retailers can 
remove the uncertainty for their customers, leaving them 
free to choose whether they want their tuna in brine or 
olive oil, not whether it was produced under conditions of 
modern slavery or not.
Catch methods are an important aspect of this, with non-
selective methods such as FAD-assisted purse seining and 
longlining associated with high levels of bycatch, including 
sharks, dolphins, and turtles. Longlining in particular 
- which spend extended periods at sea, rely heavily on 
transhipment-at-sea and are very labor-intensive - have 
also been widely associated with human rights abuses, 
as detailed in Greenpeace USA’s Choppy Waters  report. 103 
Alternatively, selective methods such as pole and line, 
and hand troll — while not without their own issues — 
are much less damaging for the environment, and much 
more equitable for those catching fish, not least due to 
shorter journeys.
All of these important aspects should be conveyed to 
consumers by clear, informative packaging detailing 
as much information about species, catch methods, 
locations, and other indicators of sustainability. Without 
clear and informative labelling, customers are unable to 
make truly informed decisions.
© Abbie Trayler-Smith / Greenpeace

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  27
When Greenpeace USA first started surveying companies 
on their sustainable sourcing policies over a decade ago it 
sometimes felt like we were speaking a different language, 
or at least a new one. Talk of Fisheries Improvement 
Projects (FIPs), bans on transhipment at sea and reduced 
bycatch was fairly new, and a long way from inclusion in 
seafood sourcing policies, where they existed at all. But, 
over the years these principles have moved from the 
fringe to the mainstream and now even those who looked 
at us with blank faces have policies and commitments in 
place.
The similarities between where the industry was on 
sustainability 10 years ago and where it currently is on 
human rights issues are hard to miss. Many appear not to 
have given it a thought, while even those who are leading 
the way still fall short in a number of areas. Despite years 
of guidance from international bodies, academic and 
NGO research and reports, shocking media exposés, and 
increasing consumer awareness, many companies have 
continued to ignore their responsibilities, while others have opted for surface level changes without the deep 
engagement and understanding required to address 
these serious issues. This is reflected in the fact that every 
company failed to make a passing grade, with policies 
lacking detail, practicality, while others simply chose to 
remain silent.
However, the increasing recognition of both the 
importance of human rights issues in supply chains, as 
well as their connection to key environmental issues, 
means companies’ time to address these often difficult 
issues is well past due. While the results of this report do 
not make for pleasant reading for anyone with a stake in 
the seafood supply chain – from retailers and suppliers 
to workers and consumers – we find optimism in the 
improvements made in sustainability over the years, 
which started from a similarly low base. We hope this 
report will provide a foundation for future assessment, 
as well as a benchmark for how far we will have come 10 
years from now.Conclusion
© Alex Hofford / Greenpeace

28 TUNA RETAILER REPORT
Retailer profiles
© Abbie Trayler-Smith / Greenpeace

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  29
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORES
ALDI US
Positive
Aldi scored the highest of all retailers in the Tuna Procurement 
section, scoring a total of 49 out of 84. In line with many other 
retailers, Aldi scored well for having comprehensive, publicly 
available seafood and human rights policies. 104 One of the purposes 
of this survey is to encourage and reward specific commitments in 
line with internationally recognized instruments and initiatives, 
and Aldi scored higher than most as a result of reference to these 
in their policies. Aldi’s International Forced Labor Policy, which 
explicitly covers all stages of its supply chain, is guided by a number 
of international standards, including the United Nations Guiding 
Principles on Business and Human Rights (UNGP). 105
Aldi’s Forced Labor Policy also specifically addresses the issue of 
recruitment. In particular, Aldi’s policy recognizes the link between 
recruitment fees and debt bondage, and establishes a framework 
for mitigating this risk. Aldi’s policy requires the company and 
its business partners to abide by the “Employer Pays Principle, ” 
prohibits recruitment fees and mandates the use of “legally 
licensed” recruitment agencies.
Aldi should also be commended for being the only retailer to 
explicitly advocate for a Living Wage for workers in its supply chain 
by signing the GIZ Living Income Commitment. Aldi was also one 
of the only retailers to engage directly on wages for workers within 
its supply chain, with explicit requirements for documentation of 
worker payments. 106
Finally, Aldi scored maximum points for a clear and well considered 
process for dealing with cases of abuse within their supply chain, 
which includes working with suppliers to improve, monitoring and 
ultimately severing ties in the cases where suppliers fail to improve.Summary
Aldi completed the survey as well as providing supporting resources. Aldi took the top spot overall, receiving the highest score in the overall 
Human Rights category, as well as across a range of sections, including Tuna Procurement and Advocacy. In combination with historically strong 
performance on environmental issues (3rd in CATO 2018), Aldi’s comprehensive, stand-alone forced labor policy - which draws on a number of 
internationally recognized standards, including the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (UNGP) - helped push them into first 
place overall.
In many areas, the level of Aldi’s understanding of complex issues and their proactive engagement marked them out. As one of the only retailers 
to achieve a passing score for any section, they in fact managed it for two, with a very strong score for their advocacy work. Nonetheless, despite 
these scores and coming first among other retailers overall, Aldi was still just shy of a passing grade.
Poor/Needs Improvement
Aldi’s Traceability score was disappointing, but their responses 
show encouraging signs. Because the survey scores retailers on 
programs that are currently in place, Aldi was unable to score 
points for initiatives that are currently in the pilot stage or not 
fully implemented. Aldi’s framework for supplier evaluation and 
traceability looks promising, and we look forward to reporting 
positive results in the future when it is fully implemented across 
the supply chain.
While Aldi’s understanding and development of grievance 
mechanisms is decidedly more advanced than many others, points 
were unfortunately lost due to the limited scope. Greenpeace 
commends Aldi’s work with the Issara Institute to promote worker 
voice in Thailand, and hope they will support implementation of this 
type of work across a wider section of their supply chain, including 
catching vessels. Further points were deducted as result of a 
failure to engage with migrant fishers during impact assessments; 
however, we hope this is something that can be quickly and easily 
rectified, and also shows the need to expand worker-centred 
welfare initiatives into programs, particularly in fishing.50% F2nd/167/14 Customer Education/
Labelling74% C2nd/1638.9/53 Current Sourcing4th/16
55% F28/51 Human Rights & labor
83% B1st/1624/29 Advocacy & Initiatives44% F7th/1612/27 Traceability49/84
1st/16
58% FTuna Procurement Policy
1st/1682.5/149HR
2nd/1676.5/112Enviro1st/1659.77%Total


30 TUNA RETAILER REPORT
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESAHOLD DELHAIZE
Positive
As mentioned, Ahold’s Human Rights report was a fairly 
comprehensive and well-considered document and backed up 
the answers with the level of detail required to receive more 
points. Ahold was one of the only companies to express an explicit 
commitment to collective bargaining, an issue that is gaining 
prominence as work to unionize fishers accelerates.
Ahold scored highly for its auditing and traceability work, a section 
that covers both environmental and human rights issues. With 
quarterly monitoring and internal traceability audits – as well as 
the same third-party audits as many others – Ahold came out top 
on a number of these questions.
Ahold also scored highly for their advocacy work, having sent 
letters to governments, RFMOs and the UN on a number of issues 
related to the tuna industry. Ahold came second to Aldi, narrowly 
beating Walmart, and it should be noted that this section favored 
large companies with the resources and time to dedicate to this 
kind of work.
Ahold’s human rights due diligence framework was considerably 
more advanced than many other retailers, many of which had 
nothing at all. Ahold’s work goes beyond social audits and lays out 
a framework for dealing with a range of human rights impacts.
Finally, Ahold received a good score for catch methods employed in 
its tuna sourcing, with nearly a quarter caught using more selective 
pole and line or hand troll methods. It also had a low proportion of 
purse seine caught tuna, at less than five percent; however, nearly 
three-quarters is still caught using longlines.Summary
Ahold Delhaize completed the survey as well as providing supporting resources. Ahold Delhaize took second place overall, receiving the second 
highest score in the Human Rights category, and finishing in the top five in all but two sections of the survey. Though they finished second in the 
Human Rights category, they were a long way behind Aldi in first. Ahold also achieved a passing grade for two sections – traceability and advocacy 
– coming second only to the overall Environment leader, Whole Foods, for its traceability work.
Ahold Delhaize scored well for having comprehensive, publicly available seafood and human rights policies in place. 107/108 In particular, their 
inaugural Human Rights report (2020) is strong, and stands out for its detailed understanding of the issues, its reference to international human 
rights instruments, and commitment to safeguarding migrants. 109 It also outlines the company’s ongoing due diligence and auditing frameworks, 
providing detail as well as practical actions that marked it out as one of the strongest such documents produced by the surveyed retailers.
Poor/Needs Improvement
Like many, Ahold cites its whistle-blower line as an example of the 
kind of public-facing, non-judicial grievance mechanism outlined 
in the UNGPs. However, the value of these lines for addressing 
potential issues in supply chains is limited, particularly aboard 
distant water fishing vessels. Accessibility – including availability of 
necessary technology or internet connections, language barriers, 
and awareness – remains a major stumbling block for generic 
“hotlines. ” Hotlines are no substitute for a worker-centred approach 
that closely considers how to most effectively provide a mechanism 
for them to make their voices heard. Part of this process must also 
involve direct engagement with migrant workers in the supply 
chain about their specific needs and the risks they face, something 
Ahold says they do not currently do.
Ahold could greatly improve the sustainability of its product offering, 
receiving a disappointing score for its inventory considering the 
strong work it has done in other areas. Selling brands that do 
not meet Ahold’s own standards undermines the improvements 
their policies are driving. Refusing to stock brands associated 
with IUU fishing and other damaging environmental practices or 
human rights abuse would promote their own efforts further and 
provide clarity for their customers. In addition, they could be much 
more selective in the catch methods and species that they stock, 
receiving a low score for stocking a number of higher-risk species 
or catch methods.
18% F13th/162.5/14 Customer Education/
Labelling52% F6th/1627.6/53 Current Sourcing3rd/16
59% F30/51 Human Rights & labor
76% C2nd/1622/29 Advocacy & Initiatives63% D2nd/1617/27 Traceability28/84
5th/16
33% FTuna Procurement Policy
2nd/1665/149HR
4th/1662.1/112Enviro2nd/1652.8%Total

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  31
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESALBERTSONS
https://www.albertsonscompanies.com/our-values/position-statements.html
Poor/Needs Improvement
In line with many other retailers in the middle of the ranking, 
Albertsons scored well for having policies in place, but missed 
out on points for lack of reference to specific instruments, 
particularly in relation to the UNGPs and ILO Core Conventions. In 
addition, Albertsons states that it has adopted a human rights due 
diligence framework and is currently working to gather and review 
information, but it is unclear how fully this program has been 
implemented. We look forward to positive updates in the future.
Albertsons received just four points – one of the lowest scores 
amongst all retailers – for the limited scope of its work to promote 
fisheries and labor reform through public advocacy. It is vitally 
important that all companies involved in global supply chains – 
particularly those with as many risks as tuna – are actively pushing 
for positive policy change to support their own supply chain due 
diligence.
Despite completing the survey, they skipped a number of questions 
related to more specific aspects of their human rights due diligence 
work, including tracking, grievance mechanisms and remediation. 
The importance of these elements in underpinning the effectiveness 
and real-world impact of a company’s ethical policies meant leaving 
them blank hurt Albertsons’s score .
Finally, Albertsons cited its use of two widely available third-party 
audit certifications as evidence of its work to engage migrant workers 
in auditing and assessment processes; however, we had hoped 
to see a deeper and more deliberate approach to this important 
area. This work is central to identifying heightened risks within 
the supply chain as well as developing worker-centered grievance 
mechanisms, remediation processes and other important aspects 
of human rights due diligence. At least in addition to third-party 
audits retailers should develop a focus on the migrant workers as 
part of an engaged and ongoing due diligence framework.Summary
Albertsons completed their own survey, coming seventh overall, with a disappointing ninth for the Environment category, and middle-ranking 
sixth for Human Rights. Albertsons ranked in the middle across most of the survey sections, though failed to achieve a passing score in any of them. 
Their highest rank was achieved for traceability, coming fourth, while their lowest (12th) was for their sourcing, a section that included inventory 
and catch methods.
Positive
Albertsons had a strong public position on transhipment at sea, 
which references robust national and international regulations 
related to vessel and crew safety and worker protections, including 
the Cape Town Agreement and the ILO’s Work in Fishing Convention 
– C.188. 110
Albertsons traceability work was also commendable – including 
tackling fish fraud – despite not being able to trace 100 percent of 
their tuna back to the catching vessel. As the foundation for effective 
supply chain oversight and risk mitigation, traceability is vitally 
important. Albertsons appears to have developed a thoughtful 
approach that involves internal audits in partnership with a third-
party organization, while not relying entirely on third parties. The 
implementation of technology to gather chain of custody data and 
assess risks also helps to improve oversight of supply chain risks.
36% F6th/165/14 Customer Education/
Labelling32% F12th/1617.2/53 Current Sourcing6th/16
27% F14/51 Human Rights & labor
24% F8th/167/29 Advocacy & Initiatives52% F4th/1614/27 Traceability27/84
7th/16
32% FTuna Procurement Policy
6th/1635.5 /149HR
9th/1648.7 /112Enviro7th/1634.34%Total

32 TUNA RETAILER REPORT
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESPositive
Greenpeace recognizes Costco’s role as a founding member of the 
Seafood Taskforce , a coalition of businesses and NGOs working to 
improve sustainability in the Thai seafood supply chain. Though the 
amount of specific information available is limited, some positive 
work has been done, including in the area of recruitment. Though 
currently limited to Thailand, this engaged approach to supply 
chain oversight should be expanded to cover all aspects of seafood 
sourcing, particularly work aboard distant-water vessels.
Greenpeace also commends Costco’s work with third-parties to 
analyze risk across their entire supply chain, though this should not 
replace ongoing audits and monitoring of suppliers.
Finally, Costco’s approach to monitoring and addressing issues 
with suppliers – as outlined in their statement for The California 
Transparency in Supply Chains Act (2015) – serves as an example of 
best practice for working with suppliers to improve in a measured, 
time-bound way. 113Poor/Needs Improvement
Like most, Costco has sourcing policies  in place, but they lack 
specificity and, importantly, references to relevant international 
instruments for upholding human rights. Costco’s human rights 
and seafood would be much improved if more clearly guided by 
specific, international principles, such as the UNGPs, ILO Core 
Conventions and C.188 – Work in Fishing Convention.
Costco does not have a public transhipment  policy, which is 
disappointing considering Costco’s buying power, the exposure 
the issue has had in recent years and its importance to sustainable 
fishing. Similarly disappointing for a company of Costco’s size and 
influence was their failure to advocate for better policy, scoring 
second from bottom on the Advocacy section.
Traceability and Audits  are covered in a very short section on the 
“Sustainable Fisheries” webpage, which focuses on shrimp. While 
these programs are positive, the company must improve monitoring, 
oversight, and conditions in valuable and risky tuna supply chains.
Costco’s human rights policy  is vague, and as a result lacks specific 
consideration of grievance mechanisms, due diligence frameworks 
or engagement with vulnerable groups, such as migrant workers, in 
their supply chains. In order to help embed these practices across the 
sector, all companies should make use of them to guide their policies.COSTCO
Summary
Costco did not complete a survey but provided links to seafood sustainability resources, which, together with further publicly available information, 
were analyzed and used to score the survey. Costco ranked 10th out of 16 overall, with a failing score in every category. Costco’s Environmental 
ranking (14th) is extremely disappointing considering its size and influence, scoring in the bottom three. Costco came 9th out of 16 in the Human 
Rights category, and failed to achieve a passing mark in any of the sections. Their best performing section was “Sourcing” , but with just 38 percent, 
they still failed to make a passing grade.
Publicly available information on Costco’s policies was limited and lacked detail. Key issues such as traceability were limited to short, vague 
sections on their Seafood Sustainability webpage. 111 The “Seafood” section of the “Human Rights Policy” webpage is also short and limited 
entirely to their work with the Seafood Taskforce in Thailand, and does not mention tuna. 112
25% F9th/163.5/14 Customer Education/
Labelling38% F9th/1620/53 Current Sourcing7th/16
27% F14/51 Human Rights & labor
7% F11th/162/29 Advocacy & Initiatives11% F12th/163/27 Traceability24/84
10th/16
29% FTuna Procurement Policy
9th/1631.5 /149HR
14th/1635/112Enviro10th/1624.29%Total

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  33
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESPositive
Giant Eagle was mediocre for environmental issues , if very poor on 
human rights. They scored well for having policies in place, and did 
have a good amount of detail regarding environmental specifics, 
including language in support of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs), 
and requirements around Fisheries Improvement Project (FIPs). 
Similarly, Giant Eagle has a clear and publicly available stance on 
transhipment-at-sea, only allowing it with 100 percent observer 
coverage. While we would like to see this strengthened, the explicit 
consideration of this key issue is positive.
Giant Eagle was the only company that mentioned the importance 
of sustainable bait fisheries for Pole & Line tuna.Poor/Needs Improvement
Giant Eagle’s engagement on human rights  in their supply chain 
is probably where they were on environmental sustainability 10 or 
15 years ago. The lack of any human rights policy, or mention of 
human rights issues in their seafood policy, meant that they scored 
almost no points for entire sections of the survey. They scored -2 
in the Human Rights section, one of only four companies to do so.
Currently, discussion of human rights at Giant Eagle is focused on 
inclusivity, racial equality, and LGBTQ+ rights, for which they earned 
a score of 90 on the Human Rights Campaign (HRC) Foundation’s 
2020 Corporate Equality Index (CEI). While this is commendable, it 
does not consider the important impacts its business has on the 
labor and human rights of those working their supply chain.
Giant Eagle puts considerable emphasis on educating customers 
to make “responsible and informed purchasing decisions, ” 
including educating staff to assist with this information. However, 
improvements to sourcing policies  and inventory  could further 
assist customers by simply ensuring that all seafood on the shelves 
meets rigorous sustainability and human rights standards. Stocking 
anything that doesn’t meet these standards undermines retailers’ 
sustainability efforts and creates uncertainty for customers.GIANT EAGLE
Summary
Giant Eagle did not complete a survey; as a result, publicly available information was analyzed and used to score the survey. 114/115/116 Giant Eagle 
ranked 8th out of 16 overall, with a failing score in every category, ranking 8th and 11th in the Environment and Human Rights categories respectively. 
Their best performing section was “Sourcing, ” but with just 44 percent, they still failed to make a passing grade.
Giant Eagle’s scores are indicative of wider trends within this segment of the supermarket sector, where a flurry of engagement five or six years 
ago has been left largely the same, meaning these policies do not appear to have developed since that time. The specific nature of this survey’s 
questions accounts for the low score of vague and outdated policies.
On most scoring areas, Giant Eagle was in line with similar brands of a similar size, though they scored lower than average in the overall Human 
Rights category (18), and second lowest in the Human Rights section, one of only four companies to receive a negative score (-2).
21% F10th/163/14 Customer Education/
Labelling44% F8th/1623.2/53 Current SourcingTied with Publix
Tied with Wegman14th/16
F2/51 Human Rights & labor
28% F7th/168/29 Advocacy & Initiatives41% F8th/1611/27 Traceability26/84
8th/16
31% FTuna Procurement Policy
11th/1618/149HR
8th/1651.2 /112Enviro8th/1625.93%Total

34 TUNA RETAILER REPORT
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESPositive
H-E-B were mediocre on environmental issues, and very poor on 
human rights. Only 10 points separate Sprouts in 5th from H-E-B in 
10th place in the Environment category; a score that would have 
been improved by completing the survey and having more robust 
policies. H-E-B scored well for having policies in place, and did 
have a good amount of detail regarding environmental specifics, 
including not sourcing from “red” fisheries and only sourcing tuna 
that is either MSC certified or making progress in a FIP . However, 
they could improve their score with some specific wording on MPAs 
and sourcing only from “green” fisheries.
H-E-B also scored reasonably well for their work to improve 
traceability, including commitments to not selling IUU fish and 
working with Trace Register to provide third party verification. One 
impressive and stand-out feature of this work was their product 
sourcing grid - essentially a table of all of the species they stock, 
country of origin, source, catch method, and sustainability rating, 
which is updated twice a year. 120 We would love to see other 
companies disclosing similar information in an easily understood 
format. Again, this work reflects industry-wide improvements to 
environmental practices in supply chains.Poor/Needs Improvement
H-E-B’s scores on human rights questions suffered, like many 
others, from a lack of specificity and saw them come 13th out of 
16. Despite recognizing that there are human rights concerns 
associated with the seafood industry, statements are vague and are 
either not grounded in a policy framework provided by international 
instruments, such as the UNGPs, or they fail to provide a practical 
explanation for how these requirements will be monitored or 
enforced. Discussions and understanding around the human rights 
impacts of global supply chains are well-advanced, but that fact is 
not reflected in much of H-E-B’s human rights work.
More than half of the questions in the survey focused on human 
rights. H-E-B does not have a human rights policy and their score 
reflects that.H-E-B
Summary
H-E-B did not complete a survey; as a result, only publicly available information – including their Seafood Policy and Supplier Code of Conduct 
– was used. 117/118/119 H-E-B performed poorly overall and ranked 11th out of 16, with a failing score in every category, ranking 10th and 13th in the 
Environment and Human Rights categories respectively. Their best performing section was ‘Traceability, ’ but with just 48 percent, they still failed 
to make a passing grade.
While H-E-B’s engagement with environmental issues in their supply chain has improved incrementally, there has been little consideration given 
to the human rights impacts of their seafood.
18% F14th/162.5/14 Customer Education/
Labelling30% F13th/1615.8/53 Current Sourcing
Tied with AD, Publix, WegmanTied with Wegman12th/16
F0/51 Human Rights & labor
28% F6th/168/29 Advocacy & Initiatives48% F6th/1613/27 Traceability19/84
12th/16
23% FTuna Procurement Policy
13th/1610.5 /149HR
10th/1647.8/112Enviro11th/1623.75%Total

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  35
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESPositive
Hy-Vee ranked second in the tuna procurement section, standing out 
for having significantly more detail and reference to international 
standards than the majority of others. 121 In particular, they had 
strong, internationally recognized requirements of their suppliers, 
including mandated rest times, crew conditions, and health and 
safety. 122
Significantly, they were one of only two companies who explicitly 
referenced migrant workers in their supplier Code of Conduct. 123 In 
particular, Hy-Vee expressly requires its suppliers to treat migrant 
workers the same as nationals, an extremely important provision 
when local laws often allow migrant workers to be treated differently 
to others.
Hy-Vee’s traceability work is strong and rooted in internationally 
recognized best practice (Global Dialogue on Seafood Traceability). 
Their traceability work – including risk assessments and audits – 
in partnership with FishWise, looks robust and well-considered, 
providing a strong framework on which to add an increased focus on 
human rights.
Finally, Hy-Vee was the only company who agreed to publish 
supplier vessel lists, demonstrating an assurance and commitment 
to transparency that no other company was willing to match.Poor/Needs Improvement
Like many of those with poorly developed or no human rights 
policies at all, Hy-Vee left blank a whole series of questions regarding 
specific details of human rights due diligence as articulated in 
the UNGPs. Many companies were unable to answer questions 
on practical elements that involve commitment and investment, 
such as grievance mechanism, remediation, and worker voice. The 
importance of these elements in underpinning the effectiveness 
and real-world impact of a company’s ethical policies meant 
leaving them blank hurt Hy-Vee’s score .
For a company that has made a number of positive improvements 
in sustainable seafood sourcing, Hy-Vee continues to source the 
majority of its tuna from damaging fishing methods, sourcing well 
over 90 percent from purse seine or longline, and just four percent 
from pole and line. Compared to companies with comparable 
sourcing policies and scores, Hy-Vee scored lower than expected 
and should commit to increasing its proportion of tuna caught 
using more sustainable methods.HY-VEE
Summary
Hy-Vee completed the survey and ranked fifth overall, fifth in the Human Rights category and in the top five for most of the survey sections, 
including third for traceability, and second for tuna procurement. Hy-Vee continued their decent performance in the Environment category with 
a third-place finish, having placed second in Greenpeace’s most recent CATO report. However, they did not achieve a passing grade in any of the 
survey sections, and scored poorly on the human rights section, coming eighth amongst an already poor field.
Hy-Vee have engaged positively on environmental issues and appear to take these commitments seriously, but still have some way to go in fully 
addressing the issues at hand. However, it is vitally important that they catch up or risk undermining the progress they have made in ethical 
sourcing generally.
35.7% 
        F4th/165/14 Customer Education/
Labelling59.3% 
        D-4th/1631.5/53 Current Sourcing8th/16
21% F11/51 Human Rights & labor
27.5% F2nd/168/29 Advocacy & Initiatives55% F3rd/1615/27 Traceability42/84
2nd/16
50% FTuna Procurement Policy
5th/1648.5 /149HR
3rd/1663.9/112Enviro5th/1642.92%Total

36 TUNA RETAILER REPORT
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESPositive
Like many others, Kroger scored early points for having policies in 
place, but later fell down on the detail – in particular, lacking reference 
to specific human rights instruments, including the International Bill 
of Human Rights, the ILO Core Conventions, and the Work in Fishing 
Convention - C188. 125/126
Kroger also articulated a number of areas of work currently underway, 
including comprehensive GAP analysis related to the UNGPs and risk 
assessment, which will be reported on their 2022 social responsibility 
report. While this work sounds positive, we are unable to consider it 
this year, but hope to report positive developments in the future.Poor/Needs Improvement
Kroger scored very poorly across a range of survey sections, 
coming second from bottom for sourcing and traceability, as well 
as the overall Human Rights category. When it came to specifics 
about supplier requirements – including worker contracts, wages 
or conditions – Kroger consistently scored poorly. Throughout the 
survey they relied heavily on a limited number of examples that 
often did not contain the necessary details to score points.
Traceability, where they ranked second, was poorly developed 
and relied heavily on the International Seafood Sustainability 
Foundation (ISSF), which cannot substitute for robust and well-
considered in-house policies. Monitoring also relies too heavily 
on third parties, with audits only taking place annually. Kroger 
answered that, despite its centrality to a range of environmental 
and human rights issues in the tuna industry, they do not have a 
stance on transhipment-at-sea.
Like many, Kroger cites its Helpline as an example of the kind of 
public-facing, non-judicial grievance mechanism outlined in the 
UNGPs. However, there are significant questions of their suitability 
for addressing potential issues in supply chains, and particularly 
aboard distant water fishing vessels. When combined with failures 
to engage with migrant workers in their supply chain and work with 
aggrieved parties on remediation, a poorly developed non-judicial 
grievance mechanism does little to provide workers with a voice.KROGER
Summary
Kroger completed their own survey and ranked twelfth overall, seventh in the Human Rights category, and second from the bottom in Environment. 
Amongst companies that completed their own survey, Kroger scored second lowest. Kroger had policies in place but they lacked the detail required 
to score points. On some of their own key metrics and targets – such as sourcing 90 percent of wild caught seafood from certified fisheries – they 
appear to be going backwards. 124 Kroger came seventh in the Human Rights category, partly as a result of forthcoming reporting and ongoing 
scoping work that couldn’t be considered as part of this survey.
Kroger failed to achieve a passing score in any section of the survey, with a highest score of just 39%, ranking third for Customer Education. They 
finished second from the bottom for their traceability work and sourcing, including one of the worst scores for the sustainability of their product 
offering
39% F3rd/165.5/14 Customer Education/
Labelling28% F15th/1614.9/53 Current Sourcing5th/16
37% F19/51 Human Rights & labor
14% F10th/164/29 Advocacy & Initiatives4% F15th/161/27 Traceability21/84
11th/16
25% FTuna Procurement Policy
7th/1633.5/149HR
15th/1631.9/112Enviro12th/1620.01%Total

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  37
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESMEIJER
Summary
Meijer completed their own survey and ranked fifteenth, second from bottom, and dead last in the environment category. As one of the few 
companies to rank lower in the Environment category than Human Rights, coming in tenth, though on just 19 points they were some way behind 
even ninth-placed Costco on 31.5. Amongst companies that completed their own survey, Meijer scored the lowest by far, coming dead last in half 
of the survey sections as well as the overall Environment category.
Meijer was the only company to score less than full points for initial and general questions on policies as a result of not having a shelf-stable tuna 
policy, despite canned tuna representing both the most popular product and highest risks. 127 As a result, Meijer was unable to score any points for 
questions relating to their policies because the majority of their tuna products are not covered by any company policy.
Positive
With some of the lowest scores across a range of categories, the 
positives of Meijer’s response were few and far between. Besides 
commending their support for collective bargaining, there is a lot 
of improvement to be made.Poor/Needs Improvement
Meijer’s scores were greatly harmed by the lack of a shelf-stable 
tuna policy, which accounts for most of the tuna sold in the US. As a 
result, they could not score points on policy-related questions, and 
came last in the traceability and tuna procurement sections. These 
sections, while broadly environmental, also overlap significantly 
with human rights issues.
One of the weaknesses of Meijer’s traceability work was its inability 
to independently verify traceability requirements, relying instead 
on ad hoc  document requests to suppliers. Instead, supplier 
documentation, including monitoring and oversight, should be 
embedded into policy and practice. Supplier auditing was also 
weak, with an annual review of Tier 1 Own Brand suppliers leaving 
significant opportunity for abusive or exploitative practices to 
develop.
Similarly, Meijer did not have a human rights due diligence 
framework in place, again relying entirely on suppliers to provide 
information, despite UNGP guidance. Though they completed their 
own survey, like many others Meijer chose to leave large sections 
blank, most of which related to details of human rights due 
diligence. Unsurprisingly, public communication is also poor, with 
limited information available online.
Finally, Meijer had one of the lowest inventory scores, particularly 
amongst companies that completed their own survey. This was 
down to including at-risk species such as bluefin tuna in its product 
offering, as well as using damaging catch methods in already 
overfished areas. In addition, over 90 percent of Meijer’s tuna 
offering came from tuna caught using longlines or FAD-assisted 
purse seines, the two least selective methods.
21% F11th/163/14 Customer Education/
Labelling38% F10th/1619.9/53 Current Sourcing11th/16
8% F4/51 Human Rights & labor
F16th/160/29 Advocacy & Initiatives4% F16th/161/27 Traceability14/84
16th/16
17% FTuna Procurement Policy
10th/1619/149HR
16th/1622.9/112Enviro15th/1614.63%Total

38 TUNA RETAILER REPORT
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESPositive
Publix scored well on initial questions about having policies, but fell 
down on the detail. It is at least encouraging that Publix recognizes 
the importance of making public commitments to sourcing 
sustainable seafood. Publix also works with a number of important 
sustainability-focused organizations, including the Sustainable 
Fisheries Partnership and the Global Sustainable Seafood Initiative 
(GSSI). While engagement with outside organizations and initiatives 
is important, it does not substitute the need for a robust policy 
with clear steps towards implementation and ongoing monitoring. 
However, based on the available information rapid improvements 
could be made through the process of codifying many of the things 
Publix already does or claim they want to do into a coherent policy.
Publix requires suppliers to maintain documentation on the products 
they provide to ensure full traceability, conducting “mock recalls” 
to verify their effectiveness. While there is no specific mention of 
seafood – a supply chain with unique challenges and risks – this is a 
positive practice that could be improved and developed to include 
sustainability standards as well as human rights due diligence. In fact, 
the UNGP suggests that “human rights due diligence can be included 
within broader enterprise risk-management systems, provided that 
it goes beyond simply identifying and managing material risks to the 
company itself.” 129Poor/Needs Improvement
Despite a new sustainability report, there is no mention of human 
rights and very little specific information on the company’s 
sustainable seafood sourcing. Companies that did not complete a 
survey nor have publicly available information on their human rights 
policy were unable to score any points for these questions and their 
scores reflect that. Publix tied for the second lowest score in the 
human rights section, one of only four companies to score negative 
points on -2. Publix also had the second lowest Tuna Procurement 
score (17), which was brought down by a lack of labor or human 
rights considerations in their purchasing decisions.
Publix was also one of only four companies to score 0 for Advocacy, 
with no public evidence that they use their position to advocate for 
positive change.PUBLIX
Summary
Publix did not complete a survey; as a result, publicly available information – mostly drawn from their “virtual store” website – was analyzed and 
used to score the survey. 128 Publix performed very poorly overall, and ranked 14th out of 16, with a failing score in every category, ranking 12th 
and 15th in the Environment and Human Rights categories respectively. Their best performing section was “Traceability” , but with just 37 percent, 
they still failed to make a passing grade.
As with many companies who ranked towards the bottom, Publix’s available sourcing policy information is extremely short on detail to back up 
well-meaning statements. Publix has a stand-alone website, which allows users to take a virtual tour of a cartoon Publix shop, stopping in different 
aisles to read about their cage-free egg or diversity policies. Unfortunately, it seems that more time and energy has gone into the presentation of 
what they do, but not nearly enough into the detail of their policies.
18% F16th/162.5/14 Customer Education/
Labelling28% F16th/1614.8/53Tied with Giant Eagle
Tied with AD, HEB, WegmanCurrent Sourcing14th/16
F2/51 Human Rights & labor
F14th/160/29 Advocacy & Initiatives37% F10th/1610/27 Traceability17/84
14th/16
20% FTuna Procurement Policy
15th/166/149HR
12th/1636.3/112Enviro14th/1616.95%Total

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  39
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESPositive
Southeast Grocers are at least aware of many of the environmental 
issues linked to seafood supply chains, and have made commitments 
to working with the Global Aquaculture Alliance (GAA), Sustainable 
Fisheries Partnership (SFP) and the World Wildlife Fund (WWF). 
However, while working with these organizations represents a 
positive step, it is not a substitute for robust policies guided by 
international instruments with clear plans for implementation.
Southeast Grocers appear to take the trust of their customers 
seriously, as well as considering their commitment to sustainable 
seafood to be part of this trust. Southeast Grocers should build on 
this premise by providing their customers with a thoughtful and 
robust seafood policy that ensures customers their seafood is not 
damaging the environment or abusing the rights of those who 
produce it.Poor/Needs Improvement
Southeast Grocers’s seafood policy needs significantly more detail 
on environmental issues, including policies on transhipment 
at sea, improved traceability, regular supplier audits and 
ongoing monitoring. There is much mention of “promises” and 
commitments to sourcing sustainable seafood, but without detail 
it is difficult to know what steps are being taken to assure this.
On human rights, Southeast Grocers must first establish a human 
rights policy covering their entire supply chain, with specific 
considerations given to high-risk activities such as fishing. This 
policy should be rooted in internationally recognized principles and 
standards – such as the ILO Core Conventions and Work in Fishing 
Convention (C188) – and guided by the UN Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human Rights.SE GROCERS
Summary
Southeast Grocers did not complete a survey; as a result, publicly available information – mostly drawn from their 2020 CSR Report – was analyzed 
and used to score the survey. 130 Southeast Grocers performed very poorly overall, ranking dead last out of 16, with a failing score in every category. 
They ranked 13th and 16th in the Environment and Human Rights categories respectively. Their best performing section was “Sourcing” , but with 
just 36 percent, they still failed to make a passing grade.
Southeast Grocers scored worst overall by a significant margin, receiving the worst overall Human Rights score (2) by far. This was due to having no 
discernible policy on a number of important environmental and human rights issues, including transhipment-at-sea, human rights due diligence, 
migrant workers or grievance mechanisms.
Southeast Grocers also scored lowest in the human rights section of the survey with -4, a position they shared with Wegmans. The negative score 
was the result of a failure to mention human rights in what policies do exist, a situation that in many ways resembles where some companies were 
on environmental policies over a decade ago. A 50-page CSR report released in 2020 does not mention human rights once. It also does not provide 
updates on environmental work mentioned in previous Greenpeace reports, nor sufficient detail about current seafood sustainability policies 
or activities to score points for many questions in the survey. What information was available pertained exclusively to sustainability and did not 
appear to give any consideration to the human rights impacts of their business.
21% F12th/163/14 Customer Education/
Labelling36% F11th/1619.2266667 /53Tied with Wegmans
Current Sourcing16th/16
F-4/51 Human Rights & labor
7% F12th/162/29 Advocacy & Initiatives7% F13th/162/27 Traceability16/84
15th/16
19% FTuna Procurement Policy **
**
16th/162/149HR
13th/1636.2/112Enviro16th/1612.35%Total

40 TUNA RETAILER REPORT
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESPositive
Sprouts achieved its highest scores and ranking for the sourcing 
section, which included questions on product offering and catch 
methods, as well as policy. Perhaps in a reflection of one of the 
strengths of being a smaller company, Sprouts got one of the 
highest scores for not stocking problematic species or brands. They 
scored joint-second highest with Whole Foods for the number of 
risky species they don’t  stock, with four out of 13, and none of the 
high-risk brands. They also scored second for catch method, less 
than half a point behind Whole Foods, sourcing 72% from pole and 
line, and 90% from pole and line or hand/troll line (with 7% from 
FAD-free purse seine and 3% from longline).
Sprouts scored in line with others for having policies, and also 
scored second highest for questions on the details of its sustainable 
sourcing policy, just behind Whole Foods. 131/132 However, on 
questions regarding details of their human rights policy, they 
scored decidedly lower .Poor/Needs Improvement
Despite scoring highly for the details of the sustainability policies, 
they received some of the lowest scores for information on their 
human rights policies and work. The lack of policy meant they 
were unable to score any points for a range of questions about 
their details – including reference to the UNGPs, human rights due 
diligence and remediation – which is reflected in the scores for 
these sections.
Recognizing that advocacy work favors larger companies with more 
resources, Sprouts was one of only two companies to score no 
points for the advocacy section, and we would encourage Sprouts 
to make better use of their voice to drive important improvements.
Finally, Sprouts was the only company to answer that they had 
not given any consideration to how purchasing practices affect 
the human rights of workers in their supply chains, one of the few 
questions where points could be deducted. Sprouts seem willing to 
engage and improve, but based on this answer and others it seems 
there is a long way to go.SPROUTS
Summary
Sprouts completed their own survey and ranked ninth overall, fifth in the Environment category, and twelfth in the Human Rights category. 
Sprouts’s best score came in the sourcing section, managing to pass with a 69 percent, which put them in third place. Unfortunately, they did not 
perform nearly as well in other categories, coming thirteenth in traceability and second from the bottom for advocacy.
Sprouts scored poorly in a number of important areas, and their scores reflect where they, like many companies of a similar size, are currently on 
human rights issues. They do, however, express and encourage willingness to engage and improve.
32% F7th/164.5/14 Customer Education/
Labelling69% D+3rd/1636.5366667/53 Current Sourcing10th/16
8% F4/51 Human Rights & labor
F15th/160/29 Advocacy & Initiatives7% F13th/162/27 Traceability28/84
6th/16
33% FTuna Procurement Policy
12th/1616.5 /149HR
5th/1658.5/112Enviro9th/1625.50%Total

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  41
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESPositive
Target’s Labor and Human Rights policy was detailed and addressed 
a number of the systemic problems, such as recruitment. 134/135 The 
policy aims to reduce the risk of recruitment associated debt by 
explicitly committing the company and its suppliers to abiding by the 
“Employer Pays Principle” . This requirement also forms part of their 
supplier reviews and audits, an essential step in ensuring compliance.
Target has also implemented a due diligence framework that appears 
well-considered and relatively comprehensive, including gathering 
a range of information from vessels in its supply chain. Currently 
covering 75% of sourcing, we hope it will soon encompass the 
entirety. Part of this framework includes specific engagement with 
migrant workers and the recognition they represent a vulnerable 
group within the supply chain.
Target’s traceability system – including its actions to prevent fish 
fraud - appears robust and comprehensive, including the verification 
of custody on certification claims of FAD-free products. They were 
one of only four companies to receive full points in this area.Poor/Needs Improvement
Target’s seafood policy does not explicitly require non-MSC certified 
tuna to be part of a FIP that is ranked either “A” or “B” , despite none 
of their suppliers sourcing from FIPs with a “C” rating. If this is the 
case, there is still much to be gained – as a business and for the wider 
industry – by explicitly enshrining it in policy.
In line with most other retailers, Target refused to publish a supplier 
vessel list, despite its currently publishing a list of supplier factories, 
which it says “creates meaningful opportunities to enhance 
responsible and sustainable production practices. ” If it is true 
for factories it is certainly true for fishing vessels, and a range of 
stakeholders – including customers and workers groups – can benefit 
from improved availability of this information.
Target’s explicit requirement of 100% observer coverage for tuna that 
is transhipped at sea is a strong starting point, but the more companies 
that prohibit this risky practice altogether – and independently audit 
to ensure compliance – the more quickly it can be eradicated.
Target has stated that they are working with their own brand suppliers 
to ensure workers are paid digitally by 2025. Payment documentation 
is an important aspect of ensuring workers in the supply chain are 
paid fairly, but this requirement can and should include all suppliers.
Target’s performance for the advocacy section was very disappointing, 
particularly for a retailer of its size; not least for the positive influence 
its leadership could have on the industry at large to drive much 
needed positive change. Target’s limited tuna industry advocacy 
efforts have focused exclusively on RFMOs, while there is much greater 
scope for engagement with the Taiwanese and US governments, and 
United Nations. Target’s recognition of the importance of protecting 
observers and the viral work they do is encouraging, but their explicit 
support and advocacy could go much further.TARGET
Summary
Target completed their own survey as well as providing supporting resources. Target ranked third overall, coming sixth and third for the Environment 
and Human Rights categories respectively. Target scored well for having comprehensive, publicly available seafood and human rights policies, as 
well as more detailed and prescriptive guidance for suppliers. Target’s strong placement in the Human Rights category was somewhat undermined 
by a mid-table ranking for Environment. This score suffered as a result of a lack of specificity in its seafood policy, reference to international policy 
instruments and certain explicit language, including around shark finning and Marine Protected Areas.
Target scored highest for the human rights section, and with 73 percent was one of only two retailers to receive a passing score. Target’s Standards of 
Vendor Engagement contains a number of supplier requirements linked to a number of labor and human rights issues, including recruitment, debt, 
freedom of movement, and other key ILO indicators. 133
36% F5th/165/14 Customer Education/
Labelling46% F7th/1624.55 /53 Current Sourcing
Tied with Walmart1st/16
73% C37/51 Human Rights & labor
24% F9th/167/29 Advocacy & Initiatives52% F5th/1614/27 Traceability25/84
9th/16
30% FTuna Procurement Policy
3rd/1659/149HR
6th/1653.5/112Enviro3rd/1647.92%Total

42 TUNA RETAILER REPORT
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESPositive
Walmart has publicly accessible web pages detailing a range 
of policies, including Seafood, “Forced labor Prevention” 
and “Human Rights Statement” . Compared with many 
other companies, Walmart is fairly advanced with both the 
development of these policies and their communication.
Walmart was one of the only companies to have a stand-
alone section on human rights, which covers all of its business 
operations, as well as those of its suppliers and other third 
parties. Walmart also stands out for being explicit in its use of 
international instruments, which it says informed its response to 
human rights issues.
Greenpeace recognizes Walmart’s role as a founder and 
instrumental member of the Seafood Taskforce , a coalition of 
businesses and NGOs working to improve sustainability in the 
Thai seafood supply chain. Though currently limited to Thailand, 
this engaged approach to supply chain oversight should be 
expanded to cover all aspects of seafood sourcing, particularly 
work aboard distant-water vessels. Walmart’s significant 
philanthropic activity also sees it fund a considerable amount of 
work on both sustainability and human rights issues in supply 
chains, including work by the Global Fishing Watch and the 
Issara Institute.
Advocacy is a key area where larger retailers with the resources 
and expertise to lobby for improvements to environmental 
and human right protections in fisheries outperformed smaller 
companies. In line with this, Walmart ranked 3rd for its advocacy 
work, behind Aldi and Ahold Delhaize, and just ahead of Whole 
Foods. It is vitally important that a company of Walmart’s size 
and influence uses its position to push for improvements at a 
range of policy levels, and this work should be commended.WALMART
Summary
Walmart did not complete a survey; as a result, publicly available information – including their “Policies and Guidelines” and “Human Rights” webpages – 
was analyzed and used to score the survey. Walmart performed relatively well, though the poor performance of other retailers – particularly in the Human 
Rights category – means that a decent ranking can belie the need for improvement. Walmart came in 4th overall, less than one point ahead of Hy-Vee in 5th. 
In the more competitive environmental category, Walmart ranked 7th, less than half a point ahead of Giant Eagle in 8th. In the Human Rights category, larger 
companies like Walmart fared better, tying with Target for 3rd place. Walmart managed to score a passing grade of 61% in the “Human Rights and Labor” 
section — though once again, it should be noted that labor and human rights policies concerning Walmart’s employees were not assessed.
Walmart’s size and available resources provide a considerable advantage regarding engagement, involvement in groups and associations, advocacy, 
communication and other initiatives. However, commitment in this area is a matter of culture, and Greenpeace recognizes Walmart’s engagement and 
investment in many areas of this work. In some ways, Walmart’s size and influence allow it to set the agenda and drive the conversation, presenting an 
excellent opportunity for positive leadership. However, Walmart must do much more than it is currently doing in order to have such an effect on the industry.
Poor/Needs Improvement
While Walmart’s sustainability and human rights policies are more detailed 
and better developed than most, many of the commitments detailed 
under its seafood policy are goals for 2025, and it is unclear how much 
progress has been made towards them. Because this survey is interested 
in what policies are currently  in place, Walmart’s score suffered for a lack of 
information on current work.
Like other retailers, Walmart’s policies leave out a number of important 
details, particularly with regard to human rights. For example, while 
Walmart does mention the need to ensure migrant workers are recruited 
responsibly, questions in this area sought specific recognition of the 
increased risks faced by migrant workers and the company’s work to 
mitigate them.
Walmart has the makings of many important aspects of environmental and 
human rights due diligence, and with some additions could significantly 
improve its score. For instance, Walmart does have a due diligence 
framework, but unfortunately it is based on OECD guidelines, which do not 
include human rights nor apply to seafood supply chains. As the UNGPs 
suggest, existing frameworks such as this can be augmented and improved 
to include human rights issues. Similarly, a grievance mechanism is in 
place, but as currently constituted and presented it does not meet the UN’s 
guidelines. Remediation of those negatively impacted by Walmart’s business 
is also developing, though currently limited to its work the Issara Institute in 
Thailand and does not include vessels. These are promising developments 
that could be improved and made considerably more effective.
Though we recognize Walmart’s role in funding work by the Global Fishing 
Watch on transhipment-at-sea, we were unable to find an explicit company 
position on this important issue. The centrality of transhipment to many 
environmental and human rights issues, as well as the history of focus 
it has received, warrants an explicit stand-alone position. In addition, 
positive leadership in this area can have a positive and much-needed 
galvanizing effect.https://corporate.walmart.com/policies#seafood-policy
https://corporate.walmart.com/policies
https://corporate.walmart.com/esgreport/esg-issues/human-rights
https://one.walmart.com/content/dam/supply-chain-security/guidance_documents/Remediation_1Pager.pdf
32% F8th/164.5/14 Customer Education/
Labelling45% F5th/1624/53 Current Sourcing
Tied with Target2nd/16
61% D-31/51 Human Rights & labor
55% F3rd/1616/29 Advocacy & Initiatives22% F11th/166/27 Traceability29/84
4th/16
35% FTuna Procurement Policy
3rd/1659/149HR
7th/1651.5/112Enviro6th/1642.74%Total

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  43
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCOREShttps://corporate.walmart.com/policies#seafood-policy
https://corporate.walmart.com/policies
https://corporate.walmart.com/esgreport/esg-issues/human-rights
https://one.walmart.com/content/dam/supply-chain-security/guidance_documents/Remediation_1Pager.pdf
Positive
Wegmans does have a web page dedicated to their 
sustainable seafood policies and actions, though as 
with many retailers, it lacks both details and specific 
reference to international standards and policies. 
However, much of what is available appears to be 
moving in the right direction. Greenpeace commends 
the commitment to sourcing from fisheries that are 
certified sustainable or involved in a FIP . Commitments 
such as these are a positive start but would benefit 
from further explicit bans on sourcing from “red” or 
“yellow” fisheries, shark finning and vessels known to 
be involved in Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated 
(IUU) fishing.
Engagement with organizations such as the Sustainable 
Fisheries Partnership (SFP) is also a positive sign, 
but must be part of a more engaged approach to 
sustainable seafood sourcing, including robust policy 
and ongoing monitoring and oversight. Similarly, 
work to improve traceability with companies such as 
Trace Register are encouraging, but represent just one 
aspect of not only ensuring all products can be traced 
but that those suppliers are upholding a company’s 
environmental and social standards.Summary
Wegmans did not complete a survey; as a result, publicly available information – mostly drawn from their “Seafood Sustainability” website – was 
analyzed and used to score the survey. 136 Wegmans performed poorly overall and ranked 13th out of 16, with a failing score in every category, ranking 
11th and 14th in the Environment and Human Rights categories respectively. Their best performing section was “Traceability” , but with just 41 percent, 
they still failed to make a passing grade.
Because they didn’t complete a survey, Wegmans’s score was hurt by the limited amount of public information available. Perhaps as a result of 
being a privately held, family-owned business, Wegmans’s publicly available information and reporting were not as comprehensive as some larger 
and publicly held companies. Based on performance in previous reports, we feel confident that completing a survey and providing more detailed 
information would have improved their score.
Their sustainability information was difficult to find, broad in scope and short on details, like many in the bottom rankings. In this end of the table, 
many retailers are separated by only a few points, meaning small improvements in policy and practice could have a significant impact on rank. In the 
Environmental category, less than two points separate Wegmans in 11th from Costco in 14th.
Their Human Rights score was very poor (6.5), managing to stand out in a very poor field, coming third from last. They also shared the lowest score for 
the Human Rights section (-4), largely as a result of lacking a clear and easily accessible human rights policy.WEGMANS
Poor/Needs Improvement
The lack of detail and specific actions undermines positive commitments to 
improved sourcing, and makes it unclear how goals and aspirations will be achieved. 
Without detail, ongoing engagement and public communication, commitments, 
and statements will remain aspirational. For example, one of the Wegmans’s “Best 
Practices” is “gear chosen to reduce bycatch.” However, it is unclear what this entails, 
but with more detail could have scored higher. Retailers received extra points for 
sourcing from pole and line fisheries, as well as FAD-free purse seines and longlining 
with bycatch mitigation.
Unfortunately, Wegmans still sources Pacific bluefin tuna (farmed) and orange 
roughy, despite their highly endangered status, a decision that saw them drop four 
places in the 2018 CATO report.
The human rights of everyone impacted by any business operation are the 
responsibility of that business, and Wegmans could make rapid and important 
improvements by developing a human rights policy to cover its supply chains. Again, 
having such a policy based on established human rights instruments – such as UNGPs 
and ILO Core Conventions – would have greatly improved Wegmans’s ranking.
Based on the information available, Wegmans relies entirely on third-party audits 
to ensure their sourcing policies and standards are being met. However, while 
third-party audits do have value, it is vitally important for companies to establish 
some independent oversight and monitoring of their supply chains. Particularly 
with respect to human rights, third-party audits have regularly been shown to be 
inadequate, with abuses continuing in audited facilities.
18% F16th/162.5/14 Customer Education/
Labelling28% F14th/1614.9/53Tied with SE Grocers Tied with HEB
Tied with GE
Tied with AD, HEB, PublixCurrent Sourcing16th/16
F4/51 Human Rights & labor
F13th/160/29 Advocacy & Initiatives41% F8th/1611/27 Traceability19/84
12th/16
23% FTuna Procurement Policy
14th/166.5/149HR
11th/1636.9/112Enviro13th/1617.24%Total

44 TUNA RETAILER REPORT
SECTION SCORES OVERALL SCORESPositive
Whole Foods came top overall in the Environment category, driven 
by its high scores for traceability and sourcing. While nearly all 
retailers had policies in place, few contained the level of details and 
references to international instruments, including the UNGPs and 
ILO principles.
Whole Foods also benefited from sourcing its canned tuna 
exclusively from pole and line vessels, meaning a number of risk 
factors – including isolation and long periods at sea – are significantly 
reduced. Whole Foods has strong traceability requirements, and is 
able to trace 100 percent of its tuna back to the catching vessel. As 
a result, it also scored highly for questions related to fish fraud and 
traceability audits.
Whole Foods came second for questions on its product offering, 
just one point behind Aldi. Out of 13 problematic species or catch 
methods surveyed in this report, Whole Foods stocks only four, and 
sells none of the brands identified as problematic. It also received 
the highest score for its catch methods, sourcing 100 percent of its 
canned tuna from pole and line or handline fisheries.Poor/Needs Improvement
While Whole Foods’s policies are strong on environmental issues, 
there are a number of gaps in relation to Human Rights that 
resulted in a to a very disappointing score, dragging down their 
overall score and rank. For nearly all questions related to human 
rights they directed their answers to an Appendix included at the 
end of the survey. However, in many cases the Appendix did not 
cover the question and their score suffered accordingly.
Whole Foods scored just four points in the human rights section, 
ranking ninth. This was largely the result of being unable to answer 
anything specific about human rights due diligence, tracking, and 
the guidance of the UNGPs. Like many others with underdeveloped 
human rights policies, Whole Foods chose to skip large sections of 
questions, and their score reflects this.
One surprising blemish on their otherwise positive performance 
on environmental issues was their lack of a position or policy on 
transhipment at sea. While we recognize that sourcing mostly from 
pole and line vessels in many ways mitigates the risks associated 
with transhipment, Whole Foods’s voice could be a powerful driver 
of change.Summary
Whole Foods completed their own survey and ranked fourth overall, coming top in the Environment category by a strong margin, which drove their 
overall ranking. However, this dominance did not carry over to the Human Rights category, coming a disappointing eighth. Whole Foods got the 
top score in half of the survey sections, including traceability and sourcing, where they achieved passing marks.
Whole Foods’s poor human rights scores were particularly concerning for a company that has been a leader on sustainable sourcing. It’s still 
unclear what impact Amazon’s acquisition has had on these issues – including some anti-union issues – but it seems unlikely that these policies 
would have existed previously and been dismantled. It does report, however, that it is currently piloting a risk-based human rights due diligence 
tool, which we could not consider for this survey.Whole Foods Market
57% F1st/168/14 Customer Education/
Labelling79% C+1st/1642/53 Current Sourcing9th/16
8% F4/51 Human Rights & labor
57% F4th/1614/29 Advocacy & Initiatives66% D1st/1618/27 Traceability32/84
3rd/16
38% FTuna Procurement Policy
8th/1632.5/149
1st/1685.5/1124th/1646.45%
HR EnviroTotal

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  451 BHRRC (2021) All at Sea: An Evaluation of Company Efforts to Address 
Modern Slavery in Pacific Supply Chains of Canned T una , https://media.
business-humanrights.org/media/documents/Tuna_II_v6.pdf
2 Oxfam, Global Supermarket Scorecard. https://www.oxfam.org/en/take-
action/campaigns/end-suffering-behind-your-food/supermarkets-
scorecard
3 World Benchmarking Alliance,  ‘Corporate Human Rights Benchmark 
2020’ https://www.worldbenchmarkingalliance.org/publication/chrb/  
4 BHRRC (2021) All at Sea: An Evaluation of Company Efforts to Address 
Modern Slavery in Pacific Supply Chains of Canned T una , https://media.
business-humanrights.org/media/documents/Tuna_II_v6.pdf
5 UN FAO (2020) The State Of Fisheries and Aquaculture , https://www.fao.
org/publications/sofia/2020/en/
6 Stat from UN Oceans Assessment - Maths: 20.5kg per capita = 1kg = 
2.205LBS (97m/T – 22m/T = 75m/T \7.6bn (people) = 9.8kg
7 UN FAO, Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing, website: 
https://www.fao.org/iuu-fishing/en/
8 UN FAO (2020) The State Of Fisheries and Aquaculture , https://www.fao.
org/publications/sofia/2020/en/
9 United Nations (2021), The Second World Ocean Assessment - Vol II , 
https://www.un.org/regularprocess/woa2launch
10 Pauly, D. & Zeller, D. Catch reconstructions reveal that global marine 
fisheries catches are higher than reported and declining. Nat. Commun. 7, 
10244 (2016) 
11 Rousseau, Y. (et al), “Evolution of global marine fishing fleets and the 
response of fished resources. ” Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America , 116(25): 12238–12243. (2019)
12 UN FAO, “Global Record of Fishing Vessels, Refrigerated Transport Vessels 
and Supply Vessels, ” website: https://www.fao.org/global-record/en/
13 Ibid
14 ibid
15 Oceana (2021), Tracking Harmful Fisheries Subsidies , https://oceana.org/
publications/reports/tracking-harmful-fisheries-subsidies
16 ibid
17 Sala, Enric (et al)(2018), “The economics of fishing the high seas” , Science 
Advances , vol. 4, No. 6. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat2504
18 Oceana (2021), Tracking Harmful Fisheries Subsidies, https://oceana.org/
publications/reports/tracking-harmful-fisheries-subsidies
19 Tickler, D. et al. Modern slavery and the race to fish. Nat Commun 9, 4643 
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07118-9
20 Pinsky, Malin L.  et al (2019). Greater vulnerability to warming of marine 
versus terrestrial ecto- therms. Nature, vol. 569, No. 7754, pp. 108–11. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1132-4
21 Pauly, D. et al , “Global fishing effort (1950–2010): trends, gaps, and 
implications. ” Fish. Res . 107, 131–136 (2011)
22 United Nations (2021), The Second World Ocean Assessment - Vol I, 
https://www.un.org/regularprocess/woa2launch
23 Campling, L (2012) “The tuna ‘commodity frontier’: business strategies 
and environment in the industrial tuna fisheries of the Western Indian 
Ocean. ” Journal of Agrarian Change 12(2&3): 252–278
24 UN FAO (2020) The State Of Fisheries and Aquaculture, https://www.fao.
org/publications/sofia/2020/en/25 Pew Charitable Trusts (2020), Netting Billions: A Global Tuna 
Valuation, https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/
reports/2020/10/netting-billions-2020-a-global-tuna-valuation
26 ibid
27 Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) (2020), ‘The socio-economic value 
of tuna’ , website: https://www.msc.org/media-centre/news-opinion/
news/2020/02/19/the-socio-economic-value-of-tuna
28 National Fisheries Institute, “TOP 10 LIST FOR SEAFOOD CONSUMPTION” , 
website: https://aboutseafood.com/about/top-ten-list-for-seafood-
consumption/
29 Pew Charitable Trusts (2020), Netting Billions: A Global Tuna 
Valuation, https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/
reports/2020/10/netting-billions-2020-a-global-tuna-valuation
30 ibid
31 Greenpeace, “Who is FCF? Taiwan’s biggest tuna trader linked to 
forced labour & illegal fishing” (2020), https://www.greenpeace.org/
international/story/29409/who-is-fcf-taiwans-biggest-tuna-trader-
linked-to-forced-labour-illegal-fishing/
32 Pew Charitable Trusts (2020), Netting Billions: A Global Tuna 
Valuation, https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/
reports/2020/10/netting-billions-2020-a-global-tuna-valuation
33 ibid
34 International Seafood Sustainability Foundation (ISSF), “Status of the 
World Fisheries for Tuna: March 2020. ISSF Technical Report 2020-12” 
(2020), https://iss-foundation.org/downloads/20140/
35 Pew Charitable Trusts (2020), Netting Billions: A Global Tuna 
Valuation, https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/
reports/2020/10/netting-billions-2020-a-global-tuna-valuation
36 UN FAO (2020) The State Of Fisheries and Aquaculture, https://www.fao.
org/publications/sofia/2020/en/
37 PlanetTuna (2019) – Which is the tuna’s natural predator?  
https://planettuna.com/en/tuna-is-the-tunas-natural-predator/
38 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), “Fishing Gear: 
Purse Seines” , website: https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/national/
bycatch/fishing-gear-purse-seines
39 International Seafood Sustainability Foundation (ISSF), “Status of the 
World Fisheries for Tuna: March 2020. ISSF Technical Report 2020-12” 
(2020), https://iss-foundation.org/downloads/20140/
40 ibid
41 FAO, “Fishing Techniques: Industrial T una Longlining” , website: https://
www.fao.org/fishery/fishtech/1010/en
42 Greenpeace (2020), Choppy Waters: Forced labor and Illegal Fishing 
in Taiwan’s Distant Water Fisheries , https://www.greenpeace.org/
southeastasia/publication/3690/choppy-waters-forced-labor-and-
illegal-fishing-in-taiwans-distant-water-fisheries/
43 Pew Charitable Trusts (2020), Netting Billions: A Global Tuna 
Valuation, https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/
reports/2020/10/netting-billions-2020-a-global-tuna-valuation
44 International Pole and Line Foundation (IPNLF)(2016), Pole-and-Line 
Tuna Fishing in the World: Status and Trends, https://ipnlf.org/perch/
resources/ipnlf-tech-report6status-and-trends-of-pole-and-line-tuna-
fishing.pdfEndnotes

46 TUNA RETAILER REPORT45 International  labor Organization (ILO) (2017), Decent work for migrant 
fishers , https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---
sector/documents/publication/wcms_569895.pdf
46 Global Tuna Alliance (GTA (2020), “Best Practices for At-Sea Transshipment 
Regulation” , https://www.globaltunaalliance.com/wp-content/
uploads/2020/06/ISSF-GTA-webinar.-Transship-BP .FINAL_.June-2020.
pdf
47 ILO (2013), Caught at Sea - Forced labor and Trafficking in Fisheries, 
https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/forced-labor/publications/
WCMS_214472/lang--en/index.htm
48 Greenpeace (2020), Choppy Waters: Forced labor and Illegal Fishing 
in Taiwan’s Distant Water Fisheries, https://www.greenpeace.org/
southeastasia/publication/3690/choppy-waters-forced-labor-and-
illegal-fishing-in-taiwans-distant-water-fisheries/
49 ibid
50 ibid
51 ILO (2012), Indicators of Forced labor , https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/
forced-labor/publications/WCMS_203832/lang--en/index.htm
52 Tickler, D. et al. “Modern slavery and the race to fish” . Nat Commun 9, 
4643 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07118-9
53 ILO (2012),  Indicators of Forced labor , https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/
forced-labor/publications/WCMS_203832/lang--en/index.htm
54 Lindley, J. & Techera, E. J. Overcoming complexity in illegal, unregulated 
and unreported fishing to achieve effective regulatory pluralism. Mar. 
Policy  81, 71-79 (2017)
55 International Transport Workers Federation (ITF), “Flags of convenience” , 
website: https://www.itfglobal.org/en/sector/seafarers/flags-of-
convenience
56 Tickler, D. et al. “Modern slavery and the race to fish” . Nat Commun 9 , 4643 
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07118-9
57 ILO (2012), Indicators of Forced labor , https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/
forced-labor/publications/WCMS_203832/lang--en/index.htm
58 ibid
59 ITF (2017), Exploitation Permitted: How Ireland’s Atypical Permit Scheme 
Drives the Exploitation of Migrant Workers , https://www.itfglobal.org/
media/1691097/itf-fish-report.pdf
60 FAO, “Tuna Fishing Vessel of the World” , website: https://www.fao.org/3/
y4499e/y4499e07.htm
61 UN FAO (2020) The State of Fisheries and Aquaculture , https://www.fao.
org/publications/sofia/2020/en/  
62 ILO (2013), Caught at Sea - Forced labor and Trafficking in Fisheries ,  
https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/forced-labor/publications/
WCMS_214472/lang--en/index.htm
63 Bales, K. Blood and Earth: Modern Slavery, Ecocide, and the Secret to 
Saving the World (Spiegel & Grau, New York, 2016). 
64 Guardian (2019), “Major tuna brands failing to tackle slavery in Pacific 
supply chains – report” , https://www.theguardian.com/global-
development/2019/jun/03/major-tuna-brands-failing-tackle-slavery-
pacific-supply-chains-report
65 Mongabay  (2021), ”Worked to death: How a Chinese tuna juggernaut 
crushed its Indonesian worker” , https://news.mongabay.com/2021/09/
worked-to-death-how-a-chinese-tuna-juggernaut-crushed-its-
indonesian-workers/
66 UN FAO (2020), The State of Fisheries and Aquaculture ,  
https://www.fao.org/publications/sofia/2020/en/67 Gianni, M. & Simpson, W. “The Changing Nature of High Seas Fishing: 
How Flags of Convenience Provide Cover for Illegal, Unreported and 
Unregulated Fishing” (Australian Department of Agriculture, Fisheries 
and Forestry, International Transport Workers’ Federation, and WWF 
International, Canberra, 2005). 
68 IPBES (2019): Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report 
on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental Science-
Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, https://ipbes.
net/sites/default/files/inline/files/ipbes_global_assessment_report_
summary_for_policymakers.pdf  
69 Sumaila, U. R., Alder, J. & Keith, H. Global scope and economics of illegal 
fishing. Mar. Policy 30, 696–703 (2006). 
70 Greenpeace (2020),  Choppy Waters: Forced labor and Illegal Fishing 
in Taiwan’s Distant Water Fisheries , https://www.greenpeace.org/
southeastasia/publication/3690/choppy-waters-forced-labor-and-
illegal-fishing-in-taiwans-distant-water-fisheries/
71 Marschke, M. & Vandergeest, P . Slavery scandals: Unpacking labor 
challenges and policy responses within the off-shore fisheries sector.  
Mar. Policy 68, 39–46 (2016). 
72 New York Times  (2015), “Murder at Sea: Captured on Video, but Killers 
Go Free” , https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/20/world/middleeast/
murder-at-sea-captured-on-video-but-killers-go-free.html
73 Global Tuna Alliance (GTA (2020), “Best Practices for At-Sea Transshipment 
Regulation” , https://www.globaltunaalliance.com/wp-content/
uploads/2020/06/ISSF-GTA-webinar.-Transship-BP .FINAL_.June-2020.
pdf
74 International labor Organization (ILO) (2017), Decent work for migrant 
fishers, https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---
sector/documents/publication/wcms_569895.pdf
75 ibid
76 ibid
77 ILO (2012), Indicators of Forced labor , https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/
forced-labor/publications/WCMS_203832/lang--en/index.htm
78 Issara Institute, “Worker Voice-Driven Ethical Recruitment” , website: 
https://www.issarainstitute.org/ethical-recruitment
79 ICCR, “Best Practice Guidance on Ethical Recruitment of Migrant Workers” , 
website: https://www.iccr.org/best-practice-guidance-ethical-
recruitment-migrant-workers-0
80 BHRRC (2021), “KnowTheChain: Responsible recruitment of migrant 
workers” , website: https://www.business-humanrights.org/en/from-
us/briefings/knowthechain-responsible-recruitment-of-migrant-
workers/
81 UN FAO (2020), The State of Fisheries and Aquaculture,  
https://www.fao.org/publications/sofia/2020/en/
82 International labor Organization (ILO) (2017), Decent work for migrant 
fishers , https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---
sector/documents/publication/wcms_569895.pdf
83 The Atlantic . “How Walmart Persuades Its Workers Not to Unionize, ” 
https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2015/06/how-
walmart-convinces-its-employees-not-to-unionize/395051/
84 The Guardian, “Why Target’s Anti-Union Video is no Joke, ”  
https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/target-anti-
union-video-cheesy-but-effective
85 UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNOHCR) (2011), 
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights , https://www.ohchr.
org/documents/publications/guidingprinciplesbusinesshr_en.pdf
86 ILO, Migrant Workers: ACTRAV - For a Rights-based Approach to labor 
Migration, website: https://www.ilo.org/actrav/areas/WCMS_DOC_ATR_
ARE_MIG_EN/lang--en/index.htm

 TUNA RETAILER REPORT  4787 ILO (2013), Caught at Sea - Forced labor and Trafficking in Fisheries , 
https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/forced-labor/publications/
WCMS_214472/lang--en/index.htm
88 ibid
89 Pauly, D. Major trends in small-scale marine fisheries, with emphasis 
on developing countries, and some implications for the social sciences. 
Marit. Stud. 4, 7–22 (2006). 
90 Sumaila, U. R., Alder, J. & Keith, H. Global scope and economics of illegal 
fishing. Mar. Policy 30, 696–703 (2006). 
91 UN FAO (2020), The State of Fisheries and Aquaculture , https://www.fao.
org/publications/sofia/2020/en/
92 UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNOHCR) (2011), 
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights , https://www.ohchr.
org/documents/publications/guidingprinciplesbusinesshr_en.pdf
93 ibid
94 ILO (2012),  Indicators of Forced labor,  https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/
forced-labor/publications/WCMS_203832/lang--en/index.htm
95 ILO (2013), Caught at Sea - Forced labor and Trafficking in Fisheries, 
https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/forced-labor/publications/
WCMS_214472/lang--en/index.htm
96 FAO, “Global Record of Fishing Vessels – About” , website: https://www.
fao.org/global-record/background/about/en/
97 ISSF ProActive Vessel Register (PVR) https://www.iss-foundation.
org/vessel-and-company-commitments/proactive-vessel-register/
proactive-vessel-register-pvr/
98 BHRRC (2021), Beyond Social Auditing: Key Considerations for Mandating 
Effective Due Diligence,  https://media.business-humanrights.org/
media/documents/2021_Beyond_social_auditing_v5.pdf
99 ibid
100 UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCR) (2011),  
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights , https://www.ohchr.
org/documents/publications/guidingprinciplesbusinesshr_en.pdf
101 ibid
102 ibid
103 Greenpeace (2020), Choppy Waters: Forced labor and Illegal Fishing 
in Taiwan’s Distant Water Fisheries , https://www.greenpeace.org/
southeastasia/publication/3690/choppy-waters-forced-labor-and-
illegal-fishing-in-taiwans-distant-water-fisheries/
104 Aldi South, “Fish & Seafood” , website: https://cr.aldisouthgroup.com/
en/responsibility/our-work-action/fish-seafood
105 Aldi South Group (2021), International Policy on Forced Labour ,  
https://cr.aldisouthgroup.com/en/downloads/international-policy-
forced-labour
106 Aldi South Group (2021),  International Position Statement on Living Wages 
and Living Incomes , https://cr.aldisouthgroup.com/en/downloads/
international-position-statement-living-wages-living-incomes
107 Giant Food Stores, “Sustainable Seafood” , website: https://
giantfoodstores.com/pages/sustainable-seafood
108 Ahold Delhaize, “Human Rights” , website: https://www.aholddelhaize.
com/en/sustainability/our-position-on-societal-and-environmental-
topics/human-rights/
109 Ahold Delhaize (2020), Human Rights Report 2020 , https://www.
aholddelhaize.com/media/10331/human-rights-report.pdf
110 Albertsons, “Position Statements” , website: https://www.
albertsonscompanies.com/our-values/position-statements.html
111 Costco, “Sustainable Fisheries & Aquaculture” , website: https://www.
costco.com/sustainability-fisheries.html
112 Costco, “Human Rights” , website: https://www.costco.com/
sustainability-human-rights.html113 https://www.costco.com/disclosure-regarding-human-trafficking-
and-anti-slavery.html
114 Giant Eagle, “Sustainable Seafood” , website: https://www.gianteagle.
com/about-us/sustainable-seafood
115 Giant Eagle, “Seafood Policy” , website: https://www.gianteagle.com/
about-us/sustainable-seafood/seafood-policy
116 Giant Eagle, “Tuna Policy” https://www.gianteagle.com/about-us/
sustainable-seafood/tuna-policy
117 H-E-B, “Seafood Policy” , website: https://www.heb.com/static-page/
article-template/H-E-B-Seafood-Policy
118 H-E-B (2021), Supplier Code of Conduct , https://storage.googleapis.com/
supplier-prod-portal-storage/file-objects/PORTAL/73251d83-5411-
4b4e-8ccd-206a78eeeed5
119 H-E-B, “Sustainability” , website: https://www.heb.com/static-page/
environment
120 H-E-B (2021), Seafood Sustainability Table , https://newsroom.heb.com/
wp-content/uploads/2021/03/seafood-sustainability-table_Dec2020.
pdf 
121 Hy-Vee, “Responsible Choice Seafood” , website: https://www.hy-vee.
com/corporate/our-company/sustainability/responsible-choice-
seafood/
122 Hy-Vee, Supplier Expectations & Supply Chain Accountability , 
https://76c35e76589404e46312-6ec6d4c514ba6d410de8bce9cae
9c292.ssl.cf2.rackcdn.com/Hy-Vee_SupplierExpectationsLetter_
April2021.pdf
123 Hy-Vee, Hy-Vee, Inc. Seafood Supplier Code of Conduct , 
https://76c35e76589404e46312-6ec6d4c514ba6d410de8bce9cae
9c292.ssl.cf2.rackcdn.com/Corporate%20Landing%20Pages/Hy-Vee_
SupplierCodeofConduct_2021.pdf
124 Kroger, 2021 Performance Tables, website: https://www.thekrogerco.
com/sustainability/2021-performance-tables/
125 Kroger (2018), Seafood Sustainability Policy , https://www.thekrogerco.
com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/The-Kroger-Co_Seafood-
Sustainability-Policy_2018-July.pdf
126 Kroger (2020), Kroger Seafood Sustainability Report 2009 – 2020 , http://
sustainability.kroger.com/Kroger-Seafood-Sustainability-Report.pdf
127 Meijer, “Sustainable Seafood” , website: http://meijercommunity.com/
sustainable-seafood
128 Publix, “Sustainability” , website: https://sustainability.publix.com
129 UNGP
130 Southeast Grocers (2020), Corporate Social Responsibility Report 2020 , 
https://www.segrocers.com/-/media/Media/pdfs/SEG_2020_CSR_
Report.pdf
131 Sprouts Farmers Market, “Sustainable Seafood Policy” , website: https://
about.sprouts.com/product-sourcing/sustainable-seafood-policy/
132 Sprouts Farmers Market, “Supplier Code of Conduct” , https://about.
sprouts.com/supplier-code-of-conduct/  
133 Target, “Standards of Vendor Engagement” , website: https://corporate.
target.com/corporate-responsibility/responsible-sourcing/social-
compliance/standards-of-vendor-engagement
134 Target, “Labor and Human Rights Policy, website: https://corporate.
target.com/corporate-responsibility/responsible-sourcing/social-
compliance/labor-and-human-rights
135 Target, “Human Rights Statement” , https://corporate.target.com/about/
purpose-history/our-commitments/human-rights
136 Wegmans, “Seafood Sustainability” website: https://www.wegmans.
com/about-us/making-a-difference/sustainability-at-wegmans/
seafood-sustainability/

© Roger Grace / Greenpeace