# Archivo original: 2023-tuna-scorecard.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:41:05 -03 2025

The High Cost  
of Cheap Tuna
US Supermarkets, Sustainability,  
and Human Rights at Sea
2nd EDITION

2 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION 
Greenpeace is an independent campaigning 
organization that uses peaceful protest and creative 
communication to expose global environmental 
problems and to promote solutions that are 
essential to a green and peaceful future.
Published February 2023 by  
Greenpeace USA*  
702 H Street NW Suite 300  
Washington, DC 20001  
Tel: 202.462.1177
Written by:  Mallika Talwar and Kieran Mulvaney
Edited by:  Sari Heidenreich and  
Marilu Cristina Flores  
Design by: Kyle Mckibbin
Cover © Paul Hilton / Greenpeace 
Acknowledgement & Special thanks to:  
John Hocevar, Asia Arminio, Josh Stride,  
Tegan Gregory, Tanya Brooks 
greenpeace.org
* Greenpeace Inc. is a registered Internal Revenue 
Service 501(c)(4) nonprofit entity that operates in 
the United States of America.

HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  3
Table of Contents
4 2022 T una Retailer Scorecard
5 Introduction
8 R esults & Findings
 17  Conclusion
 18  R etailer Profiles
 35  References
 37  Appendix : 2022 Retailer Survey
© Gavin Newman / Greenpeace

4 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION 2022 Tuna Retailer Scorecard
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
89
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
MEIJER 16%
TOTAL20%
ENVIRO16%
HR16th12thWEGMANS
 17%
TOTAL33%
ENVIRO6%
HR14th15th
SE GROCERS 18%
TOTAL35%
ENVIRO2%
HR11th16th
PUBLIX 19%
TOTAL33%
ENVIRO8%
HR13th14th
H-E-B 24%
TOTAL41% 10%10th13th
ENVIRO HR
COSTCO 27%
TOTAL32%
ENVIRO26%
HR15th7th
KROGER 27%
TOTAL34%
ENVIRO26%
HR12th8th
31%
TOTAL46%
ENVIRO20%
HR8th11thGIANT EAGLE 
ALBERTSONS 36%
TOTAL51%
ENVIRO24%
HR6th10th
SPROUTS 40%
TOTAL58%
ENVIRO25%
HR4th9th
WALMART 44%
TOTAL45%
ENVIRO42%
HR9th3rd
TARGET 48%
TOTAL47%
ENVIRO41%
HR7th4thHY-VEE
 50%
TOTAL60% 41%3rd4th
ENVIRO HRWHOLE FOODS 
MARKET50%
TOTAL75%
ENVIRO31%
HR1st6th
AHOLD 
DELHAIZE 55%
TOTAL57%
ENVIRO46%
HR5th2nd62%
TOTAL70%
ENVIRO56%
HR
2nd1stALDI USD
F
F
F
F
F
F
FF
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
NOTE: Percentage is rounded oﬀ to the nearest whole number. 
ENVIRO: Total score for all questions in the survey related to environmental issues. 
HR: Total score for all questions in the survey related to human rights & labor issues. 

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  5In 2021, Greenpeace USA released the first edition of the 
High Cost of Cheap Tuna  — a report that assessed 16 
major US tuna retailers and ranked them based on their 
environmental and human rights policies pertaining to their 
tuna supply chains. All 16 retailers surveyed in that report 
received failing scores, demonstrating a disturbing lack of 
focus from the industry towards growing human rights and 
forced labor concerns in global tuna supply chains. 
Since the release of the first edition of the High Cost of 
Cheap Tuna, sustainability and human rights concerns 
in the tuna industry persist. According to the latest stock 
assessments, among the 23 major commercial stocks of 
tuna, five are either subject to overfishing or are already 
overfished[1]. At the same time, reports of serious human 
rights violations and forced labor in global seafood 
supply chains continue to surface. A recent report found 
that 100,000 fishing-related deaths occur each year — 
three to four times previous estimates[2]. These deaths 
and human rights abuses are most prevalent on fishing 
vessels associated with Illegal, Unreported, Unregulated 
(IUU) fishing practices. Together, labor abuse and 
Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) fishing are 
undermining the social and environmental sustainability 
of fisheries, with wide-ranging impacts, including the loss 
of individual human rights and nutritional and economic 
benefits to fishing communities and governments[3]. 
The US is one of the largest importers of tuna in the 
world and US grocery retailers make a lion’s share of 
the revenue in the tuna industry — in 2018, tuna vessels 
worldwide netted $11 billion. Yet grocery stores earned 
almost four times that amount from their sales of 
tuna products in the same year[4]. US retailers have the 
economic power to influence change in the global tuna 
industry, mainly through their sourcing decisions and 
business practices. The goal of the first edition of this report was to measure the extent to which US retailers 
are rising to this opportunity and provide a benchmark 
against which to measure future progress. Since the first 
edition revealed retailers have a long way to go towards 
adequately addressing these issues in their supply 
chain, it became clear that there was a strong need to 
continuously track progress and to keep the pressure up 
to lead to meaningful and lasting change. That is the goal 
of this and all subsequent editions of this report. 
As was the case with the first edition, the results this year 
are poor across the board. Of the 16 retailers surveyed, 
15 received failing scores, and overall there were only 
marginal improvements in scores since last year. That 
said, this report shows some early signs of movement 
in the right direction — a handful of retailers, while not 
nearly doing enough to get them across the line of a 
passing grade, have still recorded improvements in their 
scores. And one — Aldi — has even managed to pass by 
a whisker. As a result, while this report illuminates a 
disappointing state of affairs, it ultimately provides an 
optimistic outlook that the industry as a whole will more 
fully embrace policies and practices that ensure tuna 
sold in the US is caught in a manner that is sustainable Introduction
In Greenpeace USA’s second scorecard measuring the human rights and sustainability practices of 
major US supermarkets in tuna supply chains, all but one retailer received a failing score. Overall, 
we saw only marginal improvements in scores since last year. 
That said, this report shows some early signs of movement in the right direction — a handful of retailers, 
while not nearly doing enough to get them across the line of a passing grade, have still recorded 
healthy improvements in their scores. And one — Aldi — has even managed to pass by a whisker. 
The US is one of the largest importers of 
tuna in the world and US grocery retailers 
make a lion’s share of the revenue in 
the tuna industry - in 2018, tuna vessels 
worldwide netted $11 billion. Yet grocery 
stores earned almost four times that 
amount from their sales of tuna products 
in the same year[4].

6 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION and ensures that those responsible for its catching and 
processing are treated justly, remunerated fairly, and 
meaningfully engaged in social responsibility initiatives. 
However, given the results so far, it seems certain 
that such change will require consistent pressure on 
retailers. This report, and future editions, are a part of 
that pressure, highlighting those retailers that are falling 
far short of what is required and recognizing those that 
take progressive actions. Ultimately, however, consumers 
must also contribute to this pressure by demanding that 
their grocery chains take swift and meaningful action. The 
power of individual and collective action is the best hope 
of bringing about a sustainable and equitable future.
METHODOLOGY
Since 2008, Greenpeace USA has periodically invited 
retailers to complete a survey on their policies regarding 
the sourcing and marketing of tuna and tuna products 
sold in their stores; we have then graded those responses 
and compiled them in a report. Prior to 2021, the survey’s 
questions focused exclusively on retailers’ environmental 
and sustainability policies; last year, the questionnaire 
expanded to incorporate policies on human rights and 
labor protections. For 2022, the survey expanded slightly 
once more, with the addition of a question on whether 
retailers have “a standalone human rights/labor policy 
that covers tuna procurement in your fresh, frozen, and 
shelf-stable categories. ”
With that addition, this year’s survey contains 39 questions 
in six categories:
1. Tuna Procurement Policy 
2. Traceability 
3. Advocacy & Initiatives 
4. Human Rights & Labor Protections
5. Current Sourcing 
6. Customer Education & Labeling
The questions in these categories addressed the following 
areas: 
1. T una Procurement Policy (20%)
Do retailers have official policies governing the 
procurement of their tuna that cover environmental 
and human rights issues? For example, do they 
only buy tuna from suppliers that recruit workers 
through formal channels that do not charge them 
recruiting fees? Are those workers guaranteed 
a local living wage? What policies do they have 
in place to ensure the safety and well-being of 
workers on their suppliers’ tuna vessels? What is their policy on procuring tuna from vessels that 
engage in transshipment at sea? Do they buy any 
tuna from “red” or “yellow”-listed fisheries? Is all 
their tuna Marine Stewardship Council certified or 
from a Fishery Improvement Program? 
This section does not address the practical steps 
being made to enforce these policies, merely 
whether such policies in fact exist.
2. Traceability (20%)
Are they able to trace all their tuna back to the 
individual vessel that caught them? Will they 
commit to making lists of those vessels public? How 
are retailers able to guarantee that their suppliers 
are providing the tuna they say they are, and that 
that tuna is caught in the manner and under the 
conditions their suppliers claim? If so, how? 
3. Advocacy and Initiatives (10%)
Do retailers publicly advocate for fisheries reform, 
improved management, and stronger guarantees 
of workers’ human and labor rights? If so, how? Do 
they add their name to group letters sent to fisheries 
organizations or do they involve themselves in 
discussions with individual governments or relevant 
United Nations agencies? Do they source their tuna 
from vessels with democratic and independent 
trade unions?
4. Human Rights and Labor Protections (25%)
What due diligence do retailers pursue to ensure 
that suppliers are meeting their commitments to 
human rights and labor protections? Do they have 
senior staff assigned to follow these issues? Do they 
have systems in place to regularly identify human 
rights risks and impacts? What kind of grievance 
and remediation mechanisms are available to 
workers? How do they deal with suppliers when 
and if abuses are discovered?
5. Current Sourcing (20%)
Do retailers stock any tuna of threatened species, 
from problematic fisheries, or from brands that 
have a history of using either of the above? What is 
the percentage of their tuna that is caught by various 
sustainable and less sustainable methods? To what 
extent do they consider how their purchasing 
practices might affect the human and labor rights 
of workers in the supply chain? 
6. Customer Education and Labeling (5%)
What information do they provide to enable 
consumers to make informed choices?

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  7Each question was assigned a maximum point value, and 
responses were scored accordingly. The score totals were 
aggregated, and each section was weighted to provide a 
final percentage score.
CategoryMax 
raw 
points Weighting
Tuna procurement policy 89 20%
Traceability 27 20%
Advocacy and initiatives 29 10%
Human rights and  
labor protections51 25%
Current sourcing 53 20%
Customer education/labeling 14 5%
In addition, every question (across all categories) was 
also classified as pertaining either to environmental 
issues, human rights issues, or both. For instance, some 
questions in the tuna procurement policy category 
related to environmental sustainability policies, others 
to human rights policies, and some, such as those 
pertaining to companies’ stands on transhipment, were 
classified as pertaining to both. As a result, in addition 
to the final percentage score, each retailer received an 
overall environmental score (marked as “ENVIRO” in the 
scorecard), and an overall human rights score (marked as 
“HR” in the scorecard). The full survey that was sent to 
retailers can be found in Appendix.
We recognize that human and labor rights and 
environmental policy are complex and evolving fields 
that encompass a broad range of issues — including 
domestic and global politics, socioeconomics, migration, 
climate change, and resource management — and impact 
a wide spectrum of actors, from small business owners 
and corporations to migrant fishers, seafood processors 
and western consumers. We recognize also that there is 
always subjectivity involved in policy decisions and the 
assessment of those decisions. With this in mind, we 
have striven to be fair and, where appropriate, to give 
companies the benefit of the doubt, particularly where 
clear effort and engagement has been made and signs 
of progress are evident. To this end, Greenpeace USA’s 
goal is not to expose and shame; rather, it remains, as it 
has been since Day One, to highlight, for both retailers 
and customers, the problems with existing supply chain 
policies, as well as the solutions to correct them.When it comes to the responsiveness of companies, 
there is reason for optimism. Last year, 9 of 16 companies 
responded to our questions. This year, of the 16 companies 
that we approached, 11 — Ahold Delhaize, Albertsons, 
Aldi, Giant Eagle, Hy-Vee, The Kroger Company, Meijer, 
Southeastern Grocers, Sprouts Farmers Market, Target, 
and Whole Foods — provided detailed responses to 
our questionnaire. We have taken the answers of these 
responsive companies in good faith and not sought to 
rigorously verify statements or claims made in response. 
Policies and their contents were verified — but verifying 
detailed, supply chain information is beyond the scope of 
this report.
The five “non-responsive companies” — Costco, HEB, 
Publix, Walmart, and Wegmans — elected not to complete 
a survey. We therefore scored them on publicly available 
policies and statements, online inventory searches, working 
group membership, and other factors. The accuracy and 
detail of those assessments can best be refined in future 
versions of this report through greater cooperation and 
responsiveness on the part of those retailers.
© Jurnasyanto Sukarno / Greenpeace

© Jiri Rezac / GreenpeaceResults & Findings

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  9One Retailer Received Passing Scores
For the second year in a row, Aldi topped our retailer 
rankings, this time reaching an overall score of 61.51 
percent, or a D when converted to a letter grade. While 
this is an improvement over last year’s table-topping 
score of 59.77 percent, and means that Aldi is the first 
retailer to achieve an overall passing grade, alas, it is 
just barely a passing grade and certainly not a grade that 
one should be proud of in their report card. Along with 
every other retailer surveyed, Aldi scored an F on Human 
Rights but a 70 percent score in the Environment section 
carried it over the line overall. The only other retailer to 
score a passing grade in any section was Whole Foods, 
which topped Environment with a score of 75 percent but 
was dragged down to an overall failing grade by its much 
poorer performance on Human Rights. All other retailers 
failed on both sections. Every retailer scored worse on 
Human Rights than on Environment.
Growth Since Last Year
There are nonetheless reasons to be positive. No retailer’s 
overall score declined, even as some retailers saw small 
decreases in one section or the other. Some showed solid 
overall increases: Giant Eagle and Southeastern Grocers 
by more than five percent, Kroger and Hy-Vee by more 
than seven, and Sprouts by a welcome 14.91 percent. 
More retailers responded to questions this year than last 
year, and several of those who did respond provided more 
detailed information than with past surveys.The Worst Performers
Even amid a largely disappointing set of results, some 
retailers are notable for performing particularly poorly. 
Meijer came last overall with a score of 16 percent: its 
score on the Environment was 11.5 percentage points 
less than the next-worst-performing company in that 
segment, Costco. While few Human Rights scores could 
even be considered acceptable, Southeastern Grocers 
came last in that segment with an execrable 2.27 percent, 
which dragged the company down to 14th place overall 
despite a middle-of-the-pack ranking on Environment. 
Other notably poor performers included Wegmans, which 
finished 14th on Environment and 15th on Human Rights 
for 15th place overall; and Publix, which finished 13th in 
Environment rankings and 14th on Human Rights, for an 
overall 13th place.
When Greenpeace USA first started surveying companies 
on their sustainable sourcing policies over a decade 
ago, talk of Fisheries Improvement Projects (FIPs), bans 
on transshipment at sea and reduced bycatch was fairly 
new, and a long way from inclusion in seafood sourcing 
policies, assuming such policies existed at all. But, over 
the years these principles have moved to the mainstream 
and an increasing number of retailers have policies and 
commitments in place.Results At A Glance
TOTAL SCORES: 
	|All but one retailer — Aldi — received failing scores. 
	|Aldi topped the rankings with an overall score of 
61.51% or a D when converted to a letter grade 
	|Meijer came dead last with a disappointing 
15.82%, followed closely by Wegmans (17.43%), 
Southeastern Grocers (17.73%), and Publix (18.53%). 
ENVIRONMENTAL SCORES: 
	|All but two retailers — Aldi (69.96%) &  
Whole Foods (75.44%) — received failing 
Environmental scores. 
HUMAN RIGHTS: 
	|All retailers received failing Human Rights scores
	|All retailers scored worse on Human Rights than 
Environment
Despite years of guidance from international 
bodies, academic and NGO research and 
reports, shocking media exposés, and 
increasing consumer awareness, many 
companies have continued to ignore their 
responsibilities, while others have opted 
for surface-level changes without the deep 
engagement and understanding required to 
address these serious issues.SCORES OVERVIEW
The similarities between where the industry was on 
environmental sustainability 10 years ago and where 
it currently is on human rights issues are hard to miss. 
Many companies appear not to have given it a thought, 
while even those who are leading the way still fall short 
in a number of areas. Despite years of guidance from 
international bodies, academic and NGO research 
and reports, shocking media exposés, and increasing 
consumer awareness, many companies have continued to 
ignore their responsibilities, while others have opted for 
surface-level changes without the deep engagement and 
understanding required to address these serious issues. 

10 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION 
FINDINGS
The Good
Every Retailer Has Some Kind of Policy in Place
In response to questions on whether they had policies 
governing tuna procurement that consider both 
sustainability and labor/human rights concerns and 
whether those policies covered all tuna they sold, almost 
every retailer answered in the affirmative (or, if they did not 
respond to the survey, were judged from public records 
to have such policies). In fact, ten — Ahold, Albertsons, 
Aldi, Giant Eagle, HEB, Hy-Vee, Sprouts, Target, Walmart 
and Whole Foods — scored maximum points on these 
fundamental questions.
Most others lost points for having policies that covered 
less than 100% of tuna sold by them. For instance, while 
Meijer appeared to have a seafood sustainability policy, 
it was vague and didn’t appear to apply to all tuna sold 
by them. Among all retailers, Southeastern Grocers was 
the only one that did not appear to have any labor/human 
rights policy at all.
Our Asks: We ask that supermarkets have a 
sustainable/responsible seafood sourcing policy 
and a standalone human rights/labor policy that 
covers 100% of tuna procured across all categories 
(fresh, frozen and shelf-stable) and sold in all stores. 
For more information, see Q1-4  in the Appendix. Many Retailers Are Able to Trace Tuna
All but two retailers profess an ability to trace every 
shop keeping unit (SKU) of tuna — fresh, frozen, and 
shelf-stable — down to the individual vessel that caught 
it, a positive development, given that traceability is 
fundamental to improving both environmental and 
human rights impacts associated with the tuna industry. 
Ahold, Aldi, Giant Eagle, HEB, Publix, SE Grocers, Sprouts, 
Wegmans and Whole Foods all scored maximum points 
on this question; only Costco, Kroger, and Meijer scored 
zero. However, when we asked all retailers whether they 
would commit to publishing a full list of the vessels from 
which they procure their tuna, all but one demurred; in 
contrast, Hy-Vee not only published its list in 2022 but 
has committed to doing so again. The question arises of 
just how valuable a traceability program can be if it is not 
also transparent and made available to the consumer; 
the fact that Hy-vee has done so, and continues to do so, 
demonstrates that it is clearly feasible. 
Our Asks: We ask that supermarkets are able to 
trace 100% of tuna (fresh, frozen and shelf-stable) 
down to the individual vessel that caught the fish 
and that they commit to publicly publish a list of 
those vessels. For more information, see Q15-16  in 
the Appendix.
© Tim Aubry / Greenpeace

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  11
Most Retailers Are Avoiding the Most Problematic 
Tuna Products
Following more than a decade of campaigning by NGOs, 
every retailer scored at least some points in response to 
the question of whether they avoid stocking some of the 
shelf-stable (or canned/tinned) tuna products that are 
known to be especially problematic, for example because 
of high levels of catch of non-target species. Ahold, Aldi, 
Hy-Vee, Sprouts, and Whole Foods scored maximum 
points here. Giant Eagle, HEB, and Kroger all saw 
improvement since last year. Whole Foods and Sprouts 
also scored highly on the question of how they sourced all 
their tuna products, and the extent to which they favored 
more sustainable fisheries practices such as pole-and-
line. Meanwhile, Albertsons, Costco, Kroger, and Walmart 
showed positive progress in this area.Our Asks:  We ask that supermarkets don’t sell tuna 
species caught using the methods most commonly 
linked to environmental harm and that they do 
not source certain at-risk species and/or stocks of 
tuna. For more information, see Q34  and Q36  in the 
Appendix.© Paul Hilton / Greenpeace

12 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION 
The Promising
Progress on Policy Commitment to International 
Human Rights Frameworks & Principles 
Most retailers expressed some level of commitment to 
respecting all internationally recognized human rights 
and fundamental rights at work across all activities 
throughout their supply chain. Points were awarded to 
those retailers who explicitly expressed adherence to, or 
guidance from, the United Nations Declaration on Human 
Rights, the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights, the International Labor Organization’s Declaration 
on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work, and the 
ILO Work in Fishing Convention of 2007, all of which set 
out fundamental rights for workers generally and/or 
fishworkers specifically. Although most scored at least 
some points, few acknowledged the ILO Work in Fishing 
Convention, which we strongly encourage retailers to 
incorporate into their seafood policies as it provides very 
specific guidance on issues fishworkers face. Four retailers 
— HEB, Publix, SE Grocers, and Wegmans — scored zero 
points here; only Aldi scored the maximum. 
Our Asks: We ask retailers to commit to upholding 
all internationally-recognized human rights and 
fundamental rights at work and to explicitly link that 
commitment to a slate of UN and ILO conventions, 
declarations, and guidance listed in Q6 of Appendix. 
Retailers must not cherry pick from among these 
standards or selectively apply elements of these 
standards. These standards must also be applied 
across all activities in their supply chain. For more 
information, see Q6 of the Appendix.Several Suppliers Are Showing Progress on 
Policies Related to Worker Recruitment
Several retailers declared that they require suppliers to 
recruit workers only through formalized avenues and 
agencies that are not on any government or NGO red 
lists, and forbid suppliers from charging those workers 
recruitment fees or subjecting them to wage deductions. 
In the past, few, if any retailers have paid attention to this 
important area. Because of this, we scored this question 
generously, wanting to acknowledge and encourage the 
few companies that showed some progress in this area, 
even when they could not provide guarantees that their 
suppliers abided by such policies. Six out of sixteen 
companies — Aldi, Costco, Hy-Vee, Target, Walmart, and 
Whole Foods — scored relatively well; all the others, 
however, fell short. 
Our Asks: We ask that retailers have a policy of only 
working with suppliers who recruit workers through 
formalized venues and don’t work with agencies 
that are on red lists. They must also comply with the 
Employer Pays Principle as set out in UN principles 
and explicitly prohibit the collection of any 
recruitment fees or wage deductions from workers. 
For more information, see Q9-11  of the Appendix.
© Jurnasyanto Sukarno / Greenpeace

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  13
that they lack meaningful engagement with workers in 
their design, implementation, and governance; do not 
have effective and accessible grievance mechanisms, and 
continue to fall short in terms of remediation processes. 
Our Asks: We ask that retailers move beyond third-
party audits and instead institute comprehensive 
human rights due diligence processes that cover 
100% of their supply chain and that align with 
the UN Guiding Principles on Business & Human 
Rights to identify, prevent, mitigate and account 
for how they address their negative impacts on 
human or labor rights. These processes must 
involve meaningful engagement with workers in 
their design, implementation, and governance. In 
addition, retailers must have processes in place 
for workers in their supply chains to lodge human 
or labor rights grievances directly with them and 
for those grievances to be remediated. For more 
information, see Q22-33  of the Appendix.The Bad
Little Human Rights Due Diligence to Ensure 
Policies Are Adhered To
Even though there has been some progress in establishing 
human rights policies and conducting risk assessments, 
there is very little sign of retailers making efforts towards 
comprehensive human rights due diligence. We asked 
several questions in this regard, related to the extent 
to which they go beyond an audit-based approach (an 
approach which has been shown to be ineffective at 
addressing human and labor rights risks[5]) to establish 
and implement a human rights due diligence framework, 
and assign senior level staff to track and respond to human 
rights risks and impacts in their tuna supply chains. Very 
few performed well: Not a single company received full 
points. In fact, the worst performers seemed to have 
barely considered the issue at all. SE Grocers scored just 
one point out of a possible 56, HEB zero, and Wegmans 
and Publix contrived to achieve negative scores. 
Special mention, however, to Ahold, Aldi, Target, 
and Walmart, which have demonstrated progress in 
establishing some sort of system to track human rights 
risks. However, by themselves, these efforts fall short in 
© Paul Hilton / Greenpeace

14 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION 
Policy Commitments Are Not Translating Into 
Changes in Sourcing & Purchasing Practices 
Not one single retailer responded affirmatively to the 
question of whether they preferentially source tuna 
from vessels that use Port States that have ratified and 
implemented the ILO Work in Fishing Convention and 
that effectively conduct labor inspections under the 
provisions of the convention; and/or from companies with 
independent, democratic trade unions and that respect 
their workers’ rights to collectively bargain and engage 
in union activities. To be fair, this question was an 
ambitious one, not least because only 20 countries have 
ratified this ILO convention. However, the principles 
enshrined in the convention should be a cornerstone for 
any procurement policy — and preferentially sourcing 
from companies that allow fundamental workers’ rights 
should also be non-controversial. Retailers have shown 
they are prepared to draw red lines in their sourcing 
for fisheries that do not meet certain environmental 
standards, and we applaud them for that. But, the fact 
that they do not presently offer the same weight to 
workers’ rights is a major failing.
Our Asks: Retailers must preferentially source 
tuna from vessels that use Port States that have 
ratified and implemented the ILO Work in Fishing 
Convention and that effectively conduct labor 
inspections under the provisions of the convention; 
and/or from companies with independent, 
democratic trade unions and that respect their 
workers’ rights to collectively bargain and engage  
in union activities. For more information, see Q7 of 
the Appendix.Few Limits on Transshipment at Sea …
Transshipment at sea — in which fish or marine wildlife 
is transferred from one vessel to another, allowing the 
fishing vessel to stay out at sea longer — is a major issue 
in global commercial fisheries. It often takes place on the 
High Seas, out of sight and beyond enforcement, and can 
lead to Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing. 
Because it enables ships to remain at sea for months or 
even years at a time (the vessels to which they transship 
fish generally provide fuel and supplies), it is also a means 
of exploiting workers, keeping them away from their 
homes and, often, from access to internet or cell service 
to communicate with anyone beyond their vessel.
Ahold, Aldi, Albertsons, Giant Eagle, Hy-Vee, Sprouts and 
Target claim to allow transshipment at sea only when there 
is 100 percent observer coverage . However, in practice, 
the rates of observer coverage are extremely low. For 
instance, observers are present on only approximately five 
percent of tuna longliners in the Pacific Ocean[6]. Further, 
observers are usually deployed on the carrier vessel, 
meaning fishing methods, locations, and conditions 
aboard catching vessels are largely unmonitored. Observer 
coverage also does not address the human rights risks 
associated with transshipment, as observers currently 
do not have a mandate to report on working conditions 
of vessel crew. This policy, especially when coupled with 
concrete reporting requirements from suppliers about 
transshipment events, is, nonetheless, to some extent, 
better than having no policy on transshipment at all, 
which is the case for virtually every other retailer. 
Our Asks: We ask that retailers commit to completely 
phasing out buying fish from companies that allow 
transshipment. By doing this, retailers can send a  
strong upstream signal in the industry against this  
practice. For more information, see Q8 of the Appendix.
© Will Rose / Greenpeace

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  15
… And Little Advocacy for Protection of 
Observers
There are other problems with using observer coverage as 
a pretext for allowing transshipment at sea — namely the 
lack of observer safety. Being an independent observer 
on a fishing vessel that is at sea for weeks or months at 
a time is a perilous undertaking: a 2020 report by the 
NGO Human Rights at Sea listed 10 recommendations for 
improving observer safety, citing the unexplained deaths 
of observers onboard two tuna purse seine vessels[7]. 
However, when retailers were asked what steps they 
took to advocate for observer protection, only Ahold 
and Aldi were able to provide somewhat comprehensive 
responses; Costco, HEB, Hy-Vee, Kroger, Meijer, Publix, SE 
Grocers, Sprouts and Wegmans were not able to provide 
any response at all. © Jiri Rezac / Greenpeace
Our Asks:  We ask that retailers advocate on 
international and regional levels for the adoption 
of policies and practices that heighten observer 
protection, including measures that ensure 
observer deaths are properly investigated. We 
also ask that retailers ensure observers receive 
heightened protections as human rights defenders 
and include them in their human rights due 
diligence process. For more information, see Q20  of 
the Appendix.

16 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION 
© Pierre Baelen / GreenpeaceLack of Traceability & Transparency
As previously mentioned, although most retailers claim an 
ability to track every SKU of tuna, only Hy-Vee expressed a 
willingness to publish a full list of their supplying vessels. 
Similarly, when asked what steps they are taking to 
combat fish fraud — the intentional mislabeling of fish 
and fish products, leading consumers to believe they are 
buying something that they are not — few were able to 
provide a detailed response. Only Albertsons, Aldi, Hy-
Vee, Target, and Whole Foods were able to score maximum 
points on this question. The importance of these two 
intertwined issues is clear: consumers need to be able 
to make informed choices about the tuna that they buy 
and to selectively support those suppliers and retailers 
that are taking the necessary steps to provide products of 
the standard that those consumers desire. Retailers need 
to provide customers with the information they need to 
make the decisions they want, and customers in turn are 
entitled to feel confident that the fish they are eating is 
the fish they believe they have bought.
Our Asks: We ask that retailers commit to 
publishing the full list of their supplier’s fishing 
vessels covering 100% of their tuna products. In 
addition, retailers must also take proactive actions 
to combat potential fraud by instituting chain of 
custody mechanisms for product verification, and 
implementing periodic monitoring and traceability 
audits. For more information, see Q15-18  of the 
Appendix.Lack of Commitment to Workers’ Safety  
and Well-Being
We asked retailers what steps they took to ensure the 
safety and well-being of the workers on the tuna vessels 
that supply them. Specifically, we asked if they require 
vessels to 1) comply with international safety standards, 
2) provide vessel crews with adequate rest, nutrition and 
potable water at no cost and 3) spend a maximum of three 
consecutive months at sea.
Albertson’s and Hy-Vee answered yes regarding vessel 
safety, rest, nutrition and potable water; Whole Foods 
answered yes to a maximum of three months at sea. Aldi 
did not answer yes to any but expressed its commitment 
to “ensuring safety and health at sea and … supporting 
several efforts to raise standards for employment at 
sea. ” No other retailers scored any points at all on what 
we consider to be a basic and fundamental requirement 
to protect the safety and well-being of workers who are 
catching tuna in dangerous and often difficult conditions. 
This area must improve.
Our Asks: We ask that retailers require vessels in 
their supply chains to comply with international 
safety standards and provide crew with adequate 
rest (no less than 10 hours in a 24 hour period and 
77 hours in any-seven day period), and free and 
adequate nutrition and potable water. Furthermore, 
the vessels that catch their tuna should spend a 
maximum of three consecutive months at sea and 
allow their crew unfettered access to port services 
for a minimum of 10 days when they dock. We 
also ask that they only source from suppliers that 
require a fishing crew manifest for each vessel. For 
more information, see Q12  of the Appendix.

© Alex Hofford / GreenpeaceConclusion
Overall, this year’s report does provide some reasons 
to be optimistic that retailers are regarding their 
responsibilities on sustainability and human rights with 
increasing seriousness. More retailers responded to 
our surveys than before, and some who had previously 
been sparse in their responses, provided more detailed 
answers, suggesting they were giving the issues greater 
thought and consideration. 
No retailer’s score declined from last year, several 
increased and one — Sprouts — saw its total score grow 
by almost 15 percent. For the first time, one retailer, Aldi, 
achieved an overall passing grade. 
However, that one passing grade was only a D. Of 32 
total grades on Environment and Human Rights, 29 were 
Fs. Even the better-performing retailers frequently fell 
far short of minimum requirements and expectations, 
whether it be refusing to stock problematic species or 
brands of tuna, showing transparency in supply lines, or 
adopting proactive measures to ensure the well-being of 
the workers who catch the tuna they sell.
It is encouraging that the majority of retailers now have 
some policies in place requiring them to consider human 
rights and environmental concerns as an integral element 
of their tuna procurement. However, for far too many, their 
involvement in those issues does not extend far enough 
beyond that. Too many are too passive and reliant on their suppliers or third parties to ensure that standards are 
met, particularly when it comes to ensuring that workers 
are treated justly and appropriately compensated. In 
addition, the complete lack of meaningful engagement 
with workers themselves in the design, implementation, 
and governance of the few social responsibility processes 
that are being implemented is particularly concerning. 
Greenpeace USA believes that among the US retailers, 
some of the largest players such as Kroger, Walmart, 
Albertsons, and Costco have an enhanced opportunity to 
influence change in this industry. With Kroger poised to 
capture an even higher market share due to its upcoming 
merger with Albertsons, its poor performance on the 
survey is especially notable and the industry-wide change 
it could make with increased engagement particularly 
marked.
It is our hope that with consistent monitoring and pressure, 
the industry will move in the right direction, taking 
decisive action to prevent environmental and human 
rights abuse in tuna supply chains. This is the goal of this 
and all subsequent editions of this report — to consistently 
track performance and inspire action. Armed with this 
information, consumers are ideally better equipped to 
demand swift change from their grocery retailer. 
Progress is evident, but far too incremental. Far more can, 
and should, be done.

18 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION 
Retailer Profiles
© Abbie Trayler-Smith / Greenpeace

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  19
18%Customer Education/
Labelling48%FCurrent SourcingHuman Rights & labor
63%D
83%Advocacy & InitiativesB63%TraceabilityD
38%FF
F F
FTuna Procurement Policy
2nd
71/154HR5th
63.86 /112Enviro2nd
54.66%
Total/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Ahold Delhaize
Positive:  As mentioned last year, Ahold’s initial Human Rights 
Report was a comprehensive and well-considered document, 
and the company has continued to show commitment toward 
human rights with the second edition of that report. On the 
Tuna Procurement Policy  section, Ahold remains one of the 
only companies to express an explicit commitment to collective 
bargaining[11], an issue that is gaining prominence as work to 
unionize fishers accelerates.
In the Human Rights & Labor Protections  section, Ahold’s human 
rights due diligence framework[11] remains considerably more 
advanced than many other retailers, many of whom had none at 
all. Ahold’s work goes beyond surface level social audits and lays 
out a framework for dealing with a range of human rights impacts.
Ahold also scores highly for its Traceability work, a section 
that covers both environmental and human rights issues. And it 
topped the class with its work on Advocacy , having sent letters 
to governments, Regional Fisheries Management Organizations 
(RFMOs) and the UN on a number of issues related to the tuna 
industry — although we should note that this section inevitably 
favors larger companies with greater reach and resources.Ahold answered the questionnaire and provided additional resources. It finished fifth on the Environment, second on Human Rights and 
second overall. Its total score increased by just under 2%, from 52.8% last year to 54.66% this year, primarily the result of a slight increase 
in scores on the Human Rights & Labor Protections  and Advocacy  sections.
Last year, we noted Ahold’s inaugural Human Rights Report[8] as strong, noting that it stood out for its detailed understanding of the issues, 
its reference to international human rights instruments, and commitment to safeguarding migrants. The company followed that up in June 
2022 with a second report that detailed actions taken towards further operationalizing its Human Rights Due Diligence plans[9]. As a result, 
Ahold continues to boast a more developed due diligence framework than any other retailer.
The company also scored highly in the Traceability  section for its auditing work, a section that covers both environmental and human 
rights issues[10].
However, Ahold’s scores on catch methods employed in tuna sourcing (Current Sourcing section) declined marginally as compared to 
last year: their sourcing from pole and line, troll, and handline has decreased markedly while sourcing from purse seine has gone up 
dramatically. 
Poor/Needs Improvement:  Although it cites its whistleblower 
line[9] as an example of the grievance mechanisms  it provides, such 
lines are — given limitations in accessibility and opportunity, as well 
as language barriers and other issues — of limited effectiveness, 
particularly for those aboard distant water fishing vessels.
Relatedly, the company does not appear to have policies or 
programs in place that provides access to remedy for workers 
who are harmed; while it has piloted a program in the chocolate 
sector[9], it has yet to consider this in the seafood space.
Although Ahold scores points in the Current Sourcing  section for 
sourcing some shelf-stable tuna from more sustainable fisheries, its 
overall percentage of tuna caught using more destructive methods 
such as longlining and purse-seining remains far too high (77.6 
percent and 15.2 percent respectively). In fact, its score in this area 
has declined from last year. Selling brands that do not meet Ahold’s 
own standards undermines the improvements their policies are 
driving. Refusing to stock brands associated with IUU fishing and 
other damaging environmental practices or human rights abuse 
would promote their own efforts further and provide clarity for 
their customers.

20 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION
32%Customer Education/
Labelling47%FCurrent SourcingHuman Rights & labor
18%F
31%Advocacy & InitiativesF52%TraceabilityF
36%FF
F F
FTuna Procurement Policy
10th
36.5 /154HR6th
56.92 /112Enviro8th
36.09%
Total/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Albertsons
Positive: Albertsons has a public position on transshipment-at-
sea of tuna[14] that includes a requirement for suppliers to provide 
detailed reporting of transshipment events. Their position on 
transshipment also references robust national and international 
regulations related to vessel and crew safety and worker protections, 
including the Cape Town Agreement and the ILO’s Work in Fishing 
Convention — C.188. However, the policy stops short of signaling a 
move toward phasing out transshipment.
Albertsons’ work on Traceability  was also commendable — 
including tackling fish fraud — despite not being able to trace 
100 percent of their tuna back to the catching vessel. Albertsons 
appears to have developed a thoughtful approach that involves 
internal audits in partnership with a third-party organization, 
while not relying entirely on third parties. The implementation of 
technology to gather chain of custody data and assess risks also 
helps to improve oversight of supply chain risksAlbertsons answered the questionnaire and provided additional resources[12] [13] [14] [15] [16]. It finished sixth on Environment and 10th on Human 
Rights, for a position of eighth overall. Its overall score improved slightly due to a better performance in the sourcing category, specifically 
an increase in tuna caught from pole and line, troll and handline, and Fish Aggregating Device (FAD)-free purse seine methods. It is also 
commendable that Albertsons made improvements in data collection and was able to provide data on shelf-stable tuna in addition to fresh 
and frozen; last year they provided data only on the latter.
It scores points on Traceability and efforts to combat fish fraud, boasting a traceability and verification system that includes implementation 
of technology to gather chain-of-custody information.
Poor/Needs Improvement:  In line with many other retailers in 
the middle of the ranking, Albertsons scored well for having Tuna 
Procurement Policies  policies in place, but missed out on points 
for lack of reference to specific instruments, particularly in relation 
to the UN Guiding Principles on Business & Human Rights (UNGP) 
and ILO Core Conventions.
Despite completing the survey, Albertsons skipped a number of 
questions in the Human Rights & Labor Protections section  
related to more specific aspects of their human rights due diligence 
work, including tracking & monitoring, grievance mechanisms and 
remediation. The importance of these elements in underpinning 
the effectiveness and real-world impact of a company’s ethical 
policies meant leaving them blank hurt Albertsons’s score. Finally, 
Albertsons cited its use of two widely available third-party audit 
certifications as evidence of its work to engage migrant workers in 
auditing and assessment processes; however, we had hoped to see 
a deeper and more deliberate approach to this important area that 
goes beyond third-party audits.

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  21
50%Customer Education/
Labelling73%CCurrent SourcingHuman Rights & labor
59%F
76%Advocacy & InitiativesC52%TraceabilityF
58%FD
F D
FTuna Procurement Policy
1st
85.5/154HR2nd
78.36 /112Enviro1st
61.51%
Total/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Aldi
Positive:  In the Tuna Procurement Policy  section, Aldi scored 
well for having comprehensive, publicly available seafood and 
human rights policies[17]  [18]  [19]. One of the purposes of this survey 
is to encourage and reward specific commitments in line with 
internationally recognized instruments and initiatives, and Aldi 
scored higher than most as a result of reference to these in their 
policies. Aldi’s International Forced Labor Policy[17], which explicitly 
covers all stages of its supply chain, is guided by a number of 
international standards, including the UNGPs.
Aldi should also be commended for being the only retailer to 
explicitly advocate for a living wage for workers in its supply 
chain[20], for having explicit requirements for documentation of 
worker payments, and for a clear and well considered process for 
dealing with cases of abuse.For the second year in a row, Aldi — which responded to the questionnaire and provided additional resources — came first overall. Indeed, 
this year, it outpaced the competition comfortably. Although it only placed first in one category — Tuna Procurement Policy  — it scored 
strongly across the board (second in Advocacy , Sourcing , and Customer Education ; fourth in Human Rights & Labor Protections , and 
Traceability ). Aldi’s comprehensive, stand-alone forced labor policy[17] — which draws on a number of internationally recognized standards, 
including the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (UNGP) — is especially notable. Its overall score improved by just under 
two percent (from 59.77% to 61.51%), thanks to slight increases in their Traceability  and Human Rights and Labor Protection  scores. As 
one of the only retailers to achieve a passing score for any section, they in fact managed two.
On Traceability , Aldi’s enhanced efforts to address fish fraud through traceability exercises at production facilities, random product 
checks, as well as supplementing third-party traceability audits with their own on-site visits, contributed to their improved performance.
On Human Rights and Labor Protections , their slightly improved score reflected efforts to develop and expand their human rights due 
diligence program — their Corporate Responsibility Supplier Evaluation (CRSE) program — as well as their efforts to improve worker 
engagement in their human rights impact assessments.
Poor/Needs Improvement:  Although Aldi’s Traceability  score 
improved marginally because of improved efforts to combat fish 
fraud, there is still some way to go. That said, there are promising 
signs, and although Aldi is unable to secure maximum points  
while its CRSE program is in development, we look forward to 
reporting positive results in the future when it is fully implemented 
across the supply chain.
While Aldi’s understanding and development of grievance 
mechanisms  is more advanced than many others, points were 
unfortunately lost due to those mechanisms’ limited scopes. 
Greenpeace USA commends Aldi’s work with the Issara Institute  
(an NGO based in Southeast Asia that tackles issues of human 
trafficking and forced labor through worker voice), to promote 
worker voices in Thailand and we hope they will support 
implementation of this type of work across a wider section of  
their supply chain, including catching vessels.

22 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION
25%FCustomer Education/
Labelling37%FCurrent Sourcing29%FHuman Rights & labor
14%FAdvocacy & Initiatives15%FTraceability
34%FTuna Procurement Policy
40/154HRF 7th
35.93 /112EnviroF 15thTotal27.02%F11th/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Costco
Positive:  Costco deserves recognition as a founding member of the 
Seafood Task Force, a coalition of businesses and NGOs working to 
improve sustainability in the Thai seafood supply chain. Though 
the amount of specific information about the Seafood Task Force 
is limited, the Task Force has done some positive work, including in 
the area of recruitment. Though currently limited to Thailand, this 
engaged approach to supply chain oversight should be expanded 
to cover all aspects of seafood sourcing, particularly work aboard 
distant-water vessels.
Costco also scores points in the Human Rights & Labor Protections  
section for monitoring and addressing issues with suppliers, as 
well as its work with third parties to analyze risk across its entire 
supply chain. Costco did not complete a survey or provide materials again this year; last year’s scores were updated with publicly available information. 
That was sufficient to result in a score increase of nearly three percent (from 24.29% to 27.02%), owing to a small improvement in scores in 
Tuna Procurement Policy , Traceability , and Human Rights & Labor Protections . Costco was 10th on Environment and a disappointing 
13th on Human Rights, for an overall place of 11th.
One change that contributed to this slightly elevated score is Costco’s work with the Seafood Task Force on suppliers’ worker contracts, 
particularly around ensuring contracts are communicated clearly to workers in a language they can understand[21]. Another is the company’s 
work on enhancing traceability[22] through an annual seafood survey and expanding this survey to suppliers for all their global locations.
In general, however, Costco’s performance remains poor; despite its size and influence, it is solidly in the bottom half of our rankings and 
its environmental and sustainability scores are especially disappointing.
Poor/Needs Improvement:  The same issues that dragged 
down Costco’s score last year remain concerning. In the 
Tuna Procurement Policy  section, its sourcing and seafood 
sustainability policies remain vague, as does its policy on human 
rights[23]  [24]. Costco’s human rights policy would be much improved 
if it was more clearly guided by specific international principles, 
such as the UNGPs, ILO Core Conventions and the ILO C188 — Work 
in Fishing Convention.
Costco also does not have a public transshipment  policy, 
which is disappointing considering Costco’s buying power, the 
exposure the issue has had in recent years, and its importance to 
sustainable fishing.
And for a retailer with such global reach, it is highly disappointing 
that Costco scores extremely poorly on Advocacy .
In the Human Rights & Labor Protections  section, Costco lacks 
specific consideration of grievance mechanisms, due diligence 
frameworks or engagement with vulnerable groups, such as 
migrant workers, in their supply chains. In order to help embed 
these practices across the sector, all companies should make use 
of the UN Guiding Principles on Business & Human Rights to guide 
their policies.

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  23
18%Customer Education/
Labelling45%FCurrent SourcingHuman Rights & labor
10%F
28%Advocacy & InitiativesF44%TraceabilityF
36%FF
F F
FTuna Procurement Policy
11th
31.5 /154HR8th
51.68 /112Enviro9th
31.12%
Total/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Giant Eagle
Positive:  Giant Eagle continued their mediocre performance on 
environmental issues. Many of Giant Eagle’s responses related to 
environmental issues were positive: on Traceability , they claim 
to be able to trace every SKU of tuna down to the fishing vessel, 
they have two dedicated sustainability officers, and they explicitly 
commit to only allow transshipment-at-sea  with 100 percent 
observer coverage[26]. The company also included language in 
support of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs), and requirements 
around Fisheries Improvement Project (FIPs)[27], and was the only 
retailer to mention the importance of sustainable bait fisheries for 
pole and line tuna.Having not completed a survey last year, Giant Eagle did so this year and provided additional resources; we commend them for their 
engagement. This engagement, and the additional information the company shared, played a significant role in Giant Eagle’s score 
increasing from 25.93% to 31.12%. For instance, its score in the Human Rights & Labor Protections  section increased from -2 last year to 
+5 as a direct result of its ability to share information that supported its survey response. 
Similarly, improved performance on the human rights-related questions in the Tuna Procurement Policy  section can be attributed to 
Giant Eagle’s recently updated Supplier Code of Conduct , which highlighted several of their positions on human rights in their supply 
chain[25]. That said, the Supplier Code of Conduct does not go far enough in terms of alignment with international standards and treaties, 
and Giant Eagle’s overall performance was mediocre at best.
Poor/Needs Improvement:  While it is good to see that Giant  
Eagle recently updated its Supplier Code of Conduct and now 
has a basic Human Rights Statement in place[28], they still have 
a long way to go. Their Supplier Code of Conduct and Human 
Rights Statement would benefit from alignment with and explicit 
reference to internationally recognized instruments such as the  
UN Declaration of Human Rights, ILO Core Conventions, and the 
ILO’s Work in Fisheries Convention, C188.
In addition, in the Human Rights & Labor Protections  section, 
while they cite their work with the Sustainable Fisheries 
Partnership’s Human Rights Risk indicator for identifying human 
rights risks in their supply chain, this work is not supported by 
a comprehensive human rights due diligence process, worker 
engagement, or grievance mechanisms. Instead, they continue to 
rely on third-party audits, an approach that has been shown to be 
inadequate and ineffective when it comes to addressing human 
rights issues in supply chains.
Giant Eagle puts considerable emphasis on educating customers 
to make “responsible and informed purchasing decisions” 
including educating staff to assist with this information. However, 
improvements to sourcing policies  and inventory could assist 
those customers by ensuring that all seafood on the shelves meets 
rigorous sustainability and human rights standards. Stocking 
anything that doesn’t meet these standards undermines retailers’ 
sustainability efforts and creates uncertainty for customers.

24 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION
32%FCustomer Education/
Labelling37%FCurrent Sourcing0%FHuman Rights & labor
7%FAdvocacy & Initiatives48%FTraceability
25%FTuna Procurement Policy
15.5 /154HRF 13th
45.76 /112EnviroF 10thTotal24.33%F12th/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020H-E-B
Positive:  In the Tuna Procurement Policy  section, H-E-B scored 
well for having policies in place and did have a good amount of detail 
regarding environmental specifics, including not sourcing from 
“red” fisheries and only sourcing tuna that is either MSC certified 
or making progress in a FIP[29]. However, they could improve their 
score with some specific wording on Marine Protected Areas and 
sourcing only from “green” fisheries. 
H-E-B also scored reasonably well for their work to improve 
Traceability , including commitments to not selling IUU fish and 
working with Trace Register to provide third party verification. One 
impressive and stand-out feature of this work was their product 
sourcing grid — essentially a publicly-available table of all the 
species they stock, country of origin, source, catch method, and 
sustainability rating, which is updated twice a year[30]. Greenpeace 
USA would love to see other companies disclosing similar informa-
tion in an easily understood format. H-E-B did not complete a survey; as a result, only publicly available information — including their Seafood Policy[29] and Supplier Code of 
Conduct[30] — was reviewed and used to score them. Based on this information, H-E-B finished 12th overall.
Like most other retailers, H-E-B scored points in the Tuna Procurement Policy  section for at least having sustainability and human rights 
policies in place; it also did reasonably well in terms of Traceability , and for efforts to source only sustainable fish (Current Sourcing) . 
However, the bright spots were few and far between; of 39 questions in the survey, H-E-B scored zero or negative points in 19. The slight 
increase in its score from last year was solely the result of this year’s survey including one more question.
Poor/Needs Improvement:  H-E-B’s scores on human rights 
questions suffered, like many others, from a lack of specificity. 
Despite recognizing that there are human rights concerns 
associated with the seafood industry, their statements are vague 
and are either not grounded in a policy framework provided by 
international instruments, such as the UN Guiding Principles 
on Business & Human Rights, or they fail to provide a practical 
explanation for how these requirements will be monitored or 
enforced. Discussions and understanding around the human rights 
impacts of global supply chains are well-advanced, but that fact is 
not reflected in much of H-E-B’s human rights work.
With more than half of the questions in the survey focused on 
human rights, H-E-B’s lack of a human rights policy played a major 
role in their poor performance. 

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  25
36%Customer Education/
Labelling58%FCurrent SourcingHuman Rights & labor
24%F
28%Advocacy & InitiativesF81%TraceabilityB
58%FF
F F
FTuna Procurement Policy
4th
63/154HR3rd
66.93 /112Enviro4th
50.08%
Total/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Hy-Vee
Positive:  Hy-Vee ranked joint first with Aldi in the Tuna 
Procurement Policy  section, standing out for having significantly 
more detail and reference to international standards than most 
others[32]. They had strong, internationally recognized requirements 
of their suppliers, including mandated rest times, crew conditions, 
and health and safety[32]. 
Significantly, they were one of only two companies who explicitly 
referenced migrant workers in their supplier Code of Conduct. In 
particular, Hy-Vee expressly requires its suppliers to treat migrant 
workers the same as nationals, an extremely important provision 
when local laws often fail to grant migrant workers the same 
protections.
Hy-Vee’s Traceability  work is strong and rooted in internationally 
recognized best practice[33]. Their traceability work — including 
risk assessments and audits — in partnership with FishWise looks 
robust and well-considered, providing a strong framework on 
which to add an increased focus on human rights.
Finally, Hy-Vee was the only company who agreed to publish 
supplier vessel lists, and followed through on this agreement, 
demonstrating a commitment to transparency that no other 
company was willing to match[31].Hy-Vee answered the survey, provided additional materials, and was one of the strongest performers; together with Ahold and Whole Foods, 
it comprised a small group challenging for second behind Aldi. It finished joint first on Tuna Procurement Policy , first on Traceability , and 
fourth on Current  Sourcing . Its overall score increased by just over 7%, from 42.92% to 50.08%, the second highest growth after Sprouts. 
Its Environmental score increased from 63.9 to 66.93 and its rating on Human Rights leaped from 48.5 to 66.
Last year, Hy-Vee was alone in committing to share its private label tuna supplier vessel list; in 2022 it not only followed through on 
that pledge[31], but it also committed to updating the list again this year, leading to bonus points in the Tuna Procurement Policy and 
Traceability  sections.
The growth in Hy-Vee’s Human Rights score is attributable to the company conducting social responsibility risk assessments to inform 
human rights risks and prioritize action. In 2021, it conducted a social responsibility deep dive, the results of which it is presently using to 
inform mitigation actions.
Overall, Hy-Vee has engaged positively on environmental issues but still has some way to go in fully addressing these issues. Its improved 
Human Rights  score reflects the increased seriousness with which it is also beginning to address those issues, although this is still at a 
nascent stage.
Poor/Needs Improvement:  Although Hy-Vee saw an improvement 
in its Human Rights score, it left blank a whole series of questions 
regarding specific details of human rights due diligence  as 
articulated in the UN Guiding Principles on Business & Human 
Rights (UNGP), such as remediation, worker engagement, and 
worker voice , and its score suffered as a result.
While it has made efforts to familiarize itself with its suppliers’ 
grievance mechanisms , it has yet to establish its own grievance 
mechanism and/or aligning existing mechanisms within the 
supply chain with the characteristics of an effective mechanism as 
highlighted in the UNGPs.
For a company that has made a number of positive improvements 
in sustainable seafood sourcing, Hy-Vee continues to source the 
majority of its tuna from damaging fishing methods, sourcing well 
over 90 percent from purse seine or longline; in fact, its score on 
Current Sourcing  has marginally declined since last year.

26 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION
39%FCustomer Education/
Labelling36%FCurrent Sourcing33%FHuman Rights & labor
21%FAdvocacy & Initiatives7%FTraceability
31%FTuna Procurement Policy
39.5 /154HRF 8th
38/112EnviroF 12thTotal27.31%F10th/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Kroger
Positive:  While they didn’t have an improvement of their score 
in the Human Rights and Labor Protections  section (since 
this section relates to systems for identifying, mitigating, and 
remediating human rights risks, not a stated human rights policy. 
Human Rights policies are covered in the Tuna Procurement 
Policy section), their commitment towards developing and 
operationalizing a more comprehensive human rights due 
diligence  process and their commitments towards conducting 
human rights impact assessments are commendable[35]. We look 
forward to seeing how these develop and translate into larger 
improvements in scores. Kroger submitted a survey and provided additional resources; it finished a disappointing 12th on Environment and eighth on Human 
Rights, for an overall position of 10th. Kroger’s score increased by a little over 7% this year, from 20.01% last year to 27.31% this year, with 
its Environment score jumping from 31.9 to 38, and its Human Rights total from 33.5 to 39.5.
These increases are attributable primarily to improved scores in Current Sourcing , and marginal improvements in Tuna Procurement 
Policy , Traceability , and Advocacy  and initiatives. The improvement in Current Sourcing  was the result of dramatically increasing their 
offerings of tuna from less environmentally damaging catch methods such as pole and line and FAD-free purse seine. 
Their improved score in Tuna Procurement Policy  stems from an updated human rights policy that explicitly commits them to upholding 
international instruments such as UN Guiding Principles on Business & Human Rights (UNGP), ILO, and the International Bill of Human 
Rights[34] .
Poor/Needs Improvement:  Despite a slight improvement in its 
Traceability  score, Kroger finished second from last in this section, 
as it did last year. Its tracing program remains poorly developed and 
continues to rely heavily on the International Seafood Sustainability 
Foundation (ISSF)[36], which cannot substitute for robust and well-
considered in-house policies. Monitoring also relies too heavily on 
third parties, with audits only taking place annually.
On the issue of transshipment-at-sea , Kroger answered that, 
despite its centrality to a range of environmental and human rights 
issues in the tuna industry, they do not have a stance on it. This is 
extremely disappointing for a company of Kroger’s size and reach. 
Kroger’s voice can be a powerful driver of change on this issue. 
While the company has made some efforts toward developing risk 
assessments and committing to conducting impact assessments, 
it is still lagging when it comes to grievance mechanisms, 
remediation, and worker voice . Kroger continues to cite their 
ethics helpline as a grievance mechanism[34]; however, there 
are significant questions as to the suitability of such helplines 
for addressing potential issues in supply chains, particularly 
aboard distant water fishing vessels. In addition to this hotline, 
Kroger launched a Worker Voice Survey in 2019, through its social 
compliance auditing firm, ELEVATE, which “allows workers to 
share sentiment and feedback anonymously. ” Such audits-based 
approaches have been found to be ineffective at addressing social 
or human rights issues. There is a need to go beyond this and adopt 
well-defined grievance mechanisms that align with the UNGPs.

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  27
21%FCustomer Education/
Labelling38%FCurrent Sourcing8%FHuman Rights & labor
0%FAdvocacy & Initiatives4%FTraceability
21%FTuna Procurement Policy
24/154HRF 12th
22.94 /112EnviroF 16thTotal15.82%F16th/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Meijer
Positive:  Outside of having at least some tuna procurement 
policies[37] and expressing commendable support for collective 
bargaining, there is little positive to be said. A lot of improvement 
needs to be made across a range of categories — from Traceability , 
to Advocacy , and Human Rights & Labor protections . Meijer completed the survey and indicated no change in its policies or actions from last year. Although its total score increased from 14.63% 
to 15.82%, this was solely the result of the addition of an extra question in 2022. Meijer scored poorly across the board and finished in 16th 
and last place overall.
It was one of very few retailers not to score maximum points from the first few questions, which merely asked respondents to describe their 
Tuna Procurement Policies ; it also scored just one point out of a possible 27 on Traceability , zero on Advocacy , and just four on Human 
Rights & Labor Protections . Meijer’s failings are numerous but include: the lack of a policy on shelf-stable tuna, which accounts for most 
of the tuna sold in the US; an over-reliance on suppliers to self-report problems from chain of supply to human rights shortcomings; selling 
at-risk species such as bluefin tuna; and selling predominantly tuna caught by longlining and FAD-assisted purse seines, the two least 
selective methods.
Poor/Needs Improvement:  Meijer’s scores were greatly harmed 
by the lack of a shelf-stable tuna policy. As a result, they could not 
score points on questions in the Tuna Procurement Policy  section 
and came last in the Traceability  section. 
One of the weaknesses of Meijer’s Traceability  work was its 
inability to independently verify traceability requirements, relying 
instead on ad hoc document requests to suppliers. Instead, 
supplier documentation, including monitoring and oversight, 
should be embedded into policy and practice. Supplier auditing 
was also weak, with an annual review of Tier 1 Own Brand suppliers 
leaving significant opportunity for abusive or exploitative practices 
to develop. Supplier auditing was also weak, with an annual review 
limited to Tier 1 Own Brand suppliers, that leaves significant 
opportunity for abusive or exploitative practices to develop. 
Similarly, Meijer did not have a human rights due diligence 
framework  in place, again relying entirely on suppliers to provide 
information. Though they completed their own survey, like many 
others, Meijer chose to leave large sections blank, in particular, the 
Human Rights & Labor Protections  section. 
Finally, Meijer had one of the lowest Current Sourcing  scores, 
particularly among companies that completed their own survey. 
This came down to including at-risk species such as bluefin tuna 
in its product offering, as well as using damaging catch methods 
in already overfished areas. In addition, over 90 percent of Meijer’s 
tuna offering came from tuna caught using longlines or FAD-
assisted purse seines, the two least selective methods.

28 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION
18%FCustomer Education/
Labelling28%FCurrent Sourcing-4%FHuman Rights & labor
7%FAdvocacy & Initiatives37%FTraceability
25%FTuna Procurement Policy
12/154HRF 14th
37.29 /112EnviroF 13thTotal18.53%F13th/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Publix
Positive:  Publix scored well on initial questions about having 
policies in the Tuna Procurement Policy  section, but fell down 
on the detail. It is at least encouraging that Publix recognizes the 
importance of making public commitments to sourcing sustainable 
seafood. Publix does acknowledge the importance of making 
public commitments to sourcing sustainable seafood. It also works 
with a number of important sustainability-focused organizations, 
including the Sustainable Fisheries Partnership and the Global 
Sustainable Seafood Initiative (GSSI). While engagement with 
outside organizations and initiatives is important, it does not 
substitute the need for a robust policy with clear steps towards 
implementation and ongoing monitoring. However, based on the 
available information, rapid improvements could be made through 
the process of codifying many of the things Publix already does or 
claim they want to do into a coherent policy.
Further, on Traceability , Publix requires suppliers to maintain 
documentation on the products they provide to ensure full 
traceability, conducting “mock recalls” to verify their effectiveness, 
although there is no specific indication that this includes seafood 
— a supply chain with unique challenges and risks. This is a 
positive practice that could be improved and developed to include 
sustainability standards as well as human rights due diligence.Publix did not respond to the questionnaire, and its positions had to be largely inferred from publicly available information, primarily 
drawn from its “virtual store” website[37]. When no information was available to answer a question definitively, no points could be awarded, 
contributing to Publix’s very low scores in all areas. There was a slight increase in its score, from 16.95% to 18.53% — the result of an 
additional two points picked up in the Advocacy  section for the company endorsing the NGO Tuna Forum’s advocacy letters to RFMOs. 
However, Publix placed 13th on Environment, 14th on Human Rights, and 13th overall.
Poor/Needs Improvement:  Publix published a new sustainability 
report in 2022[38], but it suffered from the same problems as 
previous versions, including the fact that there is no mention of 
human rights and very little specific information on the company’s 
sustainable seafood sourcing. Companies that did not complete 
a survey nor have publicly available information on their human 
rights policy were unable to score any points for questions in the 
Tuna Procurement Policy  section and Publix’s scores reflect that. 
Not only did Publix finish last in the Human Rights and Labor 
Protections  section, it scored negative points in this section owing 
to a complete lack of any sort of human rights or forced labor 
policies, besides a passing mention of zero tolerance against forced 
labor in their “Supplier Policies & Guidelines”[39].
Publix also scored very poorly on Advocacy  — managing to score 
only 2 points from a possible 29 for this section, as a result of 
limited public evidence that they use their position to advocate for 
positive change.

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  29
21%FCustomer Education/
Labelling36%FCurrent Sourcing2%FHuman Rights & labor
0%FAdvocacy & Initiatives33%FTraceability
11%FTuna Procurement Policy
3.5 /154HRF 16th
38.72 /112EnviroF 11thTotal17.73%F14th/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Southeastern Grocers
Positive:  Southeastern Grocers are at least aware of many of the 
environmental issues linked to seafood supply chains and have 
made commitments to working with the Global Aquaculture 
Alliance (GAA), Sustainable Fisheries Partnership (SFP), the World 
Wildlife Fund (WWF), and the International Seafood Sustainability 
Foundation (ISSF). However, while committing to working with 
these organizations represents a positive step, it is not a substitute 
for robust tuna procurement policies  guided by international 
instruments with clear plans for implementation.
Southeast Grocers appear to take the trust of their customers 
seriously, as well as considering their commitment to sustainable 
seafood to be part of this trust. Southeast Grocers should build on 
this premise by providing their customers with a thoughtful and 
robust seafood policy that ensures customers that their seafood is 
not damaging the environment or abusing the rights of those who 
produce it.Southeastern Grocers did not answer the survey in 2021 but did so in 2022, for which it must be commended. However, most responses 
were lacking in detail, and many questions went completely unanswered — including all of the Advocacy  section and large chunks of 
Human Rights & Labor Protections  and Current Sourcing  — requiring us to draw on publicly available information — mostly from their 
2021 Corporate and Social Responsibility Report[40], to score those sections.
The company’s score did improve from a dismal 12.35% to a marginally less terrible 17.73%, owing largely to improved scores for traceability 
(from 2 points last year to 9 this year) and to a small improvement in the human rights section (from -4 to +1). This was because, by 
answering the survey, they were able to provide more information than is available publicly to support their responses. Overall, however, 
their performance remains abysmal; the company did not receive passing scores in any section and scored points on only nine out of 39 
questions.
As with the 2020 version, its 2021 Corporate and Social Responsibility report did not include even one mention of human rights, and the 
company continues to have no discernible policy on at-sea-transshipment , human rights due diligence , migrant workers , or grievance 
mechanisms .
On the plus side, however, SE Grocers claims to be able to trace 100 percent of its tuna back to the source vessel.
Poor/Needs Improvement:  Southeastern Grocers’ seafood policy 
needs significantly more detail on environmental issues, including 
policies on transshipment at sea , improved traceability , regular 
supplier audits and ongoing monitoring. There is much mention of 
“promises” and commitments to sourcing sustainable seafood , 
but without detail it is difficult to know what steps are being taken 
to assure this. 
On human rights , Southeastern Grocers must first establish a 
human rights policy covering their entire supply chain, with specific 
considerations given to high-risk activities such as fishing. This 
policy should be rooted in internationally recognized principles 
and standards and guided by the UN Guiding Principles on Business 
and Human Rights.

30 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION
32%Customer Education/
Labelling77%CCurrent SourcingHuman Rights & labor
25%F
0%Advocacy & InitiativesF48%TraceabilityF
37%FF
F F
FTuna Procurement Policy
9th
39/154HR4th
65.26 /112Enviro7th
40.41%
Total/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Sprouts
Positive:  Sprouts achieved its highest scores and ranking for the 
Current Sourcing  section, which included questions on product 
offering and catch methods, as well as policy. Perhaps in a reflection 
of one of the strengths of being a smaller company, Sprouts got 
one of the highest scores for not stocking problematic species or 
brands. It scored joint highest with Ahold, Aldi, and Whole Foods 
for the number of risky tuna products they don’t stock, stocking 
only four out of 13 of the riskiest products, and none of the high-
risk brands. Additionally, just under 97 percent of all tuna it sells are 
caught by pole-and-line, trolls, or hand lines.Sprouts answered the survey and provided additional resources[41]  [42]. It produced a fourth-place finish in Environment, but was only ninth 
on Human Rights, for an overall position of seventh. However, its score saw by far the largest increase of any retailer from 2021 to 2022, 
leaping from 25.5% to 40.41%.
One important reason for this increase was the publication in April 2022 of a new commitment to human rights which led to an increase in 
their scores on Tuna Procurement Policy . Their new commitment included explicit alignment with international instruments such as the 
UN Declaration on Human Rights and ILO guidelines[43].
The company also instituted ongoing internal traceability  audits and expanded the traceability of all tuna products down to individual 
fishing vessels — steps that resulted in its scores in the Traceability  section jumping from an abysmal two points last year to 13 this year. 
Additionally, Sprouts has enhanced its supply chain monitoring. 
It has also begun refining its human rights due diligence framework , and, although we could not award points for this in the Human 
Rights & Labor Protections  section because the process is incomplete, we look forward to tracking its development.
That said, while Sprouts has made important strides in advancing human rights, its scores are still short of passing, indicating much more 
work to be done.
Poor/Needs Improvement:  Despite commendable improvement 
to its policy and its risk assessment protocols, its Human Rights 
scores continue to be low. When it comes to several practical 
elements of a human rights due diligence process  that is aligned 
with United Nations Guiding principles, it continues to lag on 
such areas as remediation, grievance mechanisms, and  worker 
engagement . However, it is currently working on developing these 
and Greenpeace USA looks forward to seeing these develop further.
Recognizing that advocacy work favors larger companies with more 
resources, Sprouts was one of only two companies to score no 
points for the Advocacy section, and we would encourage Sprouts 
to make better use of their voice to drive important improvements.

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  31
36%Customer Education/
Labelling45%FCurrent SourcingHuman Rights & labor
71%C
24%Advocacy & InitiativesF52%TraceabilityF
34%FF
F F
FTuna Procurement Policy
4th
63/154HR7th
52.59 /112Enviro5th
47.86%
Total/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Target
Positive:  Target’s Supply Chain Labor and Human Rights policy 
was detailed and addressed a number of systemic problems, 
such as recruitment[44]. The policy aims to reduce the risk of 
recruitment associated debt by explicitly committing the company 
and its suppliers to abiding by the “Employer Pays Principle” . This 
requirement also forms part of their supplier reviews and audits, an 
essential step in ensuring compliance
Target has also implemented a human rights  due diligence 
framework  that appears well-thought out and relatively 
comprehensive, including gathering a range of information all 
the way down to the vessels in its supply chain[45]. Part of this 
framework includes specific engagement with migrant workers 
and the recognition that they represent a vulnerable group within 
the supply chain.
Target’s traceability  system[46] — including its actions to prevent 
fish fraud[47] — appears robust and comprehensive, including the 
verification of custody on certification claims of FAD-free products.Target completed a survey and provided additional information, offering detailed explanations of many of its responses. It finished seventh 
on Environment and fourth on Human Rights, for an overall position of fifth. Its score of 47% was unchanged from last year, despite the 
addition of an extra question in the survey, as it performed slightly more poorly on Environment. That said, it performed well in several 
areas, especially in the Human Rights and Labor Protections  section, where it was the top scorer.
Poor/Needs Improvement:  Like most retailers, Target declines 
to publish a supplier vessel list, even though it publishes a list of 
supplier factories, which it says “creates meaningful opportunities 
to enhance responsible and sustainable production practices. ” If 
it is true for factories, it is certainly true for fishing vessels, and a 
range of stakeholders — including customers and workers groups 
— can benefit from improved availability of this information.
Target’s explicit requirement of 100% observer coverage for 
tuna that is transshipped at sea  is a starting point, but the more 
companies that prohibit this risky practice altogether — and 
independently audit to ensure compliance — the more quickly it 
can be eradicated. 
Target has stated that they are working with their own brand 
suppliers to ensure workers are paid digitally by 2025. Payment 
documentation is an important aspect of ensuring workers in the 
supply chain are paid fairly, but this requirement can and should 
include all suppliers.

32 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION
29%Customer Education/
Labelling44%FCurrent SourcingHuman Rights & labor
65%D
55%Advocacy & InitiativesF22%TraceabilityF
36%FF
F F
FTuna Procurement Policy
3rd
64/154HR9th
50.18 /112Enviro6th
43.51%
Total/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Walmart
Positive:  Walmart has publicly accessible web pages 
detailing a range of policies, including Seafood, “Forced 
Labor Prevention” and “Human Rights Statement” .
Walmart was one of the only companies to have a 
standalone section on human rights, which covers all its 
business operations, as well as those of its suppliers and 
other third parties[48]. Walmart also stands out for being 
explicit in its use of international instruments, which it 
says informs its response to human rights issues. 
Greenpeace USA recognizes Walmart’s role as a founder and 
instrumental member of the Seafood Taskforce, a coalition 
of businesses and NGOs working to improve sustainability 
in the Thai seafood supply chain. Though currently limited 
to Thailand, this engaged approach to supply chain 
oversight should be expanded to cover all aspects of 
seafood sourcing, particularly work aboard distant-water 
vessels. Walmart’s significant philanthropic activity also 
funds a considerable amount of work on both sustainability 
and human rights issues in supply chains, including work by 
the Global Fishing Watch and the Issara Institute.
Advocacy  is a key area where larger retailers with the 
resources and expertise to lobby for improvements to 
environmental and human right protections in fisheries 
outperformed smaller companies. In line with this, Walmart 
ranked third for its advocacy work, behind Aldi and Ahold 
Delhaize, and just ahead of Whole Foods. It is vitally 
important that a company of Walmart’s size and influence 
uses its position to push for improvements at a range of 
policy levels, and this work should be commended.Walmart did not complete a survey; as a result, publicly available information — including its Human Rights Statement[48], the Human 
Rights page on its website[48], and its Seafood Policy[49] — was analyzed and used to score the survey. Compared with many other companies, 
Walmart is fairly advanced with both the development of these policies and their communication of them. Despite the relative wealth of 
material available, we were unable to discern much progress since last year’s report, resulting in a marginal score increase that can be 
attributed entirely to the new question in the Tuna Procurement Policy  section. Walmart finished ninth on Environment and third on 
Human Rights, for an overall rank of sixth.
Walmart’s size and available resources provide a considerable advantage regarding engagement, involvement in groups and associations, 
advocacy, communication and other initiatives. However, commitment in this area is a matter of culture, and Greenpeace USA recognizes 
Walmart’s engagement and investment in many areas of this work. In some ways, Walmart’s size and influence allow it to set the agenda 
and drive the conversation, presenting an excellent opportunity for positive leadership. However, this is an opportunity Walmart has yet to 
fully embrace — it must do much more than it is currently doing in order to have such an effect on the industry.
Poor/Needs Improvement:  While Walmart’s sustainability and human 
rights policies are more detailed and better developed than most, many of 
the commitments detailed under its seafood policy are goals for 2025, and it 
is unclear how much progress has been made towards them[49]. Because this 
survey is interested in what policies are currently in place, Walmart’s score in 
the Tuna Procurement Policy  section suffered from a lack of information on 
current work.
Like other retailers, Walmart’s policies leave out a number of important 
details, particularly with regard to human rights . For example, while Walmart 
does mention the need to ensure migrant workers are recruited responsibly, 
questions in this area sought specific recognition of the increased risks faced by 
migrant workers and the company’s work to mitigate them. Since Walmart did 
not respond to our survey, we were unable to award points for these elements. 
Walmart continues to rely on third-party social audits when it comes to 
monitoring. It does have a due diligence framework , but unfortunately it is 
based on OECD guidelines, which do not include human rights nor apply to 
seafood supply chains [48]. Similarly, a grievance mechanism  is in place, but 
as currently constituted and presented it does not meet the UN’s guidelines. 
Remediation  for those negatively impacted by Walmart’s business is also 
developing, though it is currently limited to its work with the Issara Institute 
(an NGO based in Southeast Asia that tackles issues of human trafficking and 
forced labor through worker voice) in Thailand and does not include workers 
on vessels.
Though we recognize Walmart’s role in funding work by the Global Fishing Watch 
on transshipment-at-sea , we were unable to find an explicit company position 
on this important issue. The centrality of transshipment to many environmental 
and human rights issues, as well as the history of focus it has received, warrants 
an explicit stand-alone position. In addition, positive leadership in this area can 
have a positive and much-needed galvanizing effect.

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  33
18%FCustomer Education/
Labelling28%FCurrent Sourcing-8%FHuman Rights & labor
0%FAdvocacy & Initiatives41%FTraceability
24%FTuna Procurement Policy
8.5 /154HRF 15th
36.92 /112EnviroF 14thTotal17.43%F15th/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Wegmans
Positive:  There is some reason for positivity: On Tuna Procurement 
Policy , Wegmans does have a web page dedicated to sustainable 
seafood policies and actions[50]. Though, as with many retailers, 
Wegmans’ seafood sustainability webpage lacks both details 
and specific reference to international standards and policies. 
However, much of what is available appears to be moving in the 
right direction. Greenpeace USA commends their commitment to 
sourcing from fisheries that are certified sustainable or involved 
in a Fisheries Improvement Program (FIP). Commitments such as 
these are a positive start but would be improved by explicit bans 
on sourcing from “red” or “yellow” fisheries, shark finning, 
and vessels known to be involved in Illegal, Unreported, and 
Unregulated (IUU) fishing.
Wegmans also engages with organizations such as the Sustainable 
Fisheries Partnership (SFP), and is working to improve traceability  
through companies such as Trace Register. However, these 
initiatives can be further strengthened by creating robust sourcing 
and sustainability policies, and implementing ongoing monitoring 
and oversight.As was the case last year, Wegmans did not submit a survey; as a result, publicly available information — mostly drawn from its “Seafood 
Sustainability” website — was analyzed and used to score the survey[50]. Because we could not find any updates or changes, Wegmans 
received the same score as last year, other than two points picked up as a result of this year’s additional question. It performed poorly 
throughout, finishing 14th on Environment, 15th on Human Rights, and 15th out of 16th overall. It fared especially poorly in some areas of the 
survey, scoring zero points for Advocacy  and minus 4 on its Human Rights and Labor Protections  processes. Wegmans’ policies were 
hard to find, and lacking detail; completing a survey would most likely improve future scores. 
Poor/Needs Improvement:  The lack of detail and specific 
actions undermines positive commitments to improved sourcing, 
and makes it unclear how Wegmans will achieve its goals and 
aspirations. For example, one of the Wegmans’ “Best Practices” 
is for vessels to use “gear chosen to reduce bycatch. ” It is unclear 
what this entails and therefore did not receive a full score. However, 
with more detail we could have scored it higher. Without detail, 
ongoing engagement and public communication, commitments, 
and statements is aspirational.
Wegmans appears to lack a human rights policy  to cover its supply 
chains; developing one to cover its supply chain could enable it to 
make rapid and important improvements. The human rights of 
everyone impacted by any business operation are the responsibility 
of that business. Having a policy based on established human 
rights instruments — such as UN Guiding Principles on Business 
& Human Rights (UNGP) and ILO Core Conventions — would have 
greatly improved Wegmans’s ranking.
Based on the information available, Wegmans relies entirely on 
third-party audits to ensure its sourcing policies and standards 
are being met. However, while third-party audits do have value, it 
is vitally important for companies to establish some independent 
oversight and monitoring of their supply chains. Particularly 
with respect to human rights, third-party audits have regularly 
been shown to be inadequate, with abuses continuing in audited 
facilities.

34 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION
57%Customer Education/
Labelling79%CCurrent SourcingHuman Rights & labor
18%F
41%Advocacy & InitiativesF67%TraceabilityD
49%FF
F C
FTuna Procurement Policy
6th
48.5 /154HR1st
84.5 /112Enviro3rd
50.48%
Total/gid00020/gid00006/gid00004/gid00021/gid00010/gid00016/gid00015/gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020 /gid00016/gid00023/gid00006/gid00019/gid00002/gid00013/gid00013 /gid00001/gid00020/gid00004/gid00016/gid00019/gid00006/gid00020Whole Foods
Positive:  Whole Foods came top overall in the Environment 
category, driven by its high scores in Traceability  and Current 
Sourcing . While nearly all retailers had policies in place, few of 
those policies contained such a high level of detail and robust 
references to international instruments.
Whole Foods also benefited from sourcing its canned tuna 
exclusively from pole and line vessels, meaning a number of 
risk factors — including isolation and long periods at sea — are 
significantly reduced. 
The company has strong traceability  requirements and is able to 
trace 100 percent of its tuna back to the catching vessel[51]. As a 
result, it also scored highly for questions related to fish fraud and 
traceability audits.
Whole Foods also ranked first on Current Sourcing : out of 13 
problematic species or catch methods surveyed in this report, 
Whole Foods stocks only four, and sells none of the brands 
identified as problematic. It also received the highest score for its 
catch methods, sourcing 100 percent of its canned tuna from pole 
and line or handline fisheries.Whole Foods answered the survey and submitted a large number of supporting documents[51] .[52]  [53]. Whereas last year the company directed 
answers to human rights questions to an appendix that included very little relevant information that spoke to the specifics of the questions 
asked in the survey, this time it answered the questions directly and provided much more detail, including sharing relevant sections of its 
Supplier Code of Conduct[54].
Whole Foods came top in Environment and third overall, with a score of 50.48% — an improvement on last year’s 46.45%, largely driven by 
improvements in the Tuna Procurement Policy  and Human Rights & Labor Protections  sections. Improved scores in the former resulted 
from a new, much more progressive policy to address recruitment-related risks in its supply chain. Improvement in the latter category was 
a consequence of the company expanding a risk-based human rights due diligence process to fresh and frozen tuna suppliers.
Poor/Needs Improvement:  Whole Foods’ Human Rights & Labor 
Protections  scores continue to lag: while its initial steps towards 
instituting human rights due diligence  for its tuna supply chains 
are commendable, the company has not yet considered areas 
such as worker voice , grievance mechanisms , remediation , and 
worker engagement .
One surprising blemish on its otherwise positive performance 
on environmental issues was their lack of a position or policy on 
transshipment-at-sea . While we recognize that sourcing mostly 
from pole and line vessels in many ways mitigates the risks 
associated with transshipment, Whole Foods’s voice could be a 
powerful driver of change on this issue.

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  35[1] “ISSF REPORT: 86% of Global Tuna Catch Comes from Stocks at Healthy 
Levels; 9% Require Stronger Management, ” International Seafood 
Sustainability Foundation, Jul. 27, 2022. https://www.iss-foundation.org/blog/2022/07/27/issf-report-86-of-global-tuna-catch-comes-from-stocks-at-healthy-levels-9-require-stronger-management/ (accessed Jan. 23, 2023).
[2]
 R. Wefers, “More Than 100,000 Fishing-Related Deaths Occur Each Year, 
Study Finds” .
[3] E. R. Selig et al., “Revealing global risks of labor abuse and illegal, 
unreported, and unregulated fishing, ” Nat. Commun., vol. 13, no. 1, Art. no. 1, Apr. 2022, doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-28916-2.
[4]
 “A Global Tuna Valuation: Netting Billions 2020. ” https://pew.org/33Z5QbO 
 (accessed Jan. 23, 2023).
[5] A. Kashyap, “‘Obsessed with Audit Tools, Missing the Goal, ’” Hum. Rights 
Watch, Nov. 2022, Accessed: Jan. 25, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.hrw.org/report/2022/11/15/obsessed-audit-tools-missing-goal/why-social-audits-cant-fix-labor-rights-abuses.
[6]
 “Tuna Fisheries Would Benefit From More Onboard Observers, New 
Research Shows, ” Jun. 14, 2021. https://pew.org/2TVIoeg (accessed Jan. 25, 2023).
[7]
 Human Rights At Sea, “FISHERIES OBSERVER DEA THS AT SEA, HUMAN 
RIGHTS & THE ROLE & RESPONSIBILITIES OF FISHERIES ORGANISATIONS, ” Jul. 2020, Accessed: Jan. 25, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.humanrightsatsea.org/sites/default/files/media-files/2021-12/HRAS_Abuse_of_Fisheries_Observers_REPORT_JULY-2020_SP_LOCKED-1_0.pdf
[8]
 “ahold-delhaize-human-rights-report_june-2020.pdf. ” Accessed: Jan. 
20, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://media.aholddelhaize.com/media/sf1j0oup/ahold-delhaize-human-rights-report_june-2020.pdf?t=637902262871900000.
[9]
 “ahold-delhaize-human-rights-report-2022.pdf. ” Accessed: Jan. 20, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://media.aholddelhaize.com/media/zprnx2ho/ahold-delhaize-human-right
s-report-2022.
pdf?t=637902991090930000.
[10]  Ahold Delahize, “Ahold Delhaize - Our Position on Social and 
Environmental Topics - Seafood. ” https://www.aholddelhaize.com/sustainability/our-position-on-societal-and-environmental-topics/seafood/ (accessed Jan. 20, 2023).
[11]
 “ahold-delhaize-position-on-human-rights-2022.pdf. ” Accessed: Jan. 20, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://media.aholddelhaize.com/media/ys4jumuv/ahold-delhaize-po
sition-on-human-rights-2022.
pdf?t=637903574824100000.
[12]  “Albertsons Companies, Inc. - Our Impact - Products - Responsible 
Seafood. ” https://www.albertsonscompanies.com/our-impact/products/responsible-seafood/default.aspx (accessed Jan. 20, 2023).
[13]
 Albertsons Cos, “Albertsons Responsible Seafood Policy & Commitments. ” 
[Online]. Available: https://s29.q4cdn.com/239956855/files/doc_downloads/2022/12/2022_AlbertsonsCompaniesSEL_Combined.pdf.
[14]
 “Albertsons Companies, Inc. - Our Impact - Position Statements. ” https://www.albert 
sonscompanies.com/our-impact/position-statements/
default.aspx (accessed Jan. 20, 2023).
[15]  “Albertsons-Companies-FIP-Requirements_2020-Final.pdf. ” 
Accessed: Jan. 20, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://s29.q4cdn.com/239956855/files/our_impact/product/Albertsons-Companies-FIP-Requirements_2020-Final.pdf.[16]  “AlbertsonsCos_Due_Diligence_Plan.pdf. ” Accessed: Jan. 20, 2023. 
[Online]. Available: https://s29.q4cdn.com/239956855/files/our_impact/AlbertsonsCos_Due_Diligence_Plan.pdf.
[17]
 Aldi SOUTH, Aldi NORD, “Aldi SOUTH & Aldi NORD: International Policy on 
Forced Labor. ” [Online]. Available: https://cr.aldisouthgroup.com/en/downloads/international-policy-forced-labour.
[18]
 Aldi USA, “Aldi USA - Sustainable Seafood Policy 2021, ” 2021. Accessed: 
Jan. 23, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://corporate.aldi.us/fileadmin/fm-dam/Corporate_Responsibility/Supply_chain/ALDI_USA_Sustainable_Seafood_Policy_2021.pdf.
[19]
 Aldi, “Aldi - Social Standards in Production. ” 2015. Accessed: Jan. 23, 2023. 
[Online]. Available: https://cr.aldisouthgroup.com/en/downloads/aldi-
social-s
tandards-in-production.
[20]  Aldi SOUTH Group, “Aldi SOUTH Group - Interna tional Position Statement 
on Living Wages & Living Incomes. ” Accessed: Jan. 23, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://cr.aldisouthgroup.com/en/downloads/international-position-statement-living-wages-living-incomes.
[21]
 Seafood Task Forced, “Code of Conduct & Auditable Standards, Tuna 
Handbook Version 1. ” 2020. Accessed: Jan. 23, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.seafoodtaskforce.global/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/STF.G.S.002.EN_STF-Tuna-Handbook-English.pdf.
[22]
 Costco, “Sustainable Fisheries & Aquaculture, ” Costco. https://
mobilecontent.costco.com/staging/resource/img/sustainability-proof/sustainability-fisheries.html (accessed Jan. 20, 2023).
[23]
 “Costco Disclosure. ” https://www.costco.com/disclosure-regarding-
human-trafficking-and-anti-slavery.html (accessed Jan. 20, 2023).
[24]  Costco Wholesale, “Sustainability Commitment - About Human Rights. ” 
Accessed: Jan. 26, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://mobilecontent.costco.com/live/resource/img/static-us-landing-pages/2eHuman-Rights.pdf.
[25]
 Giant Eagle, “Supplier Code of Conduct. ” Accessed: Jan. 26, 2023. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.gianteagle.com/-/media/Files/Policies/FINAL%20Giant%20Eagle%20Supplier%20Code%20of%20Conduct.ashx.
[26]
 Giant Eagle, “Tuna-Policy. ” https://www.gianteagle.com/about-us/
sustainable-seafood/tuna-policy (accessed Jan. 20, 2023).
[27]  Giant Eagle, “Seafood-Policy . ” https://www.gianteagle.com/about-us/
sustainable-seafood/seafood-policy (accessed Jan. 26, 2023).
[28]  “Policies | Giant Eagle. ” https://www.gianteagle.com/about-us/policies 
(accessed Jan. 20, 2023).
[29]  “H-E-B Seafood Policy. ” https://www.heb.com/static-page/article-
template/H-E-B-Seafood-Policy (accessed Jan. 20, 2023).
[30]  H-E-B, “Seafood Sustainability - Sourcing Grid. ” Accessed: Jan. 26, 2023. 
[Online]. Available: https://images.heb.com/is/content/HEBGrocery/seafood-sustainability-03-18-update-1.pdf.
[31]
 Hy-Vee, “Hy-Vee Private Label Tuna Vessel List, ” 2022. Accessed: 
Jan. 26, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://76c35e76589404e46312-6ec6d4c514ba6d410de8bce9cae9c292.ssl.cf2.rackcdn.com/Corporate%20Landing%20Pages/2022-04_Greenpeace%20Vessel%20Verification%20Activity_HyVee_Public_Final-May.pdf.
[32]
 Hy-Vee, “Hy-Vee Supplier Code of Conduct. ” 2021. [Online]. Available: 
https://76c35e76589404e46312-6ec6d4c514ba6d410de8bce9cae9c292.ssl.cf2.rackcdn.com/Corporate%20Landing%20Pages/Hy-Vee_SupplierCodeofConduct_2021.pdf.References

36 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION [33]  Hy-Vee, “Seafood Procurement Policy. ” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://
www.hy-vee.com/webres/File/Hy-Vee_SeafoodProcurementPolicy_
April2019.pdf.
[34]  Kroger Co., “Human Rights Policy. ” 2022. Accessed: Jan. 27, 2023. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.thekrogerco.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/Kroger-Human-Rights-Policy-Feb-2022.pdf.
[35]
 Kroger Co., “Commitment to Respect Human Rights - Fiscal 2021 Progress 
Update. ” 2022. Accessed: Jan. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.thekrogerco.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/Kroger-Human-Rights-Progress-Update-Policy-Feb-2022.pdf.
[36]
 Kroger Co., “Seafood Sustainability Policy - Updated 2021. ” 2018. 
Accessed: Jan. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.thekrogerco.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/The-Kroger-Co_Seafood-Sustainability-Policy_2018-July.pdf.
[37]
 Publix, “Storefront | Publix Sustainability. ” https://sustainability.publix.
c
om/storefront (accessed Jan. 21, 2023).
[38]  Publix, “Publix Sustainability Report 2022, ” 2022. Accessed: Jan. 27, 2023. 
[Online]. Available: https://sustainability.publix.com/wp-content/uplo
ads/sustainability-report.pdf.
[39]  “Become a Retail Product Supplier, ” Publix Super Markets. http://
c
orporate.publix.com/business/publix-business-connection/retail-
product-supplier (accessed Jan. 21, 2023).
[40]  Southeastern Grocers, “Corporate Social Responsibility 2021 Progress 
Report, ” 2021. Accessed: Jan. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.segrocers.com/-/media/SEGrocers/Sustainbility/SEG_2021_CSR_Report.
[41]
 Sprouts Farmers Market, “Responsible Seafood Sourcing Policy, ” Sprouts 
Corporate: About, Sustainability, Press, Careers, Foundation, Investors. https://about.sprouts.com/product-sourcing/responsible-seafood-sourcing-policy/ (accessed Jan. 21, 2023).
[42]
 Sprouts Farmers Market, “Supplier Code of Conduct, ” Sprouts Corporate: 
About, Sustainability, Press, Careers, Foundation, Investors. https://about.sprouts.com/supplier-code-of-conduct/ (accessed Jan. 21, 2023).
[43]
 Sprouts Farmers Market, “Sprouts Farmers Market Commitment to 
Human Rights, ” Sprouts Corporate: About, Sustainability, Press, Careers, Foundation, Investors. https://about.sprouts.com/product-sourcing/human-rights/ (accessed Jan. 21, 2023).[44]  “Supply Chain Labor & Human Rights | Target, ” Target Corporate. http://
corporate.target.com/sustainability-esg/social/human-rights/supply-chain-policies (accessed Jan. 21, 2023).
[45]
 “Human Rights | T arget, ” Target Corporate. http://corporate.target.com/
sustainability-ESG/social/human-rights (accessed Jan. 21, 2023).
[46]  “Supply Chain Transparency | Target, ” Target Corporate. http://
corporate.target.com/sustainability-ESG/governance-and-reporting/responsible-sourcing-sustainability/Supply-Chain-Transparency (accessed Jan. 21, 2023).
[47]
 “Sustainable Seafood | Target, ” Target Corporate. http://corporate.target.
com/sustainability-ESG/environment/materials-and-deforestation/seafood (accessed Jan. 21, 2023).
[48]
 Walmart, “Human Rights, ” 2022 ESG. https://corporate.walmart.com/
esgreport/governance/human-rights (accessed Jan. 21, 2023).
[49]  “Walmart Policies and Guidelines, ” Corporate - US, Nov. 07, 2017. https://
corporate.walmart.com/policies (accessed Jan. 21, 2023).
[50]  “Seafood Sustainability - Wegmans. ” https://www.wegmans.com/
seafood-sustainability/ (accessed Jan. 27, 2023).
[51]  Whole Foods Market, “Whole Foods Market Seafood Department Quality 
StandardsOverview for Wild-Caught Seafood. ” 2022. Accessed: Jan. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://assets.wholefoodsmarket.com/Standards/Quality%20Standards%20for%20Wild%20Caught%20Species_11.22.22%20wfm.com_.pdf.
[52]
 “Seafood Standards Like Nowhere Else, ” Whole Foods Market. https://
www.wholefoodsmarket.com/quality-standards/seafood-standards (accessed Jan. 27, 2023).
[53]
 “Worker Welfare, ” Whole Foods Market. https://www.
wholefoodsmarket.com/mission-in-action/responsible-sourcing/worker-welfare (accessed Jan. 27, 2023).
[54]
 Whole Foods Market, “Whole Foods Market - Supplier Code of Conduct. ” 
2019. Accessed: Jan. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://assets.wholefoodsmarket.com/www/company-info/WFM%20Supplier%20Code%20of%20Conduct_12.30.19.pdf.

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  37Appendix
TUNA PROCUREMENT POLICY (20%)
1. Do you have a sustainable/responsible seafood sourcing policy (or a standalone tuna policy) that covers tuna 
procurement in your fresh, frozen, and shelf-stable categories?
a. _____ Yes, all categories across all stores and products (5)
b. _____ Partially, fresh and frozen categories only across all stores and products (2)
c. _____ Partially, the shelf-stable category only across all stores and products (2)
d. _____ Only some categories across some banner stores or some products (please specify) (1)
e. _____ No (0)
2. Environmental Sustainability: What % of the overall tuna (fresh, frozen and shelf-stable) sold by your company is 
covered by your sustainable seafood/tuna procurement policy?
a. _____ Less than 50% (0)
b. _____ 51% to 89% (0)
c. _____ 90% to 99% (2)
d. _____ Applies to all (4)
3. Do you have a standalone human rights/labor policy that covers tuna procurement in your fresh, frozen, and shelf 
stable categories?
a. _____ Yes (5)
b. _____ No (0)
4. Human Rights: What % of the overall tuna (fresh, frozen and shelf-stable) sold by your company is covered by your 
human rights/labor policy?
a. ____ Less than 50% (0)
b. ____ 51% to 89% (0)
c. ____ 90% to 99% (2)
d. ____ Applies to all (4)
5. Does your sustainable seafood/tuna policy explicitly feature any of the following? (choose all that apply)
a. _____ prohibits sourcing tuna from “red” fisheries according to the Monterey Bay Aquarium Seafood Watch program (2)
b. _____ prohibits sourcing tuna from “yellow” fisheries according to the Monterey Bay Aquarium Seafood Watch program (2)
c. _____ requires at minimum that all tuna sourced is either MSC-certified or part of a FIP that is making progress according to 
FisheryProgress.org, and rated either “A” or “B” (1)
d. _____ requires that all shelf-stable tuna storewide be pole and line, troll, or handline caught (2)
e. _____ prohibits sourcing from any company that engages in shark finning (2)
f. _____ has language in support of marine reserves and marine protected areas (2)
g. _____ has other environmental sustainability requirements that our suppliers must follow (1) (please specify)Greenpeace USA’s Tuna Grocery Retailer Survey 2022
What follows is a copy of Greenpeace USA's Sustainable and Worker Friendly Tuna Grocery Retailer Survey distributed to 
16 major US retailers in 2022. Retailer answers to this survey form the basis of this report.

38 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION 6. Do you have a commitment to respect all internationally-recognized human rights AND fundamental rights at work 
across all activities in your supply chain embedded in your seafood/tuna procurement policy or standalone human 
rights policy? To receive full credit, the commitment must explicitly reference the following: (1) the International Bill 
of Human Rights (which encompasses the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR),1 the International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),2 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights (ICESCR)3), (2) the 
International Labor Organization’s Core Conventions,4 and (3) C188 - Work in Fishing Convention.5 Furthermore, your 
company must adhere to the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (UNGP).6
a. _____ Partially; our policy has some language in support of international human rights and/or labor rights in reference to 
our tuna supply chain. (1)
b. _____ Partially. It explicitly commits our company to uphold two of the sets of instruments referenced above. (2)
c. _____ Yes, our commitment explicitly includes all three sets of instruments: the International Bill of Human Rights , the  
ILO Core Conventions , and the  C188 - Work in Fishing Convention . (4)
d. _____ Yes to all in (c), and it explicitly commits our company to uphold the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights (UNGP) . (5)
e. _____ No. (0)
7. Our tuna procurement policy has the following commitments on preferential sourcing: (choose all that apply; 3pts each)
a. _____ a commitment to preferentially source from vessels that go to port States that have ratified and implemented the ILO 
Work in Fishing Convention , and effectively conduct labor inspections according to the ILO Guidelines for port State 
inspections under the Convention.
b. _____ a commitment to preferentially source from companies with independent, democratic trade unions and who respect 
their workers’ rights to collectively bargain and engage in union activities.
8. What is your company’s public stance on sourcing from tuna vessels that engage in transshipment-at-sea?  
(Please select one. Note: to receive credit, this stance must be publicly visible, for example, in a tuna procurement policy.)
a. _____ We forbid sourcing from any tuna vessel that engages in transshipment-at-sea, and our traceability audits verify 
compliance with these policies. (7)
b. _____ We forbid sourcing from any tuna vessel that engages in transshipment-at-sea. (5)
c. _____ We allow it only in cases where there is 100% observer coverage, either via an onboard observer or a combination of 
onboard observers and onboard cameras. (3)
d. _____ We allow it, but only where the names of transshipping vessels and the time and location of every transshipment is 
recorded. (1)
e. _____ We do not have a stance on this issue. (0)
Worker Contracts and Recruitment
9. As stated in our policy, our company only purchases tuna from suppliers that have worker contracts that comply with 
ILO core labor standards and ILO Convention No. 188, are signed by the vessel owner and worker, and are written7 in a 
language that the worker understands. (Please select one.)
a. _____ Yes, there are clearly written contracts, for which we have provided examples of in our survey response. We are 
unaware of whether these terms are also verbally communicated. (2)
b. _____ Yes, there are clearly written contracts, for which we have provided examples of in our survey response, and  we have 
evidence that these terms are verbally communicated to workers as part of the onboarding process. (4)
c. _____ Partially, we have ensured everything in item (a) but only for _______% our suppliers (1)
d. _____ No (0)
1 UDHR: https://www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights
2 ICCPR: https://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr.aspx
3 ICESCR: https://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.aspx
4 ILO Core Conventions: https://www.ilo.org/global/standards/introduction-to-international-labour-standards/conventions-and-recommendations/lang-
-en/index.htm
5 C188: https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C188
6 UNGP: https://www.ohchr.org/documents/publications/guidingprinciplesbusinesshr_en.pdf
7 To avoid confusion and aid in understanding, all salient terms of the contract must be verbally communicated to each worker as part of the onboarding process.

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  3910. As stated in our policy, our company only purchases tuna from suppliers who are actively reducing recruitment-related 
risks for their workers by only recruiting via formalized avenues and agencies that are not on government or NGO red 
lists, and prohibiting recruitment fees, guarantee deposits, and wage deductions or withholdings. 
a. _____ Yes, and we have provided examples of these contracts in our survey response. (5)
b. _____ No (0)
11. As stated in our policy, our company only purchases tuna from suppliers who provide their workers with a local8 living 
wage.9 (Please select one.)
a. _____ Yes. Furthermore, workers or their intended recipients (e.g. family of workers) are directly receiving the wages due to 
them at least once a month via direct deposit to their selected bank accounts. (2)
b. _____ Yes. All of (a) above, and  the workers receive regular pay stubs that itemize and explain any deductions. (3)
c. _____ Partially, we have ensured everything in item (a) but only for_______% of our suppliers. (1) 
d. _____ Not necessarily. Workers or their intended recipients are paid whatever is legally required under law, even if this 
results in pay discrimination on distant water tuna fishing fleets. (0)
Safety and Health at Sea
12. Our company does its part to ensure the safety and well-being of the workers in the tuna vessels that supply us by 
explicitly requiring the following in our policy: (Check all that apply.)
a. _____ Only purchase fish from vessels that strictly comply with the safety provisions and standards of the 2012 Cape Town 
Agreement on the Implementation of the Torremolinos Protocol for the Safety of Fishing Vessels . (1)
b. _____ Only purchase from vessels that guarantee that all fishers receive no less than 10 hours rest in any 24-hour period 
and 77 hours in any seven-day period. (5)
c. _____ Require supplying tuna vessels to demonstrate that their fishers receive, at no cost, food of sufficient nutritional 
value, quality, quantity, and variety, and potable water of sufficient quality and quantity, with due regard to the 
duration and nature of the voyage. (1)
d. _____ Only source from tuna vessels that spend a maximum of three months at sea before going to a port and allow crew 
unfettered access to port services for a minimum of 10 days. (5)
Worker Voice
13. Our company respects workers’ freedom of association and collective bargaining by including the following in our 
policy: (check all that apply)
a. _____ affirming our company’s commitment to supporting freedom of association and collective bargaining in its own 
facilities (2)
b. _____ affirming our company’s commitment to supporting freedom of association and collective bargaining throughout our 
global tuna supply chains (2)
c. _____ ensuring that our suppliers respect union rights by investigating and fairly resolving all allegations of union busting 
or threats made against unionists (3)
d. _____ publishing our vessel supplier lists so that trade unions and worker rights organizations know which companies are 
in the end-buyer’s supply chain (5) (Note: if your company’s full vessel supplier list is already publicly disclosed and 
kept up to date, you will also receive credit here as well, regardless of your company’s rationale for being transparent.)
14. Is it in your policy, and can your company verify, that all of its tuna suppliers treat migrant fishers equally as national 
fishers regardless of the applicable law in the flag State? (This means that migrant fishers are paid at least the national 
minimum wage through regular, full-time employment, and provided with equivalent social protection even if  the 
government of the flag State does not require them to be treated the same way.)
a. _____ Yes (5)
b. _____ No (0)
8 “Local” in this context means that, for example, distant water vessels flagged to Taiwan must pay its crew at least a living wage for Taiwan.
9 “Living wage” should be based on collective bargaining or an independently determined, established methodology. Companies should publicly disclose the 
methodology they use and work with trade unions and other relevant stakeholders to develop living wage benchmarks where they do not already exist. 

40 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION TRACEABILITY (20%)
15. Are you able to trace every SKU of tuna (fresh, frozen, and shelf-stable) down to the individual vessel that caught the 
fish?
a. _____ Yes, 100% (5)
b. _____ Almost, between 90-99% of the time (3)
c. _____ No, or less than 90% of the time (0)
16. Will you publicly commit to publishing a full list of your suppliers’ fishing vessels from which your company sources 
tuna?
a. _____ Yes, we already have this. (5) URL: ___________________________
b. _____ Yes, within 3 months (3)
c. _____ No (0)
17. What are your seafood supplier requirements? Do you: (choose each that applies; 2 points each, except item (f))
a. _____ have quarterly monitoring procedures in place to ensure that your suppliers conform to your environmental and 
social policy requirements, as tuna vessels should already be reporting to port every 3 months
b. _____ conduct ongoing internal traceability audits to ensure that all tuna can be traced back to the individual fishing 
vessel (this is distinct from social audits)
c. _____ utilize an external party to provide traceability audits to ensure that all tuna can be traced to the individual fishing 
vessel (this is distinct from social audits)
d. _____ refuse to buy seafood from vessels and/or operators on the TMT Combined IUU Vessel List (https://www.iuu-vessels.
org)
e. _____ only source from suppliers that require a fishing crew manifest for each vessel that directly or indirectly supplies us 
with tuna
f. _____ other, please describe: (1)
18. Fish fraud is a rampant problem in the seafood industry, and usually manifests itself in the substitution of a premium 
product for a cheaper product. How do you ensure that your suppliers are providing you with the actual product that 
meets your policy’s specifications? (Please choose all that apply and fill in the blank to receive credit; 2pts per question if 
answered satisfactorily)
a. We are aware that the tuna canneries in our supply chain source many different products. They are able to ensure 
separation of brands and products because:
b. We know that the vessels that we source from are able to guarantee separation of product down to the level of fishing 
method (e.g., FAD-free skipjack kept apart from regular purse seine caught skipjack) because:
c. We conduct our own traceability audits of our tuna supply chain, and the results of these audits provide us with confidence 
because:

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  41ADVOCACY AND INITIATIVES (10%)
19. Do you advocate for fisheries and labor reform in the tuna sector by sending public letters to key policy-makers? (Please 
share letters or URL to receive credit. For each answer option, please choose either the first option to indicate one letter 
(worth 2 points), or the second option to indicate 2 or more letters (worth 4 pts). This question is worth 10 points total, 
so there is an opportunity to secure “bonus” points for greater than five letters across all answer options.)
  (Note: Please be aware that this question pertains to direct communications (that are available publicly) from your company to 
the relevant regulatory and/or legislative bodies involved. Examples must be within 3 years of the date of scoring. For purposes of 
the 2021 survey, a letter written in 2019 and a similar one in 2021 would receive credit for each instance.)
a. Yes, we have sent one letter ____ or 2 or more letters ____ to the Taiwanese government demanding four key reforms in line 
with NGO recommendations .
b. Yes, we have sent one letter ____ or 2 or more letters ____ to a Regional Fishery Management Organization (RFMO) that 
manages an area where we source tuna, urging stronger environmental or social safeguards.
c. Yes, we have sent one letter ____ or 2 or more letters ____ to the United Nations or its agencies advocating for greater 
human rights protection in the tuna sector.
d. Yes, we have sent one letter ____ or 2 or more letters ____ to the United Nations or its agencies advocating for a robust UN 
Oceans Treaty.
e. Yes, we have sent one letter ____ or 2 or more letters ____ to the U.S. Federal Government (e.g., U.S. Congress, an Executive 
branch agency such as NOAA, or a Regional Fishery Management Council (RFMC)), either supporting legislation or calling for 
policy reform to improve environmental sustainability and human rights protections in the tuna sector.
20. Our company advocates for observer protection by: (choose all that apply, except you may select either (b) or (c), but not 
both)
a. _____ encouraging regulatory authorities and their respective observer programs to work together and implement the 
International Observer Bill of Rights (IOBR) at the RFMO level. (4)
b. _____ ensuring that observers on supplying vessels are included alongside crew in our human rights due diligence 
processes (3)
c. _____ ensuring that observers on supplying vessels are included alongside crew in our human rights due diligence 
processes and  receive heightened protection as human rights defenders (4)
d. _____ ensuring that observer programs, both regional and national, adopt measures that provide for the highest standards 
in investigations conducted following any observer death, in line with international standards such as the Minnesota 
Protocol on the Investigation of Potentially Unlawful Death.10 (4)
21. How much of your overall tuna (by volume) is sourced from vessels with democratic and independent trade unions?
a. _____ None (0)
b. _____ Less than 5% (0.5)
c. _____ Between 5% - 9.9% (1)
d. _____ Between 10% - 14.9% (please specify percentage) (2)
e. _____ Over 15% (4)
10  https://ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/MinnesotaProtocol.pdf

42 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION HUMAN RIGHTS AND LABOR PROTECTIONS (25%)
Human Rights Due Diligence11
22. To what extent does your company implement a robust human rights due diligence framework that seeks to go beyond 
an auditing based approach? (Please select one)
a. _____ Our company does not have a due diligence framework. We rely on our suppliers providing documentation 
demonstrating its compliance with all applicable human rights laws for the region(s) in which it operates. (-1)
b. _____ Our company does not have a due diligence framework, and instead relies on third-party audits and on our suppliers 
providing documentation demonstrating its compliance with all applicable human rights laws for the region(s) in 
which it operates. (0)
c. _____ Our company recognizes the limitations of social audits in our tuna fishery supply chains and we have made a 
commitment to take action on implementing a due diligence framework within 180 days to move away from an 
exclusive reliance on social audits. (1)
d. _____ Our company is already implementing our due diligence framework to complement social audits for over 75% of our 
tuna suppliers. (3)
e. _____ Our company implements a human rights due diligence process that applies to ALL tuna suppliers in our supply 
chain, and this process is aligned with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. (5)
If you answered (d) or (e), please explain what your due diligence process looks like.
_________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________________
23. Does your company have senior level staff12 who are responsible for the day-to-day relevant human rights issues within 
the Company, including those arising from its suppliers? If so, please list the titles of the individuals tasked with this 
responsibility for all tuna sourced by your company. (Please select one.)
a. _____ Yes, and here are the functions and titles: (2)
b. _____ Yes, here are the functions and titles, and  we follow best practices to ensure that all relevant departments are 
integrally involved in harmonizing our human rights commitments with our procurement strategy (e.g., we 
have a human rights committee that meets regularly and ensure that at least one senior staff from each relevant 
department, including in-house human rights experts, sits on that committee): (3)
c. _____  Partially (in either scope of issue coverage or tuna category coverage), and here are some of the functions and titles: (1)
d. _____ No, we respond to human rights issues with available staff if they come up. (0)
Identifying, Assessing, Integrating and Acting on Human Rights Issues
24. Does your company have a system for regularly identifying human rights risks and impacts in its tuna supply chain, and 
do “key moments” trigger a review? Furthermore, have 75% or more of your suppliers completed human rights impact 
assessments on their vessels? 
  (Examples of a “key moment” would include a policy change by a relevant country, a high-profile report from civil society experts, 
entry into a new market, a new supplier, or a U.S. Federal Government action that indicates an increased risk of forced labor or 
trafficking in the fleets of certain flag states (e.g., the Department of Labor List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor, 
the State Department Trafficking in Persons report, and Customs and Border Protection withhold release orders).)
a. _____ Yes, we have a global system in place to identify risks and impacts on a regular basis across our entire tuna supply 
chain, and can describe how and when new events trigger a fresh review and we know that 75% or more of our 
suppliers have done impact assessments on their vessels in the last year. (5)
b. _____ Partially. We have a global system in place to identify risks and impacts on a regular basis across our entire tuna 
supply chain, and can describe how and when new events trigger a fresh review and we know that 50% or more of 
our suppliers have done impact assessments on their vessels in the last year. (3)
11 Corporate Human Rights Benchmark (CHRB) defines Human Rights Due Diligence as “an ongoing risk management process that a reasonable and prudent 
company needs to follow in order to identify, prevent, mitigate and account for how it addresses its adverse human rights impacts. As set out in the UN Guiding 
Principles 17-21, this includes four key steps: assessing actual and potential human rights impacts; integrating and acting on the findings; tracking responses; 
and communicating about how impacts are addressed. ”
12 “Senior level staff” should also include C-suite executives and Board members

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  43c. _____ Partially. We have a global system in place to identify risks and impacts on a regular basis across our entire tuna 
supply chain, and can describe how and when new events trigger a fresh review and we know that 25% or more of 
our suppliers have done impact assessments on their vessels in the last year. (2)
d. _____ Partially. We have a global system in place to identify risks and impacts on a regular basis across our entire tuna 
supply chain, and can describe how and when new events trigger a fresh review. We are unclear on what percentage 
of our suppliers have done impact assessments on their vessels in the past year. (1)
e. _____ No (-1)
25. Does your company assess its human rights risks and impacts, prioritize action, and  then take action to prevent, 
mitigate, or remediate the most salient human rights issues?
a. _____ Yes, and we can describe this process and can privately share the results of our assessments. (1)
b. _____ Yes, and we can describe this process and can publicly share the results of our assessments. (5)
c. _____ No (0)
Tracking Effectiveness (M&E) and Communicating Results to the Public
26. Does your company track and evaluate the effectiveness of actions taken in response to its human rights risks and 
impacts, and use this information to improve processes moving forward? If so, how?
a. _____ Yes: (1)
b. _____ No (0)
27. Does your company formally communicate how it addresses human rights impacts through its supply chain, in 
accordance with the guidance in UNGP Sec. 21 (i.e in a form that is accessible to your intended audiences, in a frequency 
that reflects your or your supply chain’s human rights impacts, that provides sufficient information to evaluate the 
adequacy of your responses, and that does not pose any risks to affected stakeholders)? 
a. _____ Yes, and here is the URL: (5)
b. _____ Partially, we have some processes in place for communicating how we address our human rights impacts but they 
are not fully aligned with UNGP Sec. 21. Here is the URL: ____ and here is additional information/context about our 
process:_____ (3)
c. _____ No (0)
Grievance mechanisms / Access to Remedy
28. Does your company have a safe and anonymous mechanism through which workers in its supply chain or external 
individuals can raise complaints or concerns regarding human rights issues, and is this mechanism accessible by 
itinerant fishers at sea?
a. _____ We ensure that all of our tuna suppliers publicly disclose online and in all of their labor contracts the procedures 
for their employees to file grievances that are secure, anonymous, and confidential, free from threat of retaliation. 
Furthermore , there is a protected avenue for workers to take their complaint to the level of us, the buyer, if not 
resolved by the supplier. (5)
b. _____ We ensure that all of our tuna suppliers publicly disclose online, in worker contracts, and via direct verbal 
communication to workers the procedures for their employees to file grievances that are secure, anonymous, and 
confidential, free from threat of retaliation. (3) 
c. _____ We have ensured everything in item (b), but only for 75% or more of our tuna suppliers. (2)
d. _____ We are unfamiliar with the grievance mechanisms employed by our tuna suppliers, but we commit to asking all 
suppliers about them within 15 business days. (1)
e. _____ We are unfamiliar with the grievance mechanisms employed by our tuna suppliers. (0)

44 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION 29. Our company has a public-facing, non-judicial grievance mechanism (GM) that is deemed effective according to the UNGP 
Sec. 31, because it is: (Please choose all that apply and briefly explain how your GM meets each of these criteria :) (1 pt each)
a. _____ Legitimate: enabling trust from the stakeholder groups for whose use they are intended, and being accountable for 
the fair conduct of grievance processes;
b. _____ Accessible: being known to all stakeholder groups for whose use they are intended, and providing adequate 
assistance for those who may face particular barriers to access;
c. _____ Predictable: providing a clear and known procedure with an indicative time frame for each stage, and clarity on the 
types of process and outcome available and means of monitoring implementation;
d. _____ Equitable: seeking to ensure that aggrieved parties have reasonable access to sources of information, advice and 
expertise necessary to engage in a grievance process on fair, informed and respectful terms;
e. _____ Transparent: keeping parties to a grievance informed about its progress, and providing sufficient information about 
the mechanism’s performance to build confidence in its effectiveness and meet any public interest at stake;
f. _____ Rights-compatible: ensuring that outcomes and remedies accord with internationally recognized human rights;
g. _____ A source of continuous learning: drawing on relevant measures to identify lessons for improving the mechanism and 
preventing future grievances and harms.
Please add your explanations on how your GM meets each of these criteria either below or immediately following each of the 
checked options above.
30. Does your company provide for or cooperate with other actors in remediation to victims where it has caused (or 
contributed to) adverse human rights impacts (e.g., excessive working hours or non-payment of wages), or cooperate 
in remediation to victims where adverse impacts are directly linked to the tuna you sell through your suppliers? If so, 
please provide an example.
a. _____ Yes. Here is an example of the approach we took when an adverse human rights impact occurred, and how we 
changed our policies or procedures to prevent similar adverse impacts in the future: (5)
b. _____ We have not discovered any adverse human rights impacts in our supply chain, but here is our public policy and 
approach that our company would take to provide for or enable a timely remedy for victims: (1)
c. _____ We do not cooperate with other actors in remediation to victims. (-1)
31. Does your company engage with workers, including migrant fishers, during its risk and impact assessments?
a. _____ Yes, and this is how we engage with them: (5)
b. _____ No (-1)
32. Does your company inform remediation of identified impacts through consultation with affected workers or their 
representatives and prioritization of their needs?
a. _____ Yes, and this is how we engage with them: (5)
b. _____ No (-1)
33. How does your company deal with your suppliers when you find abuses?
a. _____ We immediately sever our business relationship with the supplier regardless of the severity of the abuse (-1)
b. _____ We do not sever the business relationship with the supplier even if it is a severe abuse and even when it cannot be 
effectively remediated through our leverage. (-1)
c. _____ We sever our business relationship with the supplier if it is an incredibly severe 13 abuse that cannot be effectively 
remediated. (1)
d. _____ We sever our business relationship with the supplier if it is a repeat abuse that demonstrates we lack the leverage to 
ensure our supplier complies with our policies. (3) 
e. _____ We exercise our leverage to ensure effective remediation of violations that are not incredibly severe, and do so with a 
clear, benchmarked, and time-bound plan, and work with our suppliers to educate them on human rights and ensure 
no future such violations occur. (5)
13 According to the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, severity is determined by an assessment of the scale (seriousness of harm), scope 
(number of individuals that are or will be affected), and irremediable character of the violation. A determination of severity does not require all three criteria 
to be met. There is no exhaustive list of “incredibly severe” abuses, but some examples include murder, disappearances, torture, and permanent or severe 
injuries (either physical or mental), includng those that prevent the fisher from working or earning the same pay. In these instances, your supplier will not be 
able to restore those affected to a situation at least the same as, or equivalent to, their situation before the human rights abuse. When in doubt, retailers should 
consult directly with the affected people or their representatives before determining whether the abuse/s can be effectively remediated.

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  45CURRENT SOURCING (20%)
34. Do you sell any of the following species of tuna in your wetcase, frozen foods, or shelf-stable categories? (You must 
indicate a “Yes” or a “No” (Y/N) for each item. Each “N” response receives 1 point, each “Y” response receives 0 pts.)
____ Atlantic Bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus)
____ Pacific Bluefin tuna (Thunnus orientalis)
____ Southern Bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii)
____ Yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares)  from the Indian Ocean
____ Yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares)  caught with drifting longlines
____ Yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares)  caught with FAD-caught purse seine
____ Bigeye tuna (Thunnus obesus)  from the Indian Ocean
____ Bigeye tuna (Thunnus obesus)  caught with drifting longlines
____ Skipjack tuna (Katsuownus pelamis)  from the Indian Ocean
____ Skipjack tuna (Katsuownus pelamis)  caught via FAD-caught purse seine
____ Albacore tuna (Thunnus alalunga)  caught with drifting longlines
____ Longtail tuna (Thunnus tonggol)  from the Indian Ocean
____ Longtail tuna (Thunnus tonggol)  caught with drift gillnets
If applicable, please list which products your stores carry for each of the three brands below. 2 pts for each brand not carried.
____ Bumblebee brand tuna products:
____ Chicken of the Sea brand tuna products:
____ Starkist brand tuna products:
35. Do you sell any of the following shelf-stable tuna products?  
For each cell in the chart, if applicable, please fill out the brand name of the tuna AND country of origin. For example, in the 
top-left empty cell, one might fill in “Acme Select pole-and-line skipjack”  from the Maldives.  If there are multiple examples per 
cell, please list all. For purposes of this question, the same source tuna that is offered in water or oil should be considered as 
a single SKU, and not as different variants depending on packed liquid. (Scoring: 2pts per example (SKU) listed, total maximum 
number of points is 12 for the whole question.)
Please enter the brand  and the 
country of origin  for each space, 
if applicable.Pole and line or  
troll-caught tuna Handline-caught tunaFAD-free purse seine  
caught tuna
Private-label brand
National brand

46 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION 36. How much of your TOTAL amount of tuna sold (across all categories) is caught using these methods? (For example, if 10% 
of your company’s tuna by volume (across fresh, frozen, and shelf-stable categories) is caught via pole and line, then indicate that 
figure in the blank.)
Percentage currently sourced in this manner
Pole and line______%  
(Percentage multiplied by 3 is the score for this entry.)
Troll or handline______%  
(Percentage multiplied by 3 is the score for this entry.)
Purse seine______%  
(Percentage multiplied by 0.7 is the score for this entry.)
FAD-free purse seine______%  
(Percentage multiplied by 2 is the score for this entry.)
Longline______%  
(Percentage multiplied by 0.5 is the score for this entry.)
Longline w/ bycatch mitigation______%  
(Percentage multiplied by 0.7 is the score for this entry.)
Drifting gillnet______%  
(Percentage multiplied by 0.5 is the score for this entry.)
Other: ____________________%  
Note on scoring: the total possible points for this chart is 300. The total points will be divided by 30 to fit a 10-point scoring scale, 
so that a perfect score for this question would be 10 points out of 10.
37. In what ways has your company considered how its purchasing practices (e.g., price demands) might affect the human 
rights of workers in its supply chain? (Please explain, and choose all that apply.)
a. _____ We preferentially source from suppliers that meet or exceed internationally-recognized human rights and 
environmental sustainability standards. (4) Explain:
b. _____ When significant (and positive) regulatory developments or improved buyer practices occur, we support such 
reforms by absorbing at least some of the increased costs associated with these reforms. (2) Explain:
c. _____ When significant (and positive) regulatory developments or improved buyer practices occur, we support such 
reforms by absorbing a proportion of the increased costs based on proportion of profit. (4) Explain:
d. _____ We have reformed our purchasing practices in another way, as follows: (1)
e. _____ We have not yet given this area any consideration. (0)

 HIGH COST OF CHEAP TUNA 2ND EDITION  47CUSTOMER EDUCATION/LABELING (5%)
38. Apart from country of origin, what other traceability information do you provide to customers to assist them in making 
environmentally sustainable and worker-friendly tuna choices while shopping in your stores? Do you label your private 
label seafood products either on the label or via a QR-code on the label with information on the following? (Choose all 
that apply; each option worth 1 point unless otherwise stated)
a. _____ Species name (common name, e.g., “skipjack”)
b. _____ Certification status (if applicable) according to a GSSI-recognized certification scheme (e.g., MSC)
c. _____ Sustainability status according to Monterey Bay Aquarium’s seafood watch criteria (e.g. red/yellow/green labeling)
d. _____ FAO catch area (its region number)
e. _____ Detailed fishing method (e.g., longline, FAD-free purse seine) (2)
f. _____ Port of landing
g. _____ Catch vessel and day of catch
h. _____ The flag state of the fishing vessel (2)
i. _____ Worker-specific information (e.g., “union produced”)
j. _____ other, please describe:
39. How do you ensure the most environmentally sustainable choices for tuna are easy to find, clearly labeled, and 
promoted in store?  (Please select one, and provide photos to receive credit.)
a. _____ All Pole & line, FAD free, or MSC tuna are easy to find and promoted with shelf signs or banners (2)
b. _____ All shelf-stable tuna OR all of our own-brand pole & line, FAD free and MSC tuna are easy to find and promoted with 
shelf signs or banners (1)
c. _____ Some sustainable tuna products are promoted with basic labeling as part of the on-shelf pricing labels (0.5)
d. _____ None of the above (0)

© Roger Grace / Greenpeace