# Archivo original: a-marine-reserve-network-for-t.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:47 -03 2025

A MARINE RESERVE
NETWORK FOR THE 
GULF OF C ALIFORNIA
THE NEXT STEP IN CONSERVING 
‘THE WORLD’S AQU ARIUM’      

Contents
1          THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA 4
1.1        BIOLOGICAL RICHNESS AND DIVERSITY 4
1.2        CULTURAL IMPORTANCE 51.3        SOCIOECONOMIC IMPORTANCE 6
2          THREATS IN THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA 7
2.1        OVERFISHING AND AQUACULTURE 72.2        POLLUTION 7
2.3        LOSS OF HABITAT 8
2.4        TOURISM 9
3          MARINE RESERVES, A SPECIAL TYPE OF NATURAL PROTECTED AREA 10
3.1        BENEFITS OF MARINE RESERVES 10
3.2        PRINCIPLES FOR DESIGNING MARINE RESERVES 11
4          THE HISTORY OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF NATURAL PROTECTED AREAS AND 
AREAS OF CONSERVATION PRIORITY IN THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA 14
5 PROPOSAL FOR ESTABLISHING A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK 18
6 COMMUNITY MANAGEMENT AS THE BASIS FOR MARINE RESERVE MANAGEMENT 206.1 ENSURING COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT 206.2 IDENTITY 21
6.3 EQUITY 23
6.4 CREATING MARINE RESERVES 236.5 PROTECTION OF CRITICAL HABITATS 24
6.6 COASTAL AND REEF HABITAT RESTORATION 25
6.7 TRANSP ARENCY AND ACTIVITY REPORTS 26
6.8 CONSERVATION IN AN ECONOMIC CONTEXT 27
7 CONCLUSIONS 28
OCTAVIO ABURTO OR OPEZA AND C ATALINA LÓPEZ SAGÁSTEGUI
UNIVERSID AD AUTÓNOMA DE BAJ A CALIFORNIA SUR.
DEPARTAMENT O DE BIOLOGÍA MARINA.
CARRETERA AL SUR KM 5.5. LA PAZ, B.C.S.,23081. EMAIL: MABURTO@UABCS.MX
A REPORT PREPARED FOR GREENPEACEPUBLICADO POR GREENPEACE MÉXICO
JOSÉ MA. VERTIZ 646COL. NARVARTE
C.P. 03010
MÉXICO D.F .
WWW.GREENPEACE.ORG.MX
NOVIEMBRE DE 2006
JN 0025

A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 3Life abounds in the Gulf of California.This wonderful sea shelters
some of the richest fisheries in the world, contains more than thirty
species of marine mammals, and sustains the northernmost coralreefs in the American Continent. Immense coastal surges bring
nutrients from the depths of the Gulf to the surface, and fertilize
some of the richest oceanic waters in the world.The estuaries bring
nutrients from land to sea, and join the ecological processes of
ocean and land.
Few places on earth represent such dramatic environmental
contrasts as can be found in this region. For the past six million
years the Sea of Cortez has maintained this long and aridpeninsula of Baja Cal ifornia separate from the rest of the Mexican
territory, which at the same time has kept the Sea of Cortez locked
in within its own depths and apart from the Pacific Ocean.
All ar ound, the central theme is the evolutionary isolation that
generates unique and extraordinary species, and the insularitiesthat harbor astonishing forms. In this scenery, where land and sea
embr ace each othe r,isolation and biological evolution are the
cause and engine of this immense natural richness. Islands and
bays, sea mountains and estuaries, reefs and lagoons, they all keepthe genetic s ecrets of its f ounding life forms in its isolated
landscapes, and the ev olutionary memories of the species that
provided their origins.
For six million years these plants and these animals evolved
without the presence of modern human beings until they formed a
spectacular collection of biological species. Since the peninsula’s
separation from continental Mexico, this collection of living beingshas remained there, evolving and surviving, with adaptations evermore i ncred ible and wond erful,with a rich diversity of forms.The
Gulf and the deserts surrounding it regulate the climate, maintain
the fisheries, feed our richest agricultural valleys, and with their
spectacular beauty, feed and nourish our dreams and culture as
well. If we left them alone, the desert and sea would survive
without us, but we would not survive without them.In this study, Octavio Aburto Oropeza and Catalina López
Sagástegui present a detailed, comparative analysis of the different
efforts carried out in the Gulf of California aiming to establishconservation priorities. With profound knowledge of the region, they
discuss the alternatives set forth to establish a network of marine
reserves in the Gulf of California, and with a broad, inclusive spirit,
they search for consensus and solutions, finding accords,
similarities in the focus points, and congruence in the different
perspectives. In their excellent compilation of the efforts to
establish conservation priorities in the great ecosystem of the Gulf
of California, the authors also do a brilliant job at joining and
adding to these efforts. Even though the methods differ , the results
of the different groups point to the same direction, identify areas incommon, propose similar actions, and underline the same priorities.
Product of an oppor tune i nitiative from Greenpeace, this work is
above all a man ifest of unity and consensus. We must protect this
environment for our own well-being and that of everyone else, and
we should respect it for no other reason than its own singularity.The protection of the Gulf of California is the most important task
in favor of our o wn survival, for many generations. It is a task that
will last many, many years.That is why it is so urgent.Prologue

The Gulf of California, also known as the Sea of Cortez, harbors
great biological richness with highly productive waters. It is
among the five most productive and biologically diverse marine
ecosystems of the world. It is approximately 1,000 Km long and
150 Km wide (Álvarez-Borrego, 1983) and covers an area of278,000 Km
2. Five states surround this sea: Sonora, Sinaloa,
Nayarit, Baja California, and Baja California Sur (Morgan et al.,2005) (Fig. 1).
The coastline of the gulf is irregular and includes a great number
of coas tal bays and lagoons. The northern portion is dominated by
the Colorado River delta, resulting in a unique ecosystem. Theeastern coas t of the g ulf has a s eries of rivers that originate in the
chain of mountains running through Sonora and Sinaloa. These
rivers deliver water and sediments to the enclosed sea, however
there are no rivers on the peninsula side due to the dry conditions
of the region. The sea floor is characterized by underwater canyonsand depressions that, in some places, are over 3 kilometers deep.
These underwater canyons form a series of depressions that
increase in depth towards the mouth of the gulf.
1.1 Biological richness and diversity
The Gulf of California region is recognized worldwide for its
biological richness, high number of unique species, productivewaters and scenic beauty. This region includes 23 priority areas for
marine biodiversity, 42 areas of priority for terrestrial biodiversityand 62 priority areas for the conservation of birds, all describedand identified by National Commission on knowledge and use ofbiodiversity (CONABIO for its initials in Spanish) (Enríquez-
Andrade et al., 2005). This high biodiversity can be explainedthrough two phenomena: (i) the wi de variety of habitats including
mangrove forests, coastal lagoons, rocky and coral reefs,
hydrothermal vents and other shallow and deep marine habitats;
and (ii) the geology and oceanographic conditions of the region
(Ezcurra, 1998; Carvajal el at., 2004). There are 887 species of
plants and animals living on the 922 islands of the gulf, including
90 end emic spec ies.Sixty of thes e are repti les,placing Mexico
second in the world in terms of the number of endemic reptiles
(CSGC, 2004).1 ::The Gulf of California
4| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA
Fig. 1. Map of the area of the study© GREENPEACE

A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 5Marine invertebrates are the largest group represented by 4,800
identified species. Some authors believe that there is an equal
number of unidentified species waiting to be discovered (Ezcurra,1998). Of the total number of species, 740 of them are endemic
(Enríquez-Andrade et al., 2005).
There are 665 species of algae, 580 of them are macroalgae.
Puerto Peñasco possesses the highest species diversity of
microalgae in the gulf, while the coast of Baja California in the
area of the midriff islands is where the highest biomass of
commercially important algae can be found (CSGC, 2004).
The Gulf of California region is home to between 870 and 890
species of fish and 77 are endemic (CSGC, 2004; Enríquez-
Andrade et al., 2005). Of the 271 reef species known in the Sea of
Cortez,52 are end emic (Ezcur ra, 1998). The Totoaba 
(Cynosc ion
macdonal di)is end emic to the uppe r gulf and is endangered. Five
of the eight species of sea turtles can be found in the region, and
all five spec ies are categ orized as endan gered on the IUCN red l ist.
The Gulf of Cal ifornia is consi dered a very important area for the
feeding, reproduction and migration of these species (CSGC,
2004). The five species of sea turtles found here are: the
loggerhead (Caretta caretta) , the Pacific green (Chelonia mydas
agassizi) ,the leatherback (Dermochelys coriacea) ,the hawksbill
(Eretmoche lys imbricada) ,and the ol ive ridley (Lepi doche lys
olivacea).
In the cas e of the Pacific green turtle, it uses the coastal lagoons
and bays of Baja California, Sinaloa and Sonora as feeding
grounds and can be commonly found around the Midriff Islands.The leathe rback is consi dered to be cr iticall y endan gered and has
several nesting grounds in the southern portion of Baja California
Sur . The loggerhead and hawksbill turtles feed in waters off this
state,and the ol ive ridley nests in the southern portion of the
peninsula (CSGC, 2004; Morgan et al., 2005).
At least 17 species of seabirds use the islands located in the Gulf
of Cal ifornia as breed ing grounds: 11 are migratory, six are
resident, and six are quasi-endemic - 95% of the world population
nests on one island (CSGC, 2004; Enríquez-Andrade et al., 2005).Heermann’s g ull 
(Larus hee rmann i)and the r oyal tern (Sterna
maxima) are examples of two species that reproduce on these
islands. The wetlands of the region are used by ducks and geese,
such as the brent goose (Branta bernicla) , as resting or feedinggrounds during their migration (Morgan et al., 2005). Some
endemic species and sub-species like the yellow-footed gull (Larus
livens) and the Yuma clapper rail (Rallus longirostris yumanensis)
are disappearing or are threatened by the rapid loss of habitat
(Ezcurra, 1998).
The Gulf of California is also considered a very important area for
its diversity of cetacean species, since 40% (33 species) of the
world’s species are found here. The upper gulf is the only place in
the entire world where the vaquita (Phocoena sinus) can be found,
it is the only endemic marine mammal in Mexico and has the most
restricted distribution of any marine mammal in the world
(Ezcur ra,1998; Enríquez-Andrade et al., 2005; Morgan et al.,
2005). There are also around 40 colonies of California sea lions
(Zalophus californianus) forming a population of approximately
30,000 individuals (Enríquez-Andrade et al., 2005). The bluewhale 
(Balaenoptera musculus) , listed as endangered by the IUCN,
arrives to the gulf from Alaska after the feeding season; while the
humpback whale (Megaptera novaeangliae) uses the area as
reproduction grounds (Morgan et al., 2005).
1.2 Cultural imp ortance 
The historical and cultural importance of the peninsula of Baja
California has been recognized by specialists around the world.
Even though studies of the indigenous cultures of the peninsula
began in the late 19th centur y, the last 70 years have seen the
most scientific activity focused on the region (Reygadas-Dahl,
2003). There are a great number of cave paintings, encompassing
a variety of styles, on the peninsula. The most famous of these arethe great mural style paintings found in the central region of the
peninsula on the San Borja, San Juan, San Francisco, and
Guadalupe Sierras (Hambleton, 2003). It is also worth mentioningthat many ar chaeolog ical remai ns have been f ound belonging to
ancient communities of hunter-gatherers that inhabited the area
long ago. These findings have helped us to understand the lifestyle
and culture of these isolated communities and the ways in which
ancient cultures, such as the Pericues, Gaicuras, Cochimies and
Cucapas, thrived in this hostile land (León-Portilla, 2003).
The ar rival of the J esuits and the f ounding of the missions along
the peninsula are also important elements in the history of the

6| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIAregion. They were among the very few who were able to survive the
harsh conditions of the peninsula. Their success was partly due to
the relationships they were able to establish with the natives livingaround the missions. The exchange of knowledge between natives
and missionaries resulted in a fusion of two cultures that in turn
resulted in lifestyles that can still be found in local communities.
The indigenous groups on the mainland side of the gulf region,
such as the Seri, Yaqui and Cucapa, also developed lifestyles 
that allowed them to take advantage of marine and terrestrial resources.
1.3 Socioeconomic importance
There are appr oximately 8.6 million people living in the Gulf of
California region, and this number is expected to rise to 10.4
million by the year 2010. Population density is considered to be
low now; however this entire region is attracting people from
different places at a fast rate. This can be seen through the
populati on growth rates which are higher than the average national
growth rate (CSGC, 2004). Between 1990 and 2000 Mexico hadan annual population growth rate of 1.9%, while the gulf region
had a g rowth r ate of 2.4%. Baja California, Baja California Sur ,
and Sonor a have growth rates higher than the national rate, but
Sinaloa’s and Nayarit’s are lower . The biggest population growthcan be observed in coastal municipalities, and it is those
municipalities where the pressure on resources is highest (CSGC, 2004).
The abundant natural resources and the economic activity have
created new investment opportunities that encourage regionaleconomic growth. The cities and ports of the region have become
specialized in the primary and tertiary sectors, transforming the
Gulf of California region into one of the regions with the highestper capita i ncomes i n Me xico. The region is important for the
production and export of primary products (agriculture, cattle,
fishing and mining). In total the Gulf of California is responsible
for 10% of the total gross national product (GNP). The fishing
and agricultural sectors contribute 17%, with Sonora and Sinaloa
as the main producers (CSGC, 2004)Almost 50% of the national fishery products come from this
region, and 90% of shrimp farms are located here producing 40%
of the national product. The shrimp, sardine, tuna and squidfisheries yield around 500,000 tones of products with an estimated
value of 300 million dollars (this represents 70% of the total
national value). Artisanal fisheries, mostly conducted in bays and
costal lagoons and estuaries, target 70 species and produce
200,000 tons annually (Robadue, 2002; CSGC, 2004; Enríquez-
Andrade et al., 2005).
The fishing industries create employment for more than 50,000
people and have resulted i n the cons truction of ar ound 250
processi ng plants. There are nearly 26,000 boats dedicated to
fishing in the Gulf of California. Among them are 72% of the
national tuna fishing fleet, and almost all of them fish sardine as
well. Also, 52% of the total number of boats dedicated to shrimpfishing in the country work in this region as well.
Sonor a,Sinaloa and Nay arit produce 40% of the nati onal
agricultur al products (Enríquez-Andr ade et al., 2005). These four
states dedicate 1.5 million hectares of land (40% of the total
national agricultural land) to agricultural production (CSGC,
2004).
Tourism is also an important sector for the economy of the region,
generating high incomes annually that represent between 9-10% of
the national income. The Sea of Cortez holds many naturalattractions considered among the most beautiful in the country. It
is estimated that 4.8 million tourists (8% of the national total)
visit this region annually and spend approximately 2 billion dollars.Sport fishing and adventure tour ism are amon g the mos t popular
activities (Robadue, 2002; CSGC, 2004; Enríquez-Andrade et al.,
2005).

2 ::Threats in the Gulf of California
A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 7The natural ecosystems in the Gulf of California region have been
affected by factors like fishing, decrease in freshwater input,
sedimentation and pollution. Some economic activities haveresulted in a decrease of productivity of ecosystems. This can
potentially have negative impacts on local communities because
they depend directly on the availability of natural resources for
their wellbeing.
2.1 Overfishing and aquaculture
For many years, the artisanal fisheries in the region were
sustainable. As fish populations have decreased, fishermen havechanged fishing techniques in search of those that maximize theirefforts.High extraction rates and the use of gill nets, trawling
techn iques and longlines have all played a role in the rapid
reduction of fish populations, therefore risking the sustainability of
this activity (Ezcurra, 1998; Morgan et al., 2005).
As fish populations decrease the community structure begins to
change because as one species disappears or becomes rare, otherstake their place i n the commun ity (Morg an et al., 2005). Studies
have d emons trated that the abundance and density of some species
of commercial value have decreased in the last 30 years as a result
of the increase in fishing effort (Sala et al., 2004; COBI, 2005).However, this phenomenon is not easy to detect with the types of
data used by the state and federal governments because these
group v arious species into broad multi-species categories such as
“groupers” or “sharks”. When these data are separated by
species, then the effects of overfishing become apparent.The
disappearance of large predatory species (sharks and largegroupers) is evident, as is the substitution of these species by
species of smaller size from lower down in the food chain
(herbivores).
An example of a collapsed fishery in the Gulf of California is that
of the Totoaba 
(Cynoscion macdonaldi) , a species that today has
almos t disappeared. Populations of other species like the Gulf
grouper (Mycteroperca jordani) and the Leopard grouper
(Mycteroperca rosacea) show signs of over exploitation (Sala et
al., 2004; COBI, 2005). In the southern portion of the gulf, fishcatch compositi on has und ergone major chan ges -  large predator y
species like sharks, groupers and snappers were abundant in the1970’s, but were considered rare by the year 2000 (Sala et al.,
2004). Large predators and migratory species (e.g. marlin, tuna,
fin fish) have also decreased in abundance in other regions of thegulf.
The shrimp fishery also poses a major threat to the ecology of the
region because 90% of total catch is discarded as bycatch
(Excurra, 1998; Morgan et al., 2005). In the Gulf of California
shrimp fishery bycatch is made up of more than 100 fish species
and between 85 and 114 species of invertebrates. Among the non-
target species is the Totoaba, who is especially vulnerable during its
juven ile stage w hen it is caught dur ing trawling (García-Caudillo et
al.,2000). It is es timated that every year 200,000 tons of bycatch
are returned to the sea, while only 30,000 tons of shrimp are
caught (Carvajal et al., 2004).
Agriculture no lon ger expands towards the large inland valleys but,
through aquaculture, it expands to occupy salt marshes, coastal
lagoons, and es tuaries.It mos tly is d edicated to shrimp farming,
and the cons truction of thes e farms has resulted in coastal
modifications. This modification has resulted in a loss of habitat
that affects many species, not only the species that live
permanently on these habitats. Many marine species, like fish, usethese habitats as nursery grounds or during other stages in their
life cycle. Aquaculture also creates conf licts with agriculture
becaus e it needs g reat amounts of wate r;and with cons ervationists
becaus e it affects water quality and the state of coastal habitats
located near and around the farms (Robles et al., 1980).
2.2 Pollution 
Urban water discharge causes environmental damage to coastal
areas. Guaymas is a shocking example of a coastal city wherepollu tion pr oblems i n the bay have reached e xtreme levels (Ortiz-
Lozano et al., 2005). These residual waters provide sources of
nutrients for marine organisms including microalgae that exploitthe situati on and form large blooms. This increase in
phytoplankton biomass causes dissolved oxygen concentrations todecrease. In some cases, these blooms kill almost all organisms in
the area, if not all of them.

8| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIAAgricultural runoff has also become a major source of pollution in
the Gulf of California region. Pollutants are carried toward the
gulf from the United States and from Sonora and Sinaloa. Thecoasts of Sonora and Sinaloa are among the most productive in
terms of agriculture in Mexico. This activity is causing damage to
marine and coastal ecosystems because of the chemicals used. By
the 1950’s this type of pollution had already impacted the pelican
population on the islands of Salsipuedes, Las Animas and San
Lorenzo.
Shrimp farms are also sources of pollution because their residual
waters are often d ischarged d irectly into the natural environment.
Around 70% of the aquaculture i nfrastructure of the entire
country is located in the state of Sinaloa, which means that its
coastal areas, in particular lagoons, are constantly receiving large
amounts of water enriched with nutrients (Ortiz-Lozano et al.,2005). This can cause the lagoons to become eutrophic zoneswhere algal blooms are frequent and the possibility of the
formation of dead zones is high.
2.3 Loss of habitat
The coastline is a narrow fringe where the ocean and land interact,
and where drastic modifications take place as a result of humanactivities. These changes begin from the moment human activity
begins and changes in the natural environment start to happen.
The Gulf of Cal ifornia is not exempt from this phenomenon, and
there are plenty of examples of cases where economic activities are
in conflict with the well being of marine and coastal ecosystems.
Estuary and coastal lagoon ecosystems are threatened by the
construction of industries and tourist developments. The
deterioration of these types of habitats affects a great number ofmarine spec ies includ ing shrimp, mollusks and fish. These
developments are also likely to have negative impacts on the
migratory bird species that use them as feeding or resting areasduring their migration (Ezcurra, 1998). Los Cabos and Mazatlan,
considered two of the most important tourist destinations in thecountry, are also among the places that have suffered severe
disturbance (Ortiz-Lozano et al., 2005) as a result of thedevelopment that has tak en place i n ord er to satisfy the d emands
of the tourist industry.
© OCTAVIO ABURTO

A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 9The delta of the Colorado River is another example where there
have been significant habitat changes caused by the reduction in
the amount of fresh water reaching the gulf and resulting in anincrease in salinity levels in the water and the disappearance of
wetland vegetation. In the last 100 years the river’s water has
been used to irrigate agricultural land and for other human uses.
Wetland areas have varied between 5,800 and 63,000 hectares
from 1973 to1993 (Glenn et al., 1996). This wetland habitat is
important for threatened species like the desert pupfish
(Cyprinodon macularis) and the Yuma clapper rail (Rallus
longirostris yumanensis) . The decrease in the amount of water
reaching the gulf has also caused a change in the naturalconditions in what us ed to be an estuary-like habitat important for
fish repr oduction (Morgan et al., 2005). Changes in salinity
attributed to the water quality of the Colorado River have been
record ed on the nor thern por tion of the g ulf (IN E,1994) the area
where the Totoaba and Vaquita, both endangered, can be found.
Mangroves are disappearing at a rate of 2.5% annually on a
national level (INE, 2005).The cause for this degradation varies
depend ing on the area where the mangrove is, but sedimentation,
eutrophication, deforestation and changes in local hydrology may
have neg ative impac ts on the man grove forests. In many cases,
mangrove forests are cut down in order to clear space to build
shrimp farms or tourism developments. Water flow is veryimpor tant f or the d evelopment and health of mangrove forests, and
it changes when coastal areas are modified by the construction of
shrimp farms, marinas and channels (Conservation International,
www.conservation.org.mx).2.4 Tourism
Tourism can also have a negative impact on the natural resources
on which it depends. Infrastructure built to satisfy the needs ofnational and international tourists causes environmental damage
through the modification and destruction of natural habitats, waterconsumption, and sewer discharges. Highly developed areas like
Quintana Roo have attracted the attention of conservationists andthe community as a whole due to the severe ecosystem destructionthat is tourism-related. In the Gulf of California, tourismdestinations like Mazatlan and Cabo San Lucas are described asplaces where “extreme” changes of the natural environment have
taken place (Ortiz-Lozano et al., 2005).
Ecotourism has also had its impacts on some ecosystems,
especially those located on and around islands which are
considered to be the most vulnerable and fragile of all. Due to its
isolation, evolutionary processes have transformed the islands ofthe Gulf of California into ecosystems that are highly vulnerable to
the ecolog ical impacts caused by the introduction of exotic species,
habitat deterioration, hunting and fishing. Studies done in the lastyears have shown that introduced species, like rats, cats and goats,can caus e devastating damage to native plant, bird and reptile
populati ons (Ezcurra, 1998).

10| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA3 :: Marine Reserves, a special type of Natural Protected Area
Marine Protected Area (MPA), is a term that is becoming
increasingly common in the context of biodiversity conservation,
habitat protection and fisheries management.The term covers awide range of protection measures, with an equally wide variation
in the benefits conferred by this status. MPAs can be created for
many purposes, ranging from the protection of a species to a whole
habitat or ecosystem, to the protection of certain interests, such as
small scale or recreational fishing. Marine reserves are the type of
MPA that offer the highest level of protection and are closed to allextractive and disposal activities.
In the las t decade,marine reserves have become a favored
conservation tool of many conservationists and of the scientific
community (Allison et al., 1998). This is because reserves offer
new and stricter ways to protect ecosystems that cannot be
implemented otherwise, such as providing full protection for criticalhabitats and the species that live in those habitats. In addition toprotecting the ecosystem in its entirety, marine reserves can also
bring benefits to the fisheries in the surrounding waters and thushelp to avoid overfishing.
In Mexico, a natural protected area (NPA) is an area of ocean or
land representative of a particular ecosystem and its associatedbiodiversity, which has not suffered any significant changes caused
by humans and w here spec ial protection, conservation, restoration
and d evelopment reg imes are i mplemented (SEMARNA T, 2000).
Mexican NPAs used to be created based on laws that applied to
the logging, fishing and hunting sectors. On January 28, 1988, a
new law, the General Act for Ecological Balance and the
Protection of the Environment (LGEEPA for its initials in
Spanish), was established and since then NPAs are created under a
different set of laws. On November 30, 2000, the federalgovernment published a set of regulations that allowed the creation
and implementation of specific conservation measures in protected
areas. One such example is the prohibition of fishing activities
when the volume of bycatch is larger than the volume of the targetspecies (Bezaur y-Creel, 2004).
In order to adequately protect the wide range of marine species
and habitats f ound i n Me xican wate rs,Mexico must further develop
its NPA system, with a network of fully-protected marine reserves
providing the backbone.3.1 Benefits of Marine Reserves
Marine reserves are a conservation tool that can bring benefits to
the fishing industry, recreational activities and other activities thatuse, directly or indirectly, marine resources (Allison et al., 1998;
Gell and Roberts, 2003). Recent studies show that reserves canhelp increase biomass, abundance, and diversity of species that live
in them. Average biomass can be more than four times greaterinside a reserve than in an area that is not protected. Density andspecies richness can be double within a reserve than outside one;and average size of individuals can also be larger (Gell andRoberts, 2003; PISCO, 2002).
These chan ges have been obs erved in spec ies that are commercially
important as well as on those that are not. Protection from fishing
activity allows organisms to live longer and thus, reach larger sizes.
Furthermore, degraded habitats located inside a reserve will be
allowed to recover and become able to support a higher number oforganisms. This results in more species that will serve as prey for
more spec ies that are predator s, until the complexity of the food
chain is restored. Marine reserves are the only conservation toolused today that yields a cascading series of events that promote theentire ecosys tem’s we llbeing (PISCO, 2002).
Marine reserves not only bring benefits to populations living inside
them, but also can affect populations of species living around them.
This overflow of individuals can help maintain and restore
populations outside of the reserves. In the case of fish, some
individuals will leave the reserves to find places with lower
densities and, therefore, less competition for resources. The
overflow rate of larvae, juvenile and adults increases as time passesresulti ng in populati on growth.There are some cases in which
species only spend a stage of their life cycle in the reserve, and
then mo ve to other place to occupy other habitats (PISCO, 2002).
The benefits resulting from a reserve are easier to see on species
that spend their entire lives inside them. However , marine reserves
can also help protect migratory species (such as tuna, marlin,cetaceans, birds) if they are d esigned ad equate ly (PISCO, 2002).
Despite the long range of movements that these species have, entire
populati ons are h ighly vulnerable to fishing or other human
activities when they aggregate in specific areas to reproduce or
feed, or in migratory corridors, or in areas suitable as nursery

A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 11
grounds. In the case of many fish species, these aggregations take
place in the same areas every year making it easier for fishermen
to capture them, and thus harvest a large portion of the populationin a short period of time (Sala et al., 2003).
If a reserve is established in a critical or key area it can help
protect a migratory species of special interest during a stage in
which it is vulnerable. For example, protecting nursery habitats of
commercially important species can result in an increase of the
adult population, which in many cases live in other areas (PISCO,
2002).
3.2 Principles f or designing marine reserv es
If a marine reserve’s main objective is to restore and protect
biodiversity of an area while promoting sustainable fishingpractices, then there are several criteria that can be used to
analyze different areas and thus come up with a several scenarios
for a marine reserve network (Table I). There are models that canbe used to help analyze these criteria and the different options, andthey hol d the benef it of bei ng flexible enough to satisfy every
commun ity’s needs (PISCO, 2002).
There is a wide variety of habitats in the ocean, and each one
supports communities of plants and other organisms. Theimportance of protecting different habitats lies in that there is
connectivity among all habitats. For example, estuaries andlagoons are nur sery habitats for many species of fish. These are
places with high productivity, and so the organic matter produced
here works as a natural fertilizer on other coastal environmentswhen it is carried out by currents and the tide. Also, these habitatstrap sediments carried by runoff and prevent it from covering other
habitats like rocky and coral reefs.
As menti oned abo ve, many species use different habitats during
their lifetime. In the Gulf of California there are many fish species
that as adults live on rocky reefs, but the larvae travel with thecurrents and the juvenile forms are found in coastal lagoons or
mangrove forests. As these juveniles grow, they move away from
coastal habitats until they reach the rocky reefs once they reachtheir adult s tage. The ocean is f illed with spec ies with very
different needs, and this is why all types of habitats are important.
In order to support and protect this biodiversity, it is necessary toprotect parts of each habitat present in a region (Sala et al.,
2002).
© OCTAVIO ABURTO

12| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIATaken and modified form: Pisco, 2002Table I. Scientific criteria used for evaluating potential sites during the process of marine reserve design
Biogeographic
representation
Habitat representation
Vulnerable habitats
Vulnerable life stagesSpecies or populations
of spec ial conce rn
Reserve size
Ecosystem likages
(Connectivity)
Reserve networks
Ecosystem services
Human Threats
Natur al catas trophes
Social and economic
criteriaThe inclusion of different regions characterized 
by particular sets of habitats, environmentalconditions, and species
The inclusion of different types of habitats (e.g.,
estuary, rocky shore, kelp forest, sandy bottom)
Rar or threatened habitats susceptible to stressesImportant life stages, such as breeding, juvenile,
or migration periods
Species that are of economic or recreational
value, are globally rare, or live in small
geographic ranges
The area convered by a single reserve or a
network of reserves
The exchange of nutrients, plants, and animals
that connects many ecosystems
A system of reserves in critical habitats that are
linked by movement of animals and plant
propagules
Beneficial services that people use directly (e.g.,
removal of pollutants from the water , climatecontrol)
Human actions that endanger an ecosystem and
cannot be prevented or reve rsed by establishing a
reserve (e.g., pollution and habitat loss)
Events l ike large s torms,harmful alg al blooms,
disease epidemics, and climate change
Social and economic values expressed by
community members affected by oceanmanagementProtecting all biogeographic regions can help protect the
biological communities associated with each region
Protecting a variety of habitants can help protect the various
sepecies in those habitats, and allow them to complete theirlife cycles
Marine reserves offer additional protection to vulnerable
habitats
Protecting habitats where these vulnerable stages live can 
help increase abundance, size, and population growth rates
Protecting habitats where these species live can help increase
abundance ,size, and population growth rates
The choice of reserve size depends on the objectives for
reserves. Larger reserves produce proportionately greatereffects.A network of several smaller reserves may be a 
good compr omise
Identifying important linkages among ecosystems can help
locate potential reserves sites
A network of marine reserves protects critical habitats that
are us ed by plants and animals during differents stages of their
life cycle
Reserves should include critical habitats tha sustain ecological
services
Sites affected by human threats, such as pollution and coastal
develpment, are not likely to be effective marine reserves.
Other types of management may be necessary to control these
Sites subjec ted to frequent catas trophes are unl ikely to be
effective marine reserves. Multiple reserves in different
locations can reduce the overall risk from natural catastrophes
Social and economic criteria should be incorporated into
reserve design in order to maximize benefits and minimize cost.Scientific Criteria Definition Application

A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 13The design, number and size of marine reserves in a network will
be determined by both the environmental conditions and
socioeconomic factors. A species will be fully protected if itcompletes its entire life cycle inside the reserve. A large reserve or
a group of smaller ones located in strategic places can achieve the
conservation goals set. A large reserve may include a wide variety
of habitats and species, but at the same time it can result in
increased fishing effort in other areas. There are examples of
reserves of different sizes (from <1 km
2to >5000 km2) that
function favorably (Gell and Roberts, 2003). The key is todetermine the adequate size according to the magnitude of themovements of the species we wish to protect. It is also importantthat cons ervation efforts are ecosystem based, and thus all habitats
have to be repres ented with in the reserve network.
Economic conditions in some places may not make it possible for
the establishment of large marine reserves. However , a network ofreserves can be designed and it can achieve its conservation
objectives without compromising the economic wellbeing of localcommunities. This network can include reserves of different sizes
guaranteei ng connectivity between reserves through the movement
of org anisms. When reserves include different sizes and are
located at d ifferent d istances fr om each othe r we can ensure the
protection of species with different needs and characteristics. For
example, a network of marine reserves can include feeding groundsin ocean ic habitats and also repr oduction and/or breeding grounds
in shallow or coastal habitats.
To ensure that a marine reserve or network of marine reserves
meets its objectives it is absolutely crucial that all stakeholders,
including resource management specialists, government agencies,
biologists, sociologists, commercial and recreational fishermen,conservationists and community members are included in the
planning process from its inception so as to create the optimal
marine reserve network. If a reserve, or a network of reserves, is
not designed properly then it will not meet its conservationobjec tives successfully.
Greenpeace is proposing the establishment of a global network of
marine res erves that co vers 40% of the world’s oceans in order toensure that the whole range of marine ecosystems and the marine
life that they harbour are adequately protected and help secure
ecological sustainability for the rest of the oceans. Such a networkwould provide the cornerstone for implementing the ecosystem
approach. Greenpeace’s demand is consistent with that of the
World Parks Congress that said “networks should be extensive and
include strictly protected areas that amount to at least 20-30% of
each habitat.” Meanwhile, the United Nations Millennium Project
calls for 10% of the oceans to be covered by marine reserves inthe short to medium term with a long term goal of 30%.
In Me xico,different exercises have already identified important
conservation areas in the Gulf of California. Some areas have
already been declared NPAs, while others are in the process of
gaining that status. However , the majority of the identified areas
are not protected in any way.

14| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIAThe importance of biological diversity is widely recognized not only
for the Gulf of California, but also the rest of Mexico. As a result
of all the pressure natural environments are being put through bythe different economic activities that are practiced in the Gulf of
California region, conservation efforts have been focused on trying
to find ways on how to mitigate the damage (Fig. 2). Over the
years, the government has tried to protect and conserve the
country’s biodiversity with the creation of natural protected areas
of different categories such as: biosphere reserve, national park,sanctuary and area for the protection of flora and fauna, amongothers.The Gulf of California region includes 29 NPAs working for the
protection and conservation of regional biodiversity. Of these, 16
NPAs include marine and coastal habitats; seven protect islandsand terrestrial and coastal areas, while nine include marine
habitats (Table II). In the last 10 years conservation efforts aimed
at this region have yielded promising results since seven of the nine
NPAs were created during this time.
These conservation efforts have involved many participants,
including the Mexican government, NGOs and community members.
In 1996, the National Ecology Institute (INE for its initials in4 ::The history of the establishment of natural protected areas
and areas of conservation priority in the Gulf of California
Fig.2.Series of e xercises that identify the areas of significance for conservation in the Gulf of California region 

A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 15Spanish) recognized the importance of having a national NPA
network and, through the publication of a list of all NPAs in
Mexico, highlighted the need for updated information regardingconservation status of the established NPAs. This analysis was the
starting point of a movement that since then has worked to create
a network of NPAs that works efficiently through updates,integration of new i nformation and evaluation of established areas.
In 1997, a multidisciplinary group of experts started working on a
databas e of sc ientific data that would allow them to define the
areas of cons ervation priority in the Gulf of California. The
Coalition for the Sustainability of the Gulf of California was thus
formed and its main objective was to find sustainable activities andto create a fund that woul d allo w the creati on and i mplementati on
of an action plan. The Coalition began gathering information on
the biology, ecology, physical and socioeconomic aspects of the
region that woul d be us eful to define priority areas.It was clear that mar ine ecosystems were poorly represented
amon g the already established NPAs of the country. This, as well
as recogn izing the importance of having necessary information on
biodiversity and ecosystems in general, served as a motivation for
the Nati onal Commission on knowledge and use of biodiversity
(CONABIO) to establish conservation priorities, and propermanagement and sustainable use of marine ecosystems. In 1998
CONABIO organized a workshop where marine and coastal priority
areas we re defined.Table II. Marine protected areas in the Gulf of California that include the protection of 
marine and coastal habitats.
Area for the protection of Flora and
Fauna Cabo San Lucas
Biosphere Reserve El Vizcaíno
Biosphere Reserve Alto Golfo de
California y Delta del Río Colorado
National Park Cabo Pulmo
National Park Bahía de Loreto
Biosphere Reserve Islas MaríasBiosphere Reserve Isla San Pedro MartirNational P ark Archipiélago San Lorenzo
National Park Islas Marietas
TOTAL
Source: CSGC, 20041973
1998
1993
1995
1996
20002002200520053,785
49,451
541,636
7,111
183,711
617,25729,88758,4431,311
1,492,592Natural Protected Areas Date established Marine area (hectares)

16| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIAThrough the participation of 71 experts, 70 coastal and oceanic
areas were identified as priority areas for their high biodiversity,
the use of the resources found in them, and for the lack of specificinformation of each area. Of the 70 areas, 43 are located in the
Mexican Pacific, and for each one the experts identified the threats
that have the most impact on them. It is important to say that this
list of areas does not represent a thorough analysis; instead it is a
“reflection of the knowledge, experience and preference” of the
participating parties. Furthermore, these priority areas look tohighlight the problems, knowledge and most current proposalsregarding this matter so they represent a reference point andconservation tool for future efforts.
On May of 2001,The Coalition gathered 180 people in a workshop
that took place in Mazatlan with the hope of finding a consensus
on the Biologically Important Areas (BIAs). The main motivationbehind this workshop was to support a Federal Governmentinitiative that was to create a Marine Ecological Ordinance of the
Gulf of California. During this workshop participants identified 22marine BIAs and 20 terrestrial BIAs that together covered a large
portion of mar ine, coastal and terrestrial critical habitats of the
region. One aspect that makes this work particularly important is
the us e of soc ioeconom ic fac tors in determining the areas where
human-related threats are strongest. This allowed the
identification of areas that need immediate attention because ofthe leve l of threats and pressure on resour ce exploitation.
Participants also point out that there is no hierarchy among the
BIAs, but that their objective was to identify these areas so that
there could be a visual representation of the Areas of SpecialImpor tance f or Conservation.
This work drew attention to the use of socioeconomic variables
togethe r with bi ological and ecolog ical information during the
process of designing natural protected areas and marine reserves.
Of par ticular importance when designing marine reserves is taking
into account the effect they will have on fishing activities and so,since th is is a very important activity in the region, it is crucial to
understand that socioeconomic and ecological criteria are not
independent of one another .In 2002 a proposal for a MPA network designed to protect
biodiversity while assisting in fisheries management in the Gulf of
California was published (Sala et al., 2002). It is important tonote that although the authors use the term marine reserve they
are not talking about fully-protected marine reserves or areas
where fishing is not allowed but rather using the term as a
synonym for NPA/MPA. This exercise used ecological data of rocky
ecosystems and other important habitats. It aimed to protect 20%
of representative habitats and 100% of all rare habitats as well asareas with high species richness. To maximize the conservationobjectives, the authors sought for the protection of areasconsidered as larvae sources and nursery grounds for commerciallyimpor tant spec ies.Rocky areas alon g the Gulf’s coastline were
divided into 69 planning units and using an algorithm model a
network of MPAs was designed using the least number of units
possib le withou t compr omising connec tivity, and using only those
units where conservation goals were met. Sala et al. presented two
proposals: the first network maximizes protection based on
biological factors; the second network minimizes social conflict by
reducing overlap between reserves and fishing grounds.
On May of 2003 a meeti ng in Los Cabos took place and
participants we re divided into g roups that dealt with regional and
global subjects, and identified strengths and weaknesses of
conservation efforts on specific case studies. The objective behind
Defyi ng Ocean’s End, An Agenda f or Action was to create a g lobal
agenda for marine conservation and in which priorities would be
clearly specified. Case studies were chosen based on physical
characteristics, marine components, threat levels, political andlegal status, and conservation efforts dedicated to the area; one of
the case studies was the Gulf of California. Most of the priority
areas identified during this exercise are the same areas that duringthe exercise led by The Coalition had the most overlap of
information (Carvajal et al., 2004). This analysis however
establishes seven objectives that must be met if sustainability of
the reg ion is to be achieved: (1) improve the management of
marine and coastal NPAs; (2) enlarge the marine and coastal
NPAs so that at least 15% of the marine area is protected; (3)develop a comprehensi ve plan to manage and pr otect priority
wetland areas; (4) reduce the shrimp trawling fleet and improve its
fishing technology; (5) develop a plan that regulates the use of

A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 17land, coasts and waters; (6) redirect regional tourism activities
toward a low-impact and sustainable resource use; and (7)
articulate a common vision for regional development andmanagement.
With the hopes of contributing to regional conservation efforts and
to improve marine and coastal management, Comunidad y
Biodiversidad (COBI) and The Nature Conservancy (TNC) teamed
up to develop a new exercise to identify priority areas in the Gulf of
California (Ulloa et al., 2006). Even though it is not the first to
gather regional information, this exercise is important because it is
entire ly bas ed on spatial i nformation relating to the distribution
and d iversity of species, natural communities, and ecological
systems in the region. The main outcome of this exercise is the
identification of 54 priority areas, more than the number identified
in other exercises - a result of using fine scale data. These priorityareas cover 24% of the Gulf of California waters, exceeding the15% pr oposed by Carvajal et al. (2004), and are representative of
regional biodiversity and human activities. An importantcharacteristic of this exercise is that it is the first to include deep
sea habitats as pr iorities for conservation. Another valuable aspect
is its anal ysis of similarities with studies already done: 49% with
that of The Coal ition,43% with Defyi ng Ocean’s End, and 32% of
similarity with the Marine Ecological Ordinance of the Gulf of
California. It also holds almost 70% of similarity with theproposal pres ented by Sala et al. (2002). These percentages are
evidence that there is a scientific consensus on what the regional
conservation priorities should be.The process of establishing the Marine Ecological Ordinance of the
Gulf of California began on June 5, 2004. It consists of a program
that will help the government and society work together in regionalmanagement by generating, implementing, and evaluating public
policies that strive to achieve a balance between production
activities and environmental protection. Federal and state
governments (Baja California, Baja California Sur , Sonora, Sinaloa,
and Nayarit) are involved in this process. An analysis of pressure
and fragility was carried out to get an idea of the developmenttendencies in the region. Note that pressure is made up of twocomponents: pressure from land toward the sea, and pressuregenerated at sea. The fragility refers to various attributes likebiodiversity, presence of birds and species considered endangered or
under spec ial protection, presence of wetlands, among others. To
analyze vulnerability of the different areas at state and regional
levels,pressure and fr agility became i mpor tant fac tors to consider .
The areas where the highest values given to those two factors
overlap are to be considered of priority.
In general, this program seeks to integrate ecological sustainability
criteria with econom ic activities. It also looks to create a set of
actions directed to the protection of species, habitats and
ecosys tems i dentified as pr iorities i n ord er to conserve biodiversity
and at the same time ecosystem services of the region. Lastly, the
program aims to create concrete management and research actionsthat gene rate the necessar y elements for the design and
implementation of strategies that identify and prevent
environmental conflicts, so strengthening the regional decision
making processes.

18| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA5 :: Proposal for establishing a marine reserve network
Developing a regional conservation plan for the Gulf of California
is no easy task, mainly because it is a region where economic and
social development is dependent on the same resources that needto be protected. This paper does not intend to promote complete
protection of all the areas listed by the exercises described above.
We wish to highlight the ecological importance of these
ecosystems, and the value that the resources and ecosystem
services hold for local communities. We propose a conservation
plan based on the protection of ecosystems, important ecologicalprocesses, and of critical habitats that is compatible with humanuse. Our proposal aims to summarize and draw attention to theconservation efforts that have already taken place, while at thesame ti me encour age the pres ent adm inistration and society to take
further action.
This proposal includes priority areas located in the coastal areas,
the continental shelf, as well as deep sea areas, all of which areaffec ted by human activities and are characterized by having high
biodiversity and ecological uniqueness. The final result is a graphicrepresentation of the areas that are already under NPA status and
those areas that need to be pr otected (F ig. 3).
Our proposal includes a network that includes both fully protected
marine reserves and other marine protected areas (MPAs) where
different ac tivities take place (fishing, diving, ecotourism activities)
but need to be managed i n ord er to ach ieve sus tainability. Thisnetwork is at a suitable scale so as to encompass a variety of
ecosystems. Each MPA is perceived as an area where human
activity takes place but also where biodiversity conservation,including its physical, economic, cultural, demographic and political
components, promotes community development (Toledo, 2005).
Essential to the effectiveness of the proposed network will be the
designation of marine reserves of significant size within the larger
MPAs where all harmful activities are prohibited in order to allow
the ecosystem to remain in a healthy state. This way, the Gulf ofCalifornia will have a natural protected area network and a marinereserve network that will help in achieving conservation goals.
The final decision regarding the actual design of each of the
conservation areas belongs to the affected parties, in particular the
local communities that use the areas and their resources. It is
important to say that the network that we present here is based onthe areas already identified as conservation priorities in previousstudies. These are areas that have been identified several times,
and we feel it is time to take the next step and work to getunprotected areas declared as NPAs. Efforts should also be
directed to i dentifying areas within these NPAs that should be
declared marine reserves. Conservation efforts need to focus on
reinforcing coope ration amon g stakeholders, including local
communities, so that each NPA has its own management program
that addresses the environmental, social, and economic problems orconce rns spec ific to each area.

A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 19
Fig. 3. Proposal for a
protected area networkin the Gulf of
California
© GREENPEACE

20| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIACommunity management or co-management is “a regime in which
two or more parties negotiate, define and guarantee a fair
approach to describing responsibilities, roles, and rights regarding aspecific area or natural resource” (Borrini-Feyerabend et al.,
2001). In other words, natural resource management is carried
out by sharing responsibilities among state institutions, local
communities living in or near the NPA and that use the natural
resources found there, and by social organizations. In order to
achieve sustainability collective efforts need to take place,communities need to organize, suitable discussion forums need tobe available, and economic and political power need to be balancedout (Andrade and Ortiz, 2004).
Community management is not a new concept; many ancient
communities that had fishing and farming traditions managed their
resources in a way that caused little damage and based thismanagement in knowledge of the environment (Negrete and Bocco,2003). Through community management it is possible to take into
account wider environmental concerns beyond those relating to asingle fishery which will allow the maintenance of the natural
structure and func tion of the ecosystems and their productivity.
Ecosys tems are dynamic and are constantly changing so their
management shoul d be bas ed on on going mon itoring programs that
keep track of all elements. Community management is a process
that evolves and as such keeps identifying new objectives andelevating standards. As a result, community participation will also
evolve to meet these goals.
Marine reserve and NPA management must be based in equality
and social fairness, sustainable use of resources and initiatives
proposed or led by the local community itself. In order for this
management to be successful, particular values, interests andworries of eve ry participating person or party need to be
acknowledged. Transparency and equity are important and need to
be pres ent during negotiations, especially those regarding resource
use. Community members need to be allowed to assume ever moreimpor tant roles and responsibilities in this process. All sectors
have unique skills that are valuable and useful and that
complement each other if they decide to work together . It is also
extremely important to clearly establish the relationship between
the rights and responsibilities of each party involved in anyresour ce’s management.In order for the management of a marine reserve/MPA network to
be successful it is important for it to meet certain criteria that
allow for community management to develop. These criteriainclude: community property rights, identity, administrative equity,
transparency and activity reports and conservation within an
economic context.
6.1 Ensuring Community Involvement
To be effective, MPAs and marine reserves should be managed by
local commun ities rather than imposed and enforced by centralized
and bureaucratic agencies. To help with this, access to resourcesmay be assigned through permits, area concessions, quotas or , inthe cas e of f ishing, caps on catch volumes. The advantage of these
types of management tools is that they i dentify the rights and
obligations associated to the use or one or several resources. Also
regulations can be devised that place obligations on communities to
ensure that their activities are sustainable. This creates an
incentive for communities to gain the organizational capacity and
the political action that allows the development of conservationstrategies.
Implementation of these kinds of scheme may run into problems
due to lack of financial investment. Local users usually hold greatamounts of kno wledge of the area and its resour ces;however they
have limited possibilities of investment lowering expectations of this
type of cons ervation tool. The challenge is in designing a system
that meets the commun ity’s needs, in other words, something that
allows for the community’s quality of life to improve over time.
Many areas within the Gulf of California are beginning to show
problems caused by population growth and competition for local
resources. The way in which these resources have been managedhas created a s ense of i nsecurity amon g local users, who often
cannot compete against the advantages that foreign users have
over them. Protecting coastal communities’ access to marineresour ces as a means to help implement MPAs, will enable these
communities to benefit from the resources for longer periods oftime.This will create an incentive for them to strive for
sustainability in the use of those resources. Economic growth andlong term sus tainability for all sectors affected by an MPA must be
a focus point in management programs.6 :: Community management as the
basis for marine reserve management

A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 21An example of th is type of problem is what goes on in Bahia de
Los Angeles, in Baja California, where trips to see and swim withwhale sharks have become very popular (Box 1). However , thelocal community has not seen an improvement in their quality of
life becaus e of the lack of organization among users and economic
benefits going to outsiders rather than the local community.Rodríg uez-Dowdell (2004) proposes that a system where a
concession on the area is given to local community membersbecause this is the best way to maximize resource exclusivity,
guarantee the we lfare of the community, and develop cooperation
among stakeholders in conservation efforts.
Ensuring that coastal communities have access to adjacent marine
resources is a tool that can be used to implement effective marinereserves/MPAs and achieve conservation goals. Developing such
systems needs to be carried out hand in hand with the managementplan of the mar ine pr otected area and be spec ific to the community
and area where the MPA is situated.GBahia de los Angeles is one of the most productive zones in
the Gulf of Cal ifornia.
GFor ten y ears there have been ecotourism activities around
the Whale Shark.
GThe spec ies and its habitat repres ent a valuable source of
capital for the community. However , the quality of life of
people in the area has not seen improvement.
GThere exists a degree of capital flight in the area, since
many e xternal groups that offe r the same activities but do
not hire local people who offer the same services.
GA possible solution to this problem would be to grant
certain areas to members of the local communities fortheir use.
GThis mechan ism can lead to coope ration and represents an
incentive for the preservation of the resource since
exclusivity would be high, and the economic benefits wouldbe max imized.
Source: Rodriguez-Dowdell, 2004Box 1.Whale Shark Sightings in Bahia de los
Angeles
© GREENPEACE/G NEWMAN

22| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA6.2 Identity
It is important for MPAs to be considered areas where natural
resources interact with social factors resulting in an identity thatincludes the relationship of a community with the natural
environment (Andrade and Ortiz, 2004). To achieve this it isnecessary to identify all sectors affected by the establishment of an
MPA. This means all individuals that directly or indirectly use thenatural resources in a MPA, including individuals from the fisheryor tourism sectors, as well as community members.
Individuals and entire communities use the natural resources
surrounding them in different ways, and there are social, economicand cultur al fac tors that d etermine the way in which these
resources are perceived by these individuals. Indirectly, this causes
individuals to place a value on ecosystems and species. These
values can have serious implications on the way resources are
managed.
The way resources are perceived usually differs among
commun ities, and respec t for nature and commun ity sol idarity are
two key values that need to be kept in mind while establishing an
MPA and developing its management program. If MPAs that are
in the process of being established, and those that already are, do
not take into account the community’s perceptions, values, andinterests with respect to the natural resources, then they risk
failure (Ci nner and Pollnac, 2004;Toledo, 2005).
The main objective is to identify the natural resources that
repres ent the i nteraction of the local commun ity with the MPA
(Box 2). This means that species and ecosystems that give meaning
to the re lationship of i ndividuals with the environment need to be
identified, as well as the value of each one, threats and diagnosis
for its immediate future. Only this way can we “value” its loss,
recovery, or conservation for future generations (Fagetti andOlivera, 2003).
Furthermore, preserving local identity can result in the creation of
job oppor tunities. Commun ity membe rs hold advantages over
government officials for doing certain activities like enforcement
and monitoring. Since local communities depend on the availability
of resources, it is to their advantage to protect an area and itsresources. And so, it is necessary to have economic management
schemes that create incentives for the monitoring and evaluation of
the health of the resources.
© OCTAVIO ABURTO

A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 23GHistorically the economy of Loreto has relied on fishing,
however in the last few years the tertiary sector has gained
importance.
GThe zone was very important for the fishing of the mother
pearl in the nineteenth century.
GBahia de Loreto is a zone famous for its optimal conditions
for activities like sports fishing and traditional fishing.
GIn 1996, it was proclaimed a natural protected area.
GPopulation growth and the development of the region
repres ent a threat to the area’s natur al resour ces.
GThe fishing communities recognize the importance of
conserving the fish populations since these represent theirlivelihood.
GMany fishermen collaborate with scientists to the best
strategies for the conservation of the zone and itsresources..Box 2. National Park Bahia de Loreto6.3 Equity
It is crucial to recognize that by helping the most disadvantaged
groups related to an MPA we can promote their participation andthus improve their quality of life. Any development that results in
the improvement in the quality of life of local communities shouldbe considered a priority. Development programs should always
place priority on the local community before any outside parties orsectors experience economic benefits (Andrade and Ortiz, 2004).
It is also i mportant to recognize that economic, social and cultural
interests are fundamental aspects of any management plan.
Everybody’s participation in the management process makes itmore d emocr atic becaus e it g ives eve rybody the right and authority
to make decisions regarding the MPA. When the more
disadvantaged groups get involved in the decision making process,
management becomes more efficient in controlling ecosystem and
resource degradation.
Many of the activities that take place in and around MPAs, such 
as fishing and ecotour ism ac tivities, compete against each other 
for the same resources. As effort or pressure from one activity
increases, the resources needed by the other decrease thus
jeopard izing its future. It is crucial to find a balance between
interests and this can be achieved through dialogue and the use of legal mechanisms that allow fair access to resources.
Resour ce extraction inside marine protected areas is considered in
the administration plans because it represents a source of food,
jobs, recreati on,and econom ic we llbeing to local communities and
visitors. However , it is essential that resource extraction is done
through responsib le measures (F AO,1995). While federal, state,
and mun icipal fishing regulations should be followed inside MPAs,
it is necessary to apply regulations regarding the next three
concepts:
6.4 Creating marine reserves
Due to the overexploitation of many resources and the collapse of
the fisheries that d epend ed on those resources, it is clear that
fishery regulations on their own are not enough to restore
populati ons to sus tainable levels. The creation of marine reserves,
where all extractive activities are prohibited, has become a popularmeasure i n many par ts of the wor ld in order to let target species
populati ons recover . These no-take zones should be big enough to
allow for resources to recover without compromising the wellbeing
of those who depend on the extraction of the resources that arelooking to be pr otected.These types of conservation strategies
have begun to be implemented in the Gulf of California by NGO’s
like COBI (Bo x 3).
Closing an area to a particular activity can be difficult since many
people may depend on that very activity. While we do not
recommend converting all marine protected areas, or those thatneed to be pr otected,into mar ine reserves it is important that
MPAs include marine reserves (no-take zones) where no fishing is
allowed. Marine reserves will therefore be a core component of
wider MPA network and will work together to achieve their
conservation goals.

24| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA6.5 Protection of critical habitats
A critical habitat is a place that is used for reproduction, feeding
and as nursery grounds by many species, including some ofeconomic importance like snappers, groupers, lobsters, and shrimp.
Recognizing the importance of these habitats is crucial in fisherysustainability because the survival of commercially targeted schools
depends on the availability and health of these habitats. If thesehabitats are altered, either by pollution, natural causes or humanrelated causes, then their productivity will decrease.
It is ve ry important to determine the distribution of critical
habitats like mangroves, seagrass beds, macroalgae beds, reefs andseamounts. Management plans f or established M PAs have an
inventory of species; however they lack maps detailing habitat
distribution and ecosystem diversity. It is time to dedicate our
efforts to generating this type of information because by providing
a spatial representation of biological and physical information wewill better understand the dynamics that take place at an
ecosys tem leve l (Box 4).
Each MPA, and therefore all reserves, need to have its own set of
maps developed that include the species present in the area, the
eco-reg ions where they are distributed, their critical habitats, and
human related threats they are subject to. This will prove usefulnot only when trying to identify specific threats, but also when
creati ng a management plan that includes regional conservation
efforts as well as specific actions directed to each individual MPA.
While a regional approach is necessary to guarantee sustainability
of the entire region, it is equally important to have a more local
vision that helps identify and tackle problems from the roots,problems that i n many cas es are very site specific.GIn 2001, Comunidad y Biodiversidad (COBI) leads a new
project to develop a methodology for the use of No-takezones as conservation mechanisms in the Gulf of California.
GThe Bahia de Loreto National Park (PNBL) is one of the
areas where this methodology was implemented.
GFishing communities have responded favorably, creating a
demand for the implementation of this methodology in theareas where they work.
GThe kno wledge and par ticipation of the community is key
for the success of these zones.
GIn the PNBL, although the no-take zones are not the right
size in order to work effectively, the biodiversity and
abundance of spec ies has remai ned the same , while open
areas have s een a reduction in these two factors.
GIt is likely that the protection of these zones is allowing
these ecosys tems to become more stable and resistant to
environmental chances (healthy ecosystems).
Source: COBI. 2005. COBI. 2005. Diseño y evaluación de
reservas marinas en las islas del Golfo de California (A-1-
00/24). Final Report. Comunidad y Biodiversidad A.C. 39
pp.Box 3. No-take Zones in the Gulf of California

A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 256.6 Coastal and reef habitat restoration
The effects that human activities have on ecosystems have
compromised their recovery in the short and long term. Dredgingand removal of structural species (e.g. mangroves, macroalgae,
corals, and molluscs) have modified the natural environment andhave had cascading effects on the entire community. When a
community becomes unstable with low probability of recovering,restoration programs need to be put in place.
Historical information on these habitats needs to be gathered, and
species need to be rei ntroduced in accordance to their natural and
historical distributions. Regulation of human activities needs to beimplemented and a mon itoring program established to evaluate the
restoration process. This information can be used not only to
restore habitats, but also to identify the cause of the deterioration,
as well as the modifications needed to eliminate this negative
impact.Sargasso Beds
GThe leopard grouper (Mycteroperca rosacea) is a
commercially valuable species, both for commercial fishingand sports fishing.
GThe recruitment of juveniles takes place in Sargasso beds
(Sargassum spp.), in brown algae that forms in rocky zones
along the coastal strip.
GRecruitment depends on the three-dimensional structure
that the algae, like the Sargassum , offer .
GThe intensity of the recruitment is directly related 
with the abundance of ad equate habitat (biomass of 
the Sargassum ).
Source: Aburto-Oropeza, O., E. Sala, G. Paredes, A. Mendoza
and E. Balles teros. In prep. Predictability of fish recruitment
in a highly variable nursery habitat.
Wetlands
GWetlands are being threatened by water contamination,
urban d evelopment, aquaculture farms, among other
factors.
GThe deterioration of these habitats affects a large number
of species that use these areas during one time or anotherof their life cycle. Some of these species are of higheconomic importance, like some fish, mollusks, and shrimp.
GThis also affects many species of birds that use these
habitats for feeding or rest during their migration route.
Source: Ezcurra, E.M. 1998. Conservation and Sustainable
use of Natur al Resour ces in Baja Cal ifornia: An Overview.
Briefing Paper prepared for San Diego Dialogue’s Forum
Fronterizo series, San Diego Dialogue, San Diego, California,
October 1998, 15 pp. (available at
http://sandiegodialogue.org/pdfs/)Box 4. Protection of Critical Habitats Sargazo Beds

26| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA6.7 Transparency and activity reports
Marine protected areas should promote collective efforts like
commissions and associations (fishermen, hotels, transportation,ecotourism, among others), as well as support the cooperation
between public and private sectors. They should promote theformation of development agents that identify, organize, and help
community members, and in order to achieve this, the government’spolitical will is fundamental (Fagetti and Olivera, 2003).
For some time now, the Mexican government has implemented
programs that help structure a planning process that involves
society as a whole, and in which knowledge and technology can beincorporated i n the s earch for bette r use of natural resources
(Negrete and Bocco, 2003). Therefore, it is essential to strengthen
existing groups like the Sustainable Development Councils, the
Natural Protected Areas Technical Councils, and others that also
work to develop society’s participation like the Rural participationevaluation group (ERP), the Rapid rural diagnostic group (Negrete
and Bocco ,2003). These groups are formed by representatives
from the communities, academic institutions, and from thegovernment; this allows for more transparency in theadministration of natural protected areas.
These collective efforts should combine technical knowledge with
traditional knowledge in order to design an information system that
includ es: the area’s management, community administration,
regionalization and its uses, and the design of evaluation, training,
monitoring and investigation processes. This system should not
only consider the boundaries of the MPA/marine reserve and the
community, but it should work with a regional perspective of aMPA/mar ine reserve network.GThe perception of what is “natural” changes through time
and every generation has a different idea of what natural isbased on what they can observe around them.
GFishermen over 55 years of age recall that there were up to
five more economically important species, and four times
the number of productive fishing areas that have since
collapsed.
GThere is also a difference between older fishermen and
younger ones when recalling the size of the individualspecies they catch, these being larger in the past than theyare no w.
GThere are species that were abundant before that now many
of the younger fishermen have never seen in their naturalhabitat or spotted on r are occasions.
GExamples of thes e spec ies are the totaba Cynosc ion
macdonaldi , the gulf grouper Mycteroperca jordani , and the
mother pearl Pinctada mazatlanica.
Source:Sáenz-Ar royo,A., C.M. Roberts, J.Torre, M. Cariño-
Olvera and R.R. Enríquez-Andrade. 2005a. Rapidly shifting
environmental baselines among fishers of the Gulf ofCalifornia. Proc. R. Soc. B. (272):1957-1962.Box 5. Habitat Restoration

A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 276.8 Conservation in an economic context
Mexican natural protected areas are under management schemes
controlled by the state, with a hierarchical government, and highlystructured markets. The people using those areas do not have any
incentives to strive for the area’s sustainability, and instead look togain the most economic support possible from the public
administration. This leads to the exploitation of resources at levelswhich are not sustainable on the long run. Overexploitation is theresult of a failure to control extraction activities.
Recogn izing that “biological conservation is not simply a biological
matter” allows the creation of a new perspective on MPAs andmarine res erves,which from a biological point of view are
necessary to protect biodiversity but are certainly not enough
(Toledo, 2005). To make MPAs economically feasible we must
perceive them as productive units that generate vital benefits to
society that need to be recognized and valued, and that theirmanagement is subject to investments that cover its operational
costs (IN E, 1995).
The Gulf of California has great potential for local development
based on its natural and cultural resources. This development can
be ach ieved through the legal framework of marine protected areas
and marine reserves, using them as conservation tools to protectnatural resources, but also as attractors and market opportunities.
Regulated d evelopment of small-scale fisheries in the waters
surrounding a marine reserve or inside an MPA and the use of
commercially efficient marketing methods with certified labeling
are also conservation tools that promote sustainable development.
These strategies can link the revival of traditions and customs withthe d evelopment of new r oles that are not we ll known such as
tourist guides, environmental educators, or park rangers (Fagetti
and Ol ivera, 2003).
© OCTAVIO ABURTO

28| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA
7 :: Conclusions
GThe Gulf of California is a biologically diverse and culturally rich
region. The great number of unique species and the variety of
habitats make it a region of great conservation importance.
GLocal communities have a close relationship with natural
resources and the region’s development is based on the
availability of those resources. It is crucial that the region has
management and conservation plans that ensure sustainability
while promoting economic development.
GConservation efforts in the Gulf of California Region have yielded
promising results, however there is still a lot more to be done.
Several groups have already identified the areas of conservation
importance as well as threats and those areas where pressure on
natural resources is greatest.
GSome of the areas considered of conservation importance have
been d eclared NPAs, while some other are in the process of
obtaining this status. Efforts should focus on obtaining NPAstatus on areas that are not protected but are considered to beimpor tant. This will result in the creation of a marine protected
area/mar ine reserve network for the Gulf of California.
GThe management of this MPA network needs to have a regional
perspective because of the connectivity between MPAs and
resour ces. The administration of each MPA should be a
commun ity management and thr ough pr operties such as
community access to resources, identity, administrative equity,
transparency and ac tivity reports, the region’s sustainability can
be achieved.
GImpor tant e lements of the M PA networ k are the mar ine reserves
that need to be established within each MPA. Marine reserves
will bring benefits not only to the fishing industry, but to otherimpor tant industries like tourism because there will be an
improvement in the health of the marine environment. A fully
protected marine reserve network within a wider MPA systemwill allow the recovery of natural ecosystems through stricter
regulations including the prohibition of all extractive activities.© OCTAVIO ABURTO

A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIA | 29
© OCTAVIO ABURTO

30| A MARINE RESERVE NETWORK FOR THE GULF OF CALIFORNIAReferences
1. Allison, G.W., J. Lubchenco, y M.H. Carr . 1998. Marine Reserves are Necessary 
but not Sufficient for Marine Conservation. Ecological Applications 8(1):S79-S92.
2. Alvarez-Borrego, S. 1983. Gula of California. En: Ecosystems of the World,
Estuaries and Enclosed Seas. B.H. Ketchum (Ed.). Elsevier Scientific Publishing 
Company. Nueva York.
3. Andrade, F .B. y B. Ortiz. 2004. Semiótica, educación y gestión ambiental. Universidad 
Iberoamericana, Puebla, México. 212 pp.
4. Bezauri-Creel, J.E. 2004. Las Áreas Protegidas Costeras y Marinas de México. En:
Rivera-Arriaga, E., G. Villalobos-Zapata, F . Rosado-May, I. Azuz-Adeath (Eds.) El Manejo
Costero en México, Parte III Protección Zona Costera, UAC-UQROO-CETYS-
SEMARNAT.
5. Borrini-Feyerabend, G., M.Taghi Farvar , V. Solis y H. Govan. 2001. Manejo conjunto de 
los recursos naturales. UICN,-GTZ, Heidelberg, Alemania. 100pp.
6. Carvajal, M.A., E. Ezcurra and A. Robles. 2004.The Gulf of California: Natural resource 
concerns and the pursuit of a vision. In: L.K. Glover and S. Earle (eds.) Defying Ocean’s 
End.An agenda f or ac tion.Island Press, Washington, D.C. pp. 105–124.
7. Cinner , J.E. y R.B. Pollnac. Poverty, perceptions and planning: why socioeconomics matter 
in the management of Mexican reefs. Ocean & Coastal Management. 47: 479-493.
8. COBI. 2005. Diseño y Evaluación de recursos marinos en las Islas del Golfo de California 
(A-1-00/24). Informe Final. Comunidad y Biodiversidad A.C. 37 pp.
9. CONABIO. 1998. Regiones Prioritarias Marinas de México. Comisión Nacional para el 
Conoc imiento y Uso de la Biodiversidad. México198 pp.
10.CONANP .2006. (disponible en: www.conanp.gob.mx/sig/)
11.Conservación Internacional. Bioregión Golfo de California, Mar y desiertos únicos en el 
mundo. (dispon ible en ww .cons ervacion.org.mx/pages/archivos.html)
12.CSGC. 2004. El Golf o de California: Prioridades de Conservación. Informe Final,
Coalición para la Sustentabilidad del Golfo de California. México.
13. Enriquez-Andrade, R., G. Anaya-Reyna, J.C. Barrera-Guevara, M.A. Carvajal-Moreno,
M.E. Martínez-Delgado, J. Vaca-Rodríguez, y C. Valdés-Casillas.2005. An análisis of 
critical areas for biodiversity conservation in the Gulf of California region. Ocean & 
Coastal Management . 48:31-50.
14.Ezcur ra, E.M. 1998. Conservation and Sustainable use of Natural Resources in Baja 
California: An Overview. Briefing Paper prepared for San Diego Dialogue’s Forum 
Fronterizo series, San Diego Dialogue, San Diego, California, October 1998, 15 pp.
(disponible en http://sandiegodialogue.org/pdfs/).
15. Fagetti, C. y J.L. Olivera. 2000. Se necesitan actores y actrices. Revista Escenario 2 ,
No.1. (disponible en http://www.escenario2.org.uy/numero1/index.html)
16.FAO. 1995. Código de Conducta para la pesca Responsable. Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome. (disponible en http://www.fao.org/fi)
17. García-Caudillo, J.M., M.A. Cisneros-Mata y A. Balmori-Ramírez. 2000. Performance of 
a bycatch reduc tion device in the shr imp fishery of the Gulf of California, Mexico.
Biological Cons ervation .92:199-205.
18. Gell, F .R. y C.M. Roberts. 2003. Benefits beyond boundaries:The Fishery Effects of 
Marine Reserves. TRENDS in Ecology and Evolution . 18(9):448-455.
19. Glenn, E.P ., C. Lee, R. Felger y S. Zengels. 1996. Effects of water management on the 
wetlands of the Colorado River Delta, Mexico. Conservation Biology. 10(4):1175-1186.
20.Glover , L.K. y S.A. Earle. 2004. Defying Ocean’s End, An agenda for Action. Island Press.
USA. 283 pp.
21. Greenpeace. 2006. Reservas para el mar Mediterráneo. 56 pp.
22. Hambleton, E. 2003. Lienzos de Piedra. Arqueología Mexicana . Vol. XI, Núm. 62: 46-51.
23. INE. 1994. Programa de manejo de la Reserva Especial de la Biosfera Islas del Golfo de 
California. SEDESOL. México.24. INE. 1995. Áreas naturales: economía e instituciones. Cuadernos de trabajo #3. Instituto 
Nacional de Ecología. México. 50 pp.
25. INE. 1996. Reservas de la Biosfera y otras Áreas Naturales Protegidas de México.
SEMARNAT-INE. 314 pp.
26. INE. 2005. Evaluación preliminar de las tasas de pérdida de superficie de manglar en 
México. SEMARNAT-INE. México. 22 pp.
27. Katon B., A. Knox y R. Meinzen-Dick. 2001. La acción colectiva, los derechos de 
propiedad y la delegación del manejo de los recursos naturales. INTERNATIONAL FOOD
POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE. Resumen de políticas.
28. León-Portilla, M. 2003. Las crónicas coloniales sobre Baja California. Arqueología 
Mexicana .Vol. XI, Núm. 62: 56-61.
29. Morgan, L., S. Maxwell, F .Tsao,T.A.C. Wilkinson, y P . Etnoyer . 2005. Áreas Prioritarias 
Marinas para la Conservación, Baja California al mar de Béring. Comisión para la 
Cooperación Ambiental y Marine Conservation Biology Institute. Montreal, febrero de 
2005.
30. Negrete, G. y G. Bocco. 2003. El ordenamiento ecológico comunitario: una alternativa de 
planeación participativa en el contexto de la política ambiental de México. Gaceta 
Ecológica . SEMARNAT-INE. México 68: 9-22.
31. Ortiz-Lozano, L., A. Granados-Barba, V. Solís-Weiss y M.A. García-Salgado. 2005.
Environmental evaluation and development problems of the Mexican Coastal Zone. Ocean 
& Coastal Management . 48:161-176.
32.Partnership for Interdisciplinary Studies of Coastal Oceans. 2002.The Science of Marine 
Reserves.22 pp. (disponible en http://www.piscoweb.org).
33. Reygadas-Dahl, F . 2003. Historia de la arqueología en la península de Baja California.
Arqueología Mexicana. Vol. XI, Núm. 62: 32-39.
34. Robadue, D. 2002. An Overview of Governance of the Gulf of California. Narragansett,
Rhode Island, USA: Coastal Resources Center , University of Rhode Island. 15 pp.
35. Robles, A., E. Ezcurra, y C. León. 1998.The Sea of Cortés, A place with a Future.
PULSAR. México. 182 pp.
36.Rodríguez-Dowdell, N. 2004. "Asignación de Derechos de Propiedad: Caso de Estudio:
Tiburón Ballena en Bahía de Los Ángeles, Baja California." Presented at "The Commons in an Age of Global Transition: Challenges, Risks and Opportunities," the Tenth Conference
of the Inte rnational Assoc iation for the Study of Common Property. Oaxaca. México.
August 9-13, 2004.
37. Sala, E., Aburto-Oropeza, O., Paredes, G., Parra, I., Barrera, J.C., y Dayton, P .K. A 
General Model for Designing Networks of Marine Reserves.
Science. 298:1991-1993.
38. Sala, E., Aburto-Oropeza, O., Reza, M., Paredes, G., y López-Lemus, L.G. 2004. Fishing 
down coastal food webs in the Gulf of California. Fisheries. 29(3):19-25.
39. SEMARNAT. 2000. Programa de Áreas Naturales Protegidas de México 1995-2000.
SEMARNAT. México. 121 pp.
40.Toledo ,V.2005. Repensar la cons ervación: ¿áreas naturales protegidas o estrategia 
bioregional? Gaceta Ecológ ica.INE-SEMARNA T.México 77: 67-83.
41. Ulloa, R., J.Torre, L. Bourillón, A. Gondor y N. Alcanzar . 2006. Planeación Ecorregional 
para la Conservación Marina: Golfo de California y Costa Occidental de Baja California Sur.Informe Final a The Nature Conservancy. Guaymas (México): Comunidad y 
Biodiversidad, A.C., 153 pp.

© OCT AVIO ABURTO

A MARINE RESERVE
NETWORK FOR THE
GULF OF C ALIFORNIA
THE NEXT STEP IN CONSERVING 
‘THE WORLD’S AQUARIUM’
www.greenpeace.org© OCTAVIO ABURTO