# Archivo original: carting-away-the-oceans-10.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:49 -03 2025

Carting Away the Oceans 10

Greenpeace is an independent campaigning 
organization that uses peaceful protest and 
creative communication to expose global 
environmental problems and to promote 
solutions that are essential to a green and 
peaceful future.
Published October 2017 by
Greenpeace USA
702 H Street NW Suite 300
Washington, DC 20001
Tel: 202.462.1177
Printed on processed, chlorine-
free, 100% post-consumer 
waste recycled paper on a wind-
powered press.
Written by:  David Pinsky and James Mitchell
Edited by: Joan O’Callaghan
Design by:  Samantha Garner
Cover © Pierre Gleizes / Greenpeace
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to : James Mitchell, Samantha 
Garner, Joan O’Callaghan, Tim Aubry, John 
Hocevar, Maggie Ellinger-Locke, Deepa 
Padmanabha, Kate Melges, Perry Wheeler, 
Samantha Sommer, Graham Forbes, Caitlin 
Cosgrove, and Maggie Mullen.
greenpeace.orgGreenpeace is an independent campaigning 
organization that uses peaceful protest and 
creative communication to expose global 
environmental problems and to promote 
solutions that are essential to a green and 
peaceful future.
Published August 2018 by
Greenpeace USA
702 H Street NW Suite 300
Washington, DC 20001
Tel: 202.462.1177
Printed on processed, chlorine-
free, 100% post-consumer 
waste recycled paper on a wind-
powered press.
Written by:  David Pinsky & James Mitchell
Designed by:  Samantha Garner
Edited by: Joan O’Callaghan
All photos © Greenpeace
Cover © Ivan Donche / Greenpeace
To pressure national environment ministers to vote 
for (and ultimately approve) a progressive European 
Union Plastics Strategy, Greenpeace activists from 13 
countries hang a 50 meter “NO PLASTIC” banner from 
the Asparuhov Bridge in Varna, Bulgaria.
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to : James Mitchell, Samantha 
Garner, Jacob Hardbower, Joan O’Callaghan, 
Maggie Ellinger-Locke, Tim Aubry, John Hocevar, 
Perry Wheeler, Caitlin Cosgrove, and Maggie 
Mullen.
greenpeace.org

© Alex Hofford / GreenpeaceTable of Contents
Scorecard
Introduction
Companies Evaluated & Methodology
Plastics Are Devastating Our Oceans
Everyone Must Take Action
Retailer  Profiles
Glossary
Endnotes2
3
10
12
14
16
40
43

Carting Away the Oceans    22018 Supermarket Sustainable 
Seafood Scorecard0 - 39.9 40 - 69.9 70 - 100
80.4 #1
79.8 #2
71.9 #3
70.8 #4
69.4 #5
67.1 #6
67 #7
65.4 #8
64.1 #9
62.3 #10
61.4 #11#12 60.4
#13 60
#14 58.1
#15 56.2
#16 54.3
#17 48.1
#18 47.2
#19 46.4
#20 40.4
#21 39.2
#22 37.9


Carting Away the Oceans    3
Introduction
As fish stocks decline from overfishing, industrial fleets 
expand, and demand increases for cheap seafood, some 
companies are motivated to employ cheap or forced 
labor and to fish illegally.1 Furthermore, a convenience-
driven, throwaway culture is exacerbating a global 
plastic pollution crisis in our oceans. As our planet 
faces greater environmental threats, more and more 
people are coming together to demand real social and 
environmental leadership from corporations, and to 
create a better future. This moment requires marked 
action. As we have urged in every Carting Away the 
Oceans , retailers should use their brand and buying 
power now to create a different world for our oceans and 
humanity.
© Alex Hofford / GreenpeaceIn June 2008, Greenpeace published the first edition 
of Carting Away the Oceans , and evaluated 20 major 
U.S. grocery retailers on seafood sustainability. By 
documenting current practices and educating retailers 
about the impacts of their seafood sales on marine life 
and our oceans, we sought to raise consumer awareness 
and collectively encourage retailers to source only 
sustainable seafood. At that time, the vast majority of 
retailers were concerned with price and quality, not 
seafood sustainability. Unsurprisingly, all 20 retailers 
failed in the first evaluation. Ten years later, in this tenth 
edition of Carting Away the Oceans , 20 out of 22 retailers 
have achieved at least passing scores.
We would like to acknowledge the extensive 
contributions of Greenpeace supporters and volunteers, 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), scientists, 
governments, retailers, suppliers, and the press. Through 
dialogue, collaboration, and a persistent vision for a 
better future for our oceans, together we have achieved 
a great deal over the past ten years. Nonetheless, the 
work over this next decade is critical to ensuring healthy 
oceans teeming with marine life, where seafood workers 
are treated fairly, and coastal fishers are able to provide 
for their families without suffering exploitation from 
industrial fishing fleets. To achieve this vision for marine 
life and people, we must stay focused and act with a 
sense of urgency.

Carting Away the Oceans    4Timeline of Notable Milestones Since June 2008
Greenpeace has evaluated U.S. grocery retailers on sustainable seafood since 2008. This timeline highlights some of the 
milestones and accomplishments that demonstrate progress in this sector over time.i
June 2008:  Greenpeace releases its 
first Carting Away the Oceans  report. Not 
a single retailer received a passing score. 
Sustainable seafood was not even on 
the radar of many retailers, and orange 
roughy and Chilean sea bass commonly 
appeared in seafood cases across the 
country.
December 2008:  A six-month update 
of Carting Away the Oceans  is released 
to reflect swift progress by several 
retailers. Nine retailers drop one or more 
red list items, including shark, bluefin 
tuna, orange roughy, and Chilean sea 
bass. Wegmans  and Whole Foods  post 
new sustainable seafood standards 
online.
June 2009:  The third edition of Carting 
Away the Oceans  is released, with 
Wegmans , Ahold , and Whole Foods  
in the lead, and H-E-B , Price Chopper , 
and Meijer  in the back of the pack. 
Target  and Walmart  have both dropped 
orange roughy and Wegmans  asks the 
U.S. State Department to address illegal, 
unreported, and unregulated (IUU) 
fishing.January–March 2010:  Target  an -
nounces that it will stop selling all 
farm-raised salmon (which it unfortu -
nately reintroduces in 2017). Following 
a Greenpeace campaign, Trader Joe’s  
agrees to implement sustainability 
measures throughout its seafood oper -
ations, and stops selling orange roughy.
April 2010:  In the fourth edition of 
Carting Away the Oceans , half of the 
20 retailers evaluated receive passing 
scores, and more than half have 
sustainable seafood policies. Target , 
Wegmans , and Whole Foods lead 
the pack, while Winn-Dixie , Meijer , 
and H-E-B  are dead last. Greenpeace 
launches a campaign on Costco  to clean 
up its sourcing.
Early 2011:  Costco , Harris Teeter , 
H-E-B , and Safeway  discontinue 
orange roughy, three more retailers 
drop Chilean sea bass, and Price 
Chopper  discontinues shark. Following 
Greenpeace’s campaign, Costco  agrees 
to remove more than half of its red list 
seafood items, pursue better practices 
in aquaculture, and assume a leadership 
role to develop a sustainable global 
tuna industry. Safeway  and Wegmans  publicly call for a marine protected 
area in the Ross Sea. (Today, under an 
international agreement signed in 2016, 
this intact ecosystem is now protected 
from all commercial fishing for 35 years.)
April 2011:  Five new retailers receive 
passing scores, and only five retailers 
fail in the fifth edition of Carting 
Away the Oceans . Safeway , Target , 
and Wegmans  lead the pack, while 
SUPERVALU , Winn-Dixie , and Meijer  
remain in last place.
April 2012:  By the sixth edition of 
Carting Away the Oceans , Safeway  and 
Whole Foods  are the first retailers to 
earn a green ranking and the only two 
profiled retailers selling sustainable 
private label canned tuna. Wegmans  
ranks third, and the three worst 
performers are SUPERVALU , Publix , 
and Bi-Lo/Winn-Dixie . The sale of four 
top-tier red list species across profiled 
retailers has dropped precipitously since 
2008: shark (down 78%), orange roughy 
(down 75%), hoki (down 71%), Chilean 
sea bass (down 50%). A&P , Ahold , ALDI , 
Costco , Meijer , Target , and Walmart  do 
not sell any of these species.
Jun. 2008 Dec. 200830
25
20
15
10
5
0Number of Retailers 
2009 2010 2011
Carting Away the Oceans    4i In 2008, Greenpeace released two editions of Carting Away the Oceans . Since 2009, Greenpeace has released the report annually, with the exception of 2016 and 2017, when no reports 
were published. After having added six new retailers in 2014, Greenpeace has decreased the number of assessed retailers due to consolidations or bankruptcies.

Carting Away the Oceans    5May 2013:  In the seventh edition 
of Carting Away the Oceans . Whole 
Foods , Safeway , and Trader Joe’s  lead 
the pack in the green category, while 
Kroger , Publix , and Bi-Lo  continue 
to scrape the bottom. Walmart  has 
introduced FAD (fish aggregating 
device)-free skipjack and pole and line 
albacore tuna in more than 3,000 stores 
nationwide, and ALDI , H-E-B , Meijer , 
Trader Joe’s , and Whole Foods  have 
publicly committed to avoid selling 
genetically engineered (GE) salmon.
May 2014:  In the eighth edition of 
Carting Away the Oceans , the four green 
rated companies are Whole Foods , 
Safeway , Wegmans , and Trader 
Joe’s and the four failing companies 
are Publix , Save Mart , Bi-Lo , and 
Roundy’s . Every other retailer achieves 
a passing score. Safeway  and Kroger  
join more than 60 other retailers 
pledging not to sell GE salmon. Hy-Vee  
debuts in fifth place, selling sustainable 
private label canned tuna along with 
Whole Foods , Safeway , and Trader 
Joe’s . Greenpeace demands action 
from retailers on labor and human rights 
abuses and IUU fishing.
June 2014:  A UK Guardian investiga -
tion reveals forced labor in the sup -
ply chain of the Thai shrimp industry’s 
biggest supplier, CP Foods, naming 
Walmart , Costco , and ALDI  as custom -
ers of shrimp supplied by CP Foods.2June 2015:  In the ninth edition of 
Carting Away the Oceans , Whole Foods , 
Wegmans , Hy-Vee , and Safeway  earn 
a green rating, while Southeastern 
Grocers , Roundy’s , Publix , A&P , and 
Save Mart  fail. Costco  and Target  begin 
selling private label sustainable canned 
tuna. Whole Foods , Wegmans , Hy-Vee , 
Safeway , Ahold , and Giant Eagle  call 
on Congress to pass tougher legislation 
to stop IUU fishing.
December 2015:  An Associated Press 
investigation reveals child and forced 
labor was used in Thai Union’s shrimp 
supply chains.3 Kroger , Albertsons , 
Whole Foods , and Walmart  are 
mentioned as examples of where 
tainted seafood might have ended up (in 
either shrimp or pet food products), to 
demonstrate the significant risks for all 
retailers regarding poor traceability.
2016:  Greenpeace’s global campaign 
on tuna giant Thai Union is underway. In 
April, Greenpeace launches a campaign 
on Walmart  to improve its canned tuna. 
Several U.S. retailers continue focusing, 
or begin to focus, on canned tuna. In 
December, Greenpeace’s T urn the Tide  
report4 documents the risks associated 
with transshipment at sea, including a 
significant risk of products sold by major 
U.S. retailers being linked to IUU fishing 
and human rights abuses.2017:  In March, Mars and Nestlé 
announce strong measures to address 
transshipment at sea. Several retailers 
have released public shelf-stable tuna 
policies, including, Whole Foods , Hy-
Vee , ALDI , Giant Eagle , Wegmans , and 
Albertsons . Whole Foods  becomes the 
first U.S. retailer to commit to sell only 
sustainable canned tuna (private label 
and national brands). By the release of 
Greenpeace’s second U.S. T una Shopping 
Guide5 in April, ALDI , Giant Eagle , Ahold 
Delhaize , Kroger , SUPERVALU , and 
Southeastern Grocers are developing 
or selling sustainable private label 
canned tuna products. In July, Thai Union 
commits to a series of environmental and 
social reforms, that will transform its U.S. 
and global tuna supply chains.
August 2018:  Greenpeace releases 
its tenth edition of Carting Away 
the Oceans , where 90% of profiled 
companies receive passing scores, 
versus all failing in 2008. Whole Foods , 
Hy-Vee , and ALDI  hold the top three 
ranks as Price Chopper , Save Mart , and 
Wakefern  score the lowest. Amid major 
improvements over the last decade, 
new threats persist from labor and 
human rights abuses, climate change, 
and plastic pollution. The next decade is 
critical for ocean health and humanity.
30
25
20
15
10
5
0Fail Pass Leading
2012 2013 2014 2015 2018
Carting Away the Oceans    5

Carting Away the Oceans    6Carting Away the Oceans 10: Significant Findings
Following mergers, acquisitions, and bankruptcies, this year’s edition assesses 22 U.S. retailers with a significant 
nationwide or regional presence, including one newly profiled retailer (Sprouts Farmers Market, or “Sprouts”). Ninety 
percent of the retailers achieved at least a passing score. 
• Whole Foods  remains the top-ranked retailer 
following the release of its shelf-stable tuna policy 
last year. After Amazon’s  acquisition of Whole 
Foods , questions remain as to whether Amazon  
will follow the grocer’s lead on sustainable seafood.  
• Hy-Vee  (ranked 2nd), improving on shelf-stable tuna 
and with several advocacy initiatives, takes Wegmans’  
place near the top. Wegmans  dropped four spots to 
6th, in part because of its unfortunate reintroduction 
of orange roughy and its troubling  decision to source 
farmed Pacific bluefin tuna for special events.  
• By continuing to implement their policies and 
seize advocacy opportunities, ALDI  (ranked 
3rd) and Target  (4th) moved into the green 
category. Giant Eagle’s  (5th) years-long focus 
on sustainable seafood is bearing fruit: the 
retailer leapt six spots to round out the top five.  
• ALDI  (ranked 3rd), Giant Eagle  (5th), Wegmans  
(6th), and Sprouts  (8th) have public policies 
with requirements regarding transshipment at 
sea for tuna. Whole Foods  (1st), Hy-Vee  (2nd), 
and Meijer  (10th) are the only profiled retailers 
that fully source pole and line and/or FAD-free 
tuna for their own brand shelf-stable products.  
• None of the profiled retailers have major, 
comprehensive commitments  to reduce and 
ultimately phase out their reliance on single-
use plastics. Among the largest U.S. retailers by 
revenue, Walmart , Kroger , Costco , Ahold Delhaize , 
Albertsons , and Amazon  must urgently address 
their contribution to the plastic pollution crisis.  • Following its acquisition of Safeway , Albertsons  
Companies’  (“ Albertsons , ” ranked 7th) public 
commitments and advocacy initiatives landed 
it as the highest ranked among the nation’s five 
largest (by revenue) retailers, and the company 
is building upon Safeway’s  legacy of sustainable 
seafood initiatives. Ahold Delhaize  (9th) and 
Kroger  (gained seven spots to 11th) are close 
behind, while Walmart  (13th) dropped one spot 
and Costco’s  (15th) rank remains unchanged.  
• Newly profiled Sprouts  (ranked 8th) has 
a new sustainable seafood policy, with 
plans to source 100% pole and line shelf-
stable tuna and to phase out red list species.  
• Save Mart  (ranked 21st), Publix  (17th), Southeastern 
Grocers  (16th), Kroger  (11th), and Giant Eagle  
(5th) are the most improved retailers, respectively. 
Southeastern Grocers  and Publix  both received 
passing scores for the first time ever. Although 
Save Mart failed in this report, as it implements its 
new seafood policy, it should continue to improve.  
• While other retailers made strong gains, Trader 
Joe’s (ranked 14th) dropped seven spots following 
a lack of initiatives and customer engagement 
on sustainable seafood. Price Chopper  (20th) 
dropped six spots, underperforming on initiatives 
and transparency, while Wakefern  (22nd) dropped 
five spots to scrape the bottom of the rankings.  
© Pierre Gleizes / Greenpeace

Carting Away the Oceans    7The Modernization of Grocery Retail
Drowning in Plastic
Struggling to Uphold Labor and Human Rights StandardsThere has been a dramatic change in grocery retail 
since the last edition of Carting Away the Oceans  in 
2015. Consolidations continue and formerly profiled 
companies have either merged or gone out of business. 
Several trends are emerging in the wake of Amazon’s 
acquisition of Whole Foods, as competitors seek to 
remain relevant in this new era of grocery retail.6  
Retailers are partnering with delivery services to offer 
faster, even two-hour, delivery. Walmart acquired 
Jet.com, Target acquired Shipt, retailers from Costco 
to Albertsons offer delivery through Instacart, and 
Ahold Delhaize’s Peapod, which launched decades 
ago, is offering price cuts and promotions to remain 
competitive. At the store level, retailers are investing in 
modernized layouts, signage, and product packaging, as 
many open smaller-format stores for urban millennials. 
Some are also integrating tech solutions that offer 
convenient ways to shop and pay for groceries (e.g., 
pick up pre-bagged groceries, Apple Pay). A key strategy in staying competitive, employed by the likes of Trader 
Joe’s, ALDI, and Costco, involves a focus on private label 
products, especially as millennials and urban shoppers 
increasingly trust these over national brands.7, 8, 9
As part of this technological modernization effort, some 
retailers are working with organizations or companies 
that can bolster a retailer’s seafood traceability, to 
avoid unsustainable or unethically sourced seafood 
(e.g., Whole Foods, Ahold Delhaize, and Albertsons with 
Trace Register; Publix, Walmart, and Giant Eagle with 
Sustainable Fisheries Partnership (SFP) for its Ocean 
Disclosure Project (ODP)). While this is a welcome trend, 
Greenpeace cautions against the public relying too 
heavily on such resources for information. In the case 
of ODP , the data are all self-reported, focus only on 
wild-caught seafood, and even then, do not encompass 
the entire inventory.10 Nonetheless, Greenpeace 
acknowledges such efforts as a great first step toward 
greater seafood traceability and transparency.
Across the board, retailers are severely lagging in their 
efforts to tackle single-use plastic packaging. The 
equivalent of one garbage truck of plastic enters our 
oceans every minute,11 and with plastic production set 
to double in the next 20 years—largely for packaging—
the threats to ocean biodiversity and seafood supply 
chains are increasing. The United Nations (UN) describes 
it as a potential “toxic time-bomb. ”12 Single-use plastics are devastating our oceans (see page 12), and retailers 
must take responsibility for their contribution to this 
global crisis. Retailers in the United Kingdom13 and 
the Netherlands14 are making significant changes and 
commitments toward reducing or eliminating the use 
of plastics in their operations. It is time for U.S. retailers 
to swiftly and comprehensively reduce and eventually 
phase out single-use plastics. 
The year 2018 has seen a continued focus on labor and 
human rights in the seafood industry, including several 
reports from organizations like Human Rights Watch,15  
International Labor Rights Forum (ILRF),16 Greenpeace,17 
and Oxfam.18 Behind the Barcodes , a recent Oxfam report, 
even profiled some of the same supermarkets in this 
report across four categories: transparency, workers, 
farmers, and women. It found that all six U.S. retailersii  
profiled outright failed, and had “barely shown any awareness, ” in particular regarding transparency in their 
supply chains and gender inequality issues.19
 
Many in the industry are part of initiatives, such as 
the Seafood Task Force. While such fora can facilitate 
improvements, this initiative seems to have stalled out.iii, 20
For meaningful changes to occur in Thailand, Taiwan, 
and other key regions, the Task Force and its member 
companies must step up their commitment by 
ii Walmart, Kroger, Albertsons, Ahold Delhaize, Costco, and Whole Foods.
iii The Seafood Task Force’s membership covers a wide range of interests, from vessel operators to global retailers, which, given different objectives and concerns, may be slowing down 
its progress. Its governance structure does not allow for effective external stakeholder engagement, which prevents the Task Force from actually fixing problems faced by workers (e.g., 
eliminating recruitmentment fees, ensuring genuine and effective worker voice mechanisms, and using buying power to encourage the Thai government to enact legal reforms, especially 
for worker representation). For more, including recommendations for the Task Force, see endnote 20.  

Carting Away the Oceans    8encouraging the Thai and Taiwanese governments to 
make it legal for migrant workers to organize and lead 
trade unions, and to ensure that International Labour 
Organization (ILO) conventions 87, 98, 108, and 188 are 
ratified and fully implemented.21 Fortunately, other 
initiatives like the newly formed Fishers’ Rights Network 
(FRN)  are working to stop exploitation and abuse in the 
Thai fishing industry, and calling for bold action from 
the Thai government. Supported by the International 
Transport Workers’ Federation, the FRN22 is helping 
workers to organize and campaign to improve the wages, 
working conditions, and labor rights of all fishers in the 
Thai fishing industry.
In May, Greenpeace East Asia reported on systemic 
problems in Taiwan’s distant water fishing fleets, 
including labor and human rights abuses linked to 
one of the world’s largest seafood traders, Fong Chun 
Formosa Fishery Company (FCF).23 Many large U.S. 
retailers do business with FCF and should act quickly to 
evaluate the social responsibility and sustainability of 
any seafood supplied by FCF, including calling on FCF to 
make far-reaching reforms.iv Retailers must leverage their 
long-term supplier relationships—whether with FCF or 
another supplier—to improve problematic operations 
wherever possible. However, if a supplier cannot 
demonstrate swift and effective action to eliminate 
problems once they have been identified, then retailers 
or other customers should terminate their relationship 
with that supplier.Most eco-certification schemes either insufficiently 
address or outright ignore labor abuses and seafood 
worker treatment in the supply chain,24, 25, 26 and even 
social certifications have failed to create the systemic 
changes needed.27 Rather than doubling down on 
inherently flawed certification schemes or relying only 
on corporate codes of conduct and internal or external 
audits, industry and NGOs must reconsider whether this 
approach is indeed working. Greenpeace encourages all 
profiled retailers and their suppliers to aim higher and 
instead support ILRF’s call to action28 to hold companies 
and retailers accountable through legally binding 
commitments and enforceable agreements with trade 
unions and workers’ organizations that put workers’ 
rights, legal fishing, and environmental sustainability 
front and center.
“Certified” Sourcing and Troubling Policy Developments
While retailers have collectively phased out many red list 
species over the past decade, amid controversial Marine 
Stewardship Council (MSC) certifications of orange 
roughy and Chilean sea bass, some retailers may be 
eager to begin sourcing them again. Greenpeace strongly 
cautions against this potential transgression. Sometimes 
a species should not be commercially available, despite 
what the MSC or any other certification scheme says; 
most certifiers face strong industry pressure and 
have a financial incentive to certify fisheries or farms. 
While Greenpeace recognizes there is some value to 
certifications, retailers cannot solely rely on them given 
outstanding concerns.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 Meanwhile, in U.S. waters, trouble is brewing with the 
Trump administration’s repeal of the National Ocean 
Policy36 and the U.S. House of Representatives’ approval 
of a bill that significantly weakens conservation 
measures in the Magnuson-Stevens Act.37, 38 This should 
concern every retailer that sources from U.S. fisheries, 
and those retailers touting the strength of sourcing from 
U.S. fisheries in their public policies. Retailers must 
advocate for strong ocean protections and science-based 
fisheries management both domestically and abroad.
iv Such as the ambitious commitments that Thai Union made following a Greenpeace campaign. See www.greenpeace.org/international/press-release/7207/thai-union-commits-to-
more-sustainable-socially-responsible-seafood .
© Jiri Rezac / Greenpeace

Carting Away the Oceans    9Tuna Improvements and Challenges
Where We Go from HereFollowing a global campaign that included extensive U.S. 
retailer engagement, Thai Union responded to serious 
supply chain concerns (i.e., environmental, labor, and 
human rights). Thai Union, the world’s largest tuna 
processor, has developed a comprehensive new policy 
and program of change, demonstrating to the wider tuna 
and seafood industries what is possible if a company is 
willing to set a higher bar.39
In light of similar issues linked to its supply chains, 
FCF should now do the same. It is troubling that FCF 
touts sourcing MSC certified tuna (which, including 
the aforementioned concerns with MSC, only partly 
covers some of its operations) and has yet to apply its 
sustainability and social responsibility fisheries policies 
to all of its products. FCF must work alongside its 
suppliers to eliminate seafood that is associated with 
labor or human rights abuses. As one of the world’s 
largest tuna traders, this would help block tainted 
products from entering several key markets. FCF must 
assess all of its supplying vessels and prioritize auditing 
companies that are historically linked to IUU fishing 
or labor abuses. Retailers should move quickly to seek 
assurances and  evidence that the seafood they buy from 
FCF is not linked to environmental destruction or labor 
abuses.
The tuna industry is fraught with transshipment at sea, 
where smaller boats refuel, restock, and transfer catch onto 
larger cargo vessels. This practice is often used to traffick 
workers who have no means of escape, turning fishing boats into floating prisons, and enabling vessels to hide 
illegally caught fish and mistreat crew members.40, 41 Many 
retailers require tuna supplied by International Seafood 
Sustainability Foundation (ISSF) member companies, 
although this will not sufficiently address high-risk 
practices like transshipment at sea with longline vesselsv 
or ensure sustainable tuna.vi Fortunately, some companies 
are taking action, including Thai Union,42 Nestlé,43 Mars,44 
Aramark,45 ALDI,46  Wegmans,47 Giant Eagle,48 and Sprouts.49  
Retailers are also moving toward sustainable shelf-
stable tuna. In 2011, Whole Foods was the first U.S. 
retailer to sell private label sustainable canned tuna, 
and in 2017, it was the first U.S. retailer to commit to sell 
only  sustainable canned tuna across its entire private 
label and national brands. (Indeed, Whole Foods has 
effectively rendered the transshipment at sea issue 
moot, in that it only sources one-by-one caught tuna 
that avoids this problematic practice altogether.) In 
2015, six retailers profiled in this report had sustainable 
private label canned tuna products; today, that number 
has nearly doubled to eleven, with additional retailers 
expected to launch products in the near future. As 
retailers continue to make improvements on their private 
label sourcing, they should also demand improvements 
from national brand suppliers and traders (like FCF), 
address problematic transshipment at sea, and 
advocate for improved management by regional fishery 
management organizations (RFMOs).50
Despite the challenges we face, the past ten years have 
demonstrated that several retailers are willing and able 
to make significant improvements, to advocate with 
suppliers, governments, and industry laggards, and 
to take action—even when difficult. We will need this 
enthusiasm more than ever over the next decade, and 
urge retailers to use their brands, buying power, and 
influence to do what is right for our oceans and for future 
generations.
v Transshipment at sea with longline vessels must meet strict standards. Unfortunately, ISSF has yet to develop a comprehensive set of ISSF Conservation Measures to better manage 
transshipment at sea (e.g., 100% observer coverage for transshipments involving all longline vessels, regardless of length, limits to vessel time at sea), despite its own extensive review 
of the practice. See iss-foundation.org/knowledge-tools/technical-and-meeting-reports/download-info/issf-2018-08-transshipment-strengthening-tuna-rfmo-transshipment-
regulations .
vi ISSF standards largely fail to address overcapacity and destructive fishing methods such as the use of FADs and longlines. Its standards alone are insufficient to achieve the level of 
sustainability needed to ensure long-term tuna stock health or to mitigate concerns with labor and human rights abuses. Furthermore, ISSF is closely connected to industry, which has 
raised questions in the past. See www.greenpeace.org/usa/oceans/sustainable-seafood/how-international-seafood-sustainability-foundation-blocks-environmental-action .
© Jiri Rezac / Greenpeace

Carting Away the Oceans    10Companies Evaluated
& Methodology
© Alex Hofford / GreenpeaceThis report evaluates the seafood sustainability of 22 U.S. 
retailersvii in four key areas: policy, initiatives, labeling 
and transparency, and inventory. Each company received 
an identical survey reflective of the four scoring criteria, 
along with advance notice of the survey and context 
about this assessment, and was given approximately 
seven weeks to complete it. This year had a high rate 
of survey participation among profiled retailers: only 
Publix, H-E-B, and Wakefern declined to participate in the 
survey process.
Greenpeace also used publicly available information 
(e.g., websites, annual reports, industry press) to 
evaluate companies.viii While some profiled companies 
may have internal sustainable seafood initiatives, 
Greenpeace is unable to assess initiatives for which it has 
no data. 
Surveys were scored independently and consistently. 
After extensive review of independent findings among 
the scoring team, companies received a score for each criterion and an overall score (a weighted average of all 
four criteria). Each company profile features its score 
for each of the four criteria and its overall score (on a 
100-point scale). Retailers are ranked based on their 
overall score, where below 40 is failing (red), 40 to 69.9 
is passing (yellow), and above 70 is leading (green). Each 
company is encouraged to meet with Greenpeace to 
discuss its results and Greenpeace’s recommendations.
vii While several profiled companies have international operations (e.g. Walmart, Costco, Ahold Delhaize), this report evaluates U.S. operations only. However, Greenpeace expects 
international retailers to have global initiatives and develop consistent standards for every country where they operate.
viii For a majority of retailers, the information on stores, banners, and revenue is primarily based on data available in the Supermarket News  “Top 75 Retailers & Wholesalers” report. See 
www.supermarketnews.com/top-75-retailers-wholesalers/sn-s-2018-top-75 .

Carting Away the Oceans    111. Policy 
The policy score reflects the system that the company 
has in place to govern its purchasing decisions and avoid 
supporting destructive practices. To lead in this category, 
a retailer would need to establish and enforce rigorous 
standards to responsibly source wild-caught and farm-
raised seafood across its fresh, frozen, and shelf-stable 
categories.
2. Initiatives 
The initiatives score evaluates a retailer’s efforts 
to improve fisheries management through policy 
and market interventions (e.g., refuse to buy tuna 
transshipped at sea; take measures to prevent IUU 
fishing; advocate for reforms with RFMOs; require 
suppliers to source only sustainable, ethical shelf-stable 
tuna; engage suppliers to improve their operations; work 
with groups to publicly promote sustainable seafood and 
protect workers’ rights). Retailers that have taken action 
to assess and reduce their plastic footprint, particularly 
with regard to single-use plastics, earn bonus points in 
this category.3. Labeling and Transparency  
This score evaluates a retailer’s transparency (e.g., 
online and in-store communication, vessel- or farm-
to-shelf traceability). Equally important is whether 
retailers call on their suppliers to be transparent, 
particularly about where and how they catch or farm 
seafood. For customers, some companies present the 
data at the point of sale, while others opt to make the 
data accessible online. The best retailers do both, and a 
leader in this category would go to considerable lengths 
to educate its customers about the seafood they buy and 
the impacts of their choices.
4. Inventory (Red List)  
This score evaluates each retailer’s seafood inventory 
across 26 commonly sold species. Greenpeace 
benchmarked each retailer’s inventory against 
the Monterey Bay Aquarium Seafood Watch 
recommendations, and considered whether a retailer 
mitigates sourcing concerns (e.g., engaged in a rigorous 
fishery improvement project (FIP) or aquaculture 
improvement project (AIP)).ix 
Performance BadgesSeafood Sustainability Scoring Criteria
Category Winner —Awarded 
to each of the four category 
winners: Policy : Whole Foods; 
Initiatives : Hy-Vee; Labeling 
and Transparency : Hy-Vee; and 
Inventory : Trader Joe’s.Canned Tuna —Awarded to the 
three retailers that sell only 
sustainable private label canned 
tuna.Improvement —Awarded to the 
five most improved retailers 
(based on overall score, not 
relative ranking) since the previous 
report, in the order below.Wrong Way —Indicates the five 
retailers whose score dropped 
more than 0.1 points since the 
previous report, in this order 
from biggest to smallest drop.
ix Many timebound FIPs/AIPs can play a temporary role to improve operations and sourcing in more 
sustainable ways, and retailers can help ensure FIPs/AIPs are effective. However, in an industry with 
rampant overfishing, IUU fishing, and human rights abuses, sourcing of a problem species from a 
FIP or AIP is not always the solution. “Continuous improvement” can be a misleading, overused 
phrase by industry and NGOs to excuse the continued sale of a problem species with no solution 
in sight. Greenpeace advises retailers to not base entire purchasing policies or sustainability/social 
responsibility statements on sourcing from a FIP or AIP . The solution for most contentious species 
(e.g., orange roughy, bigeye tuna) is simple: stop sourcing immediately.

Carting Away the Oceans    12The flow of plastics into our environment has reached 
crisis levels, and the evidence is most clearly on display 
in our oceans. The equivalent of one garbage truck of 
plastic enters our oceans each minute.51 A recent study 
estimated that there may be more than 50 trillion pieces 
of plastic in our oceans,52 and according to the UN, ocean 
plastic causes the deaths of hundreds of thousands of 
marine animals each year.53 A 2015 study that analyzed 
the digestive tracts of fish sold in the United States and 
Indonesia found microplastic contamination in about 
25% of the seafood sampled.54 A 2017 study found 
substantial microplastic contamination in municipal 
tap water in every region of the world.55 Every minute, 
one million plastic bottles are purchased worldwide,56  
and with plastic production set to double in the next 20 
years—largely for plastic packaging—the threats to ocean 
biodiversity and seafood supply chains are increasing. 
The UN describes this as a potential “toxic time-bomb. ”57
For this year’s assessment, we asked retailers what 
steps they have taken to address their plastic footprints. 
Unfortunately, most retailers have done far too little 
given the scope of the problem. Walmart’s 2025 goal of 
100% recycled content for its private label packaging is the epitome of an outdated, ineffective strategy that 
many retailers currently employ. We cannot recycle 
our way out of this problem: less than 10% of plastic is 
recycled in the United States58 and only 14% globally.59 
As it slowly degrades, plastic becomes more dangerous—
breaking down into smaller pieces that are eaten by 
birds, whales, turtles, and other marine life; ending up 
in our drinking water, salt, and food, raising significant 
health concerns; and even contaminating the air we 
breathe in the form of microplastic particles.60
We can no longer afford to use plastic materials that 
last forever to make products that we use once and 
throw away. Throwaway packaging, straws, utensils, 
bags, and other single-use plastic items are choking our 
waterways and polluting our environment. That is why 
Greenpeace, alongside more than 1,000 organizations 
in the Break Free From Plastic movement,61 is calling 
on retailers to set ambitious goals to quickly phase 
out single-use plastics. Without immediate action, the 
increasing quantity of plastics in our oceans will have 
severe consequences for biodiversity and human food 
and water safety.
Concern about plastic pollution is growing rapidly. A 
2018 Ipsos survey on global views on the environment 
found that more than half of global respondents would 
reuse their disposable items to help cut down on waste.62  
Among American millennials, plastic pollution is now 
perceived to be a threat on par with oil spills, which has 
long been their top concern. Further, millennials expect 
action: 64% of millennials surveyed believe that we are 
likely to make progress in reducing the flow of plastic 
pollution into our oceans in the next five years.63
Many businesses are responding. In January 2018, UK 
retailer Iceland became the first major supermarket 
chain to commit to dropping plastic packaging from 
its own brand products. McDonald’s pledged to drop 
Styrofoam cups and packaging by the end of 2018, Starbucks announced it will be getting rid of plastic 
straws, and IKEA is phasing out single-use plastics. 
Bon Appétit Management Company was the first U.S. 
institutional foodservice company to make a public 
commitment, banning plastic straws, and in July, 
Aramark announced its ambitious plan to reduce single-
use plastics across its global operations.
As other retail and foodservice sectors take action on 
single-use plastics, U.S. grocery retailers largely remain 
silent. As the five largest U.S. retailers, Walmart, Kroger, 
Costco, Albertsons, and Ahold Delhaize have an added 
responsibility to act immediately; however, all retailers 
must move swiftly to address the plastics crisis, starting 
with public commitments and time-bound policies to 
reduce their single-use plastic footprints.Retailers Failing on Plastics
Consumer TrendsPlastics Are Devastating
Our Oceans

Carting Away the Oceans    13Governments at all scales are taking action globally. 
Plastic pollution tends to be a non-partisan issue in the 
United States, as evidenced by the ban on microbeads 
passed by Congress in 2016—one of the very few 
progressive environmental laws passed in recent years. 
California, Puerto Rico, and American Samoa have 
banned plastic bags, and a New York bag ban looks 
inevitable. Baltimore has outlawed Styrofoam, Seattle is 
getting rid of plastic straws, and other new laws to limit 
single-use plastics are being planned and debated in 
towns and cities nationwide.France banned plastic plates and cutlery in 2016, and the 
European Union is considering more sweeping measures. 
Plastic bag bans are in effect in more than a dozen 
African countries, and India and Costa Rica are getting rid 
of single-use plastics altogether. Taiwan has announced 
it will begin banning plastic straws and several other 
single-use plastic items by 2019. In this global climate 
of rapid regulatory change, a strong business case is 
emerging for corporations to come together and support 
legislation to phase out throwaway plastics. 
Over previous decades, plastic has become a very 
common part of our lives. Fortunately, there are several 
complementary approaches that can help move 
companies away from single-use plastics.
For many products, the answer is relatively 
straightforward: replace single-use plastic items like 
shopping bags, cutlery, and straws with reusable items 
made from more sustainable materials. Unnecessary 
packaging can simply be discontinued, saving money 
and avoiding ridicule from customers who do not want 
individually wrapped oranges, potatoes, cucumbers, 
or bananas. For most products typically sold in plastic 
packaging, there are alternatives in glass, aluminum, 
or cardboard. Better yet is the trend toward bulk sales, plastic-free aisles, and other new approaches to product 
delivery that do not rely on single-use packaging at all.
Bioplastics and biodegradable plastics may play a role 
in some cases, but often bring sustainability concerns 
of their own and have not yet proven to be sustainable 
alternatives at scale. Bioplastic implies that some or 
all of the source material is from plants, but carries no 
guarantee of sustainability—and in some cases still 
includes fossil fuels. Many so-called biodegradable 
materials do not break down at temperatures or light 
levels typically found in the ocean. Additionally, studies 
show that people are more likely to discard bioplastics in 
the belief that they will readily biodegrade.64Policy Changes
Alternatives
With alarming new scientific studies being published weekly, it is clear that our current reliance on single-use plastics 
is unsustainable for our planet’s health as well as our own. A major course correction is needed, and single-use 
plastics must be phased out. Greenpeace calls on retailers and their suppliers to take the following actions in 2018:Time for Action
1. Analyze.  What is your single-use plastic footprint? 
How much of each type of plastic do you sell, and in 
what types of products? Approximately how much is 
recycled?  
2. Commit.  Set an ambitious, public goal to reduce 
your company’s plastic footprint and report progress 
annually. Prioritize eliminating plastics that are rarely 
recycled, such as anything coded three or higher.  
3. Innovate. Invest in and test new ways to deliver 
products that do not rely on single-use plastics, and 
prioritize reuse rather than throwaway packaging.  4. Educate.  Let your customers know about your efforts 
to reduce your plastic footprint, and urge them to 
support these efforts by choosing products designed 
for reuse.  
5. Advocate.  Support public policy initiatives that will 
phase out single-use plastic items.  
6. Collaborate.  While some steps to move away from 
single-use plastics are clear, others are complicated 
and involve questions about the sustainability of 
alternative materials, such as carbon footprints, 
compostability, biodegradability, and water and land 
issues. Greenpeace can help work through these and 
other questions and encourages companies to consider 
additional organizations with expertise in this area.x x For more information, visit breakfreefromplastic.org ; plasticpollutioncoalition.org ; 
newplasticseconomy.org ; 5gyres.org ; storyofstuff.org/plastics ; no-burn.org ; asyousow.
org/our-work/waste/ocean-plastics ; Rethinkdisposable.org .

Carting Away the Oceans    14As fish stocks collapse, plastics choke our oceans, and workers continue to be at risk of labor and human rights abuses, 
retailers must use their purchasing power to bring about positive change for our oceans and seafood workers. Here are 
five ways they can lead:Five Ways Grocery Retailers Must LeadEveryone Must Take Action
Take action to stop forced labor, labor abuse, and IUU fishing. Retailers must improve traceability, 
transparency, and enforcement mechanisms to ensure that any seafood they source is free of labor and human 
rights abuses. This includes addressing problematic transshipment at sea, supporting legally binding agreements 
that protect workers’ rights, and calling on FCF and other companies linked to unsustainable or unethical practices 
to improve immediately.2.
Support initiatives and advocate for positive change for our oceans and seafood workers.  Retailers must 
advocate for policy makers to protect our oceans, improve fishery management, and protect seafood workers’ 
rights throughout the supply chain. Retailers can also encourage their customers and the public at large to 
pressure decision makers on these issues.4.1. Create a strong, time-bound, publicly available sustainable seafood policy.  Retailers with guidelines covering 
all seafood categories are better able to ensure that they are not causing undue harm to the oceans throughout 
their operations. Avoid seafood connected to overfishing or destructive fishing and farming methods. In most 
cases, a rigorous policy can help retailers avoid being lured by the purported sustainability of eco-certifications or 
the promise that every FIP or AIP is actually  improving the targeted fish stock or greater ecosystem.
3. Reduce your plastic footprint.  Set an ambitious, public goal to reduce your company’s plastic footprint and report 
progress annually. Prioritize eliminating plastics that are rarely recycled, such as anything coded three or higher.
5. Increase transparency through data, chain of custody, and education.  Responsible seafood is impossible to 
achieve without establishing strong traceability mechanisms. Traceability must cover the fishing vessel or farm to 
the point of sale, allowing customers to make educated choices based on all available information. Be transparent 
with your shoppers both on your website and in stores.
© Daniel Müller / Greenpeace

Carting Away the Oceans    15
As fish stocks collapse, plastics choke our oceans, and workers continue to be at risk of labor and human rights abuses, 
shoppers can vote with their dollar and let retailers know why they want healthy oceans and sustainable, ethical 
seafood. Here are five ways to demand change from major retailers:
Join the #BreakFreeFromPlastic movement.  Sign upxi and demand that supermarkets announce ambitious, 
public goals to reduce their plastic footprints. Take pictures of ridiculously overpackaged items and post them on 
social media, and talk to store managers about reducing their plastic footprint.xii 2.
Vote with your dollar. Do not buy orange roughy, Chilean sea bass, or bigeye tuna.  Use the Monterey Bay 
Aquarium Seafood Watch app66 to buy only green rated  “Best Choices” seafood. Ask how your supermarket is 
addressing concerns about forced labor, labor abuse, and illegal fishing. If you are not satisfied with its response, 
take your business elsewhere.4.1. Know the facts and speak your mind.  Visit greenpeace.org/usa/carting-away-the-oceans  to learn more. Bring 
some friends and talk to grocery store managers about seafood sustainability, ocean health, and workers’ rights.
3. Eat tuna? Make sure it is sustainable and ethical. Tell your supermarket that you want responsibly caught tuna, 
and express your concern if it is coming from suppliers that cannot guarantee sustainable and ethical products, like 
FCF, Bumble Bee, and StarKist.65
5. Eat less seafood.  Today’s demand for seafood far outweighs what can be sustainably sourced. Reducing seafood 
consumption now can help lessen the pressure on our oceans, ensuring fish for the future.Five Ways Customers Can Take Action
Carting Away the Oceans    15xi See the Break Free From Plastic website. www.breakfreefromplastic.org .
xii Read this blog and download the “#PointlessPlastic Toolkit” to get started. www.greenpeace.org/usa/campaign-updates/pointlessplastic-toolkit .

Carting Away the Oceans    16
Retailer Profiles
© Paul Hilton / Greenpeace

Carting Away the Oceans    17
 Carting Away the Oceans    17

Carting Away the Oceans    18
#1 Whole Foods Market
Headquarters: Austin, TX
Stores and Banners:  467 stores operating as Whole Foods Market and 
Whole Foods Market 365
Background:  Whole Foods is known for its natural and organic 
products. Amazon’s acquisition of Whole Foods sent shockwaves 
throughout grocery retail.xiii Whole Foods has cut prices and has 
begun offering a series of perks, including discounts for Amazon 
Prime members. Its FY 2017 revenue was $14 billion.67 
Greenpeace Comments:  Whole Foods continues its reign as the 
top-ranked retailer in this assessment. From launching its new 
tuna policy to continued advocacy initiatives for improvements 
in fisheries management, Whole Foods is remaining active on 
sustainable seafood. Recent reports have scrutinized Whole Foods 
regarding its lack of public labor standards (see page 7). As labor 
and human rights abuses persist in the seafood industry, Whole 
Foods has the opportunity to lead with the same tenacity as it has 
on sustainable seafood.xiv The retailer must also take action to tackle 
plastic pollution. While time will tell whether its recent acquisition by 
Amazon will affect future seafood-related decisions, for now Whole 
Foods remains the leader in this assessment.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  Whole Foods’ seafood policy requires 
that it buy only seafood that is green or yellow rated according to 
Seafood Watch, or is in a time-bound FIP or AIP . The policy applies to 
its fresh/frozen seafood, shelf-stable tuna, and any prepared foods 
that use tuna. Its public canned tuna policy68 is above and beyond 
that of any other retailer profiled. It is the only policy among profiled 
retailers that requires sourcing only one-by-one tuna (e.g., pole and 
line, handline, troll), and has traceability requirements that help 
ensure a sustainable and traceable product. A shopper interested in 
canned tuna can walk into any Whole Foods in the country, grab any 
brand of tuna on the shelf (private label or national brand), and be 
assured of its sustainability. This is no small feat. 
Another unique element of Whole Foods is that it still relies on its own 
standards for farmed salmon, other finfish, and shrimp, instead of 
relying on incomplete third-party certifications. These standards raise 
the bar for aquaculture suppliers regarding environmental standards 
and animal welfare.Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Whole Foods conducts third-
party audits to review its suppliers’ farmed fish, shrimp, and mollusc 
aquaculture operations. While it reviews IUU vessel lists to ensure it is 
not inadvertently sourcing illegally caught tuna, Whole Foods should 
also reference these lists for any wild-caught species that it procures. 
Whole Foods does not have a policy on transshipment at sea in the 
tuna industry, although because it does not source from purse seine 
or longline fleets, this is essentially not an issue for its sourcing. The 
retailer also signed on to a 2018 tuna RFMO advocacy letterxv calling 
for fishery management improvements. 
Whole Foods has been moderately active in reducing plastic pollution. 
It requires a minimum amount of post-consumer recycled plastic in 
the packaging for some items, and is actively considering alternatives 
for some of its in-store items (like single-use plates). However, it must 
swiftly and markedly strengthen its initiatives as the plastic pollution 
crisis worsens. Especially given Amazon’s massive single-use plastic 
footprint, Whole Foods has an opportunity to set the bar for U.S. retail 
by developing a strong, comprehensive policy to phase out single-use 
plastics.
Labeling and Transparency:  Whole Foods features prominent 
signage to inform customers about sustainable seafood choices 
and uses color-coded sustainability labels for each species in the 
wetcase. Through in-store flyers, brochures, and signage, the 
retailer communicates about various standards, including its own 
aquaculture standards. Whole Foods prioritizes transparency with 
its standards, publishing this information online and updating its 
customers and the public on its seafood sustainability milestones. 
Its private label tuna even carries a quick response (QR) code for 
consumers to use to learn more about the tuna’s sourcing. This 
approach could be used to share more data about other products, 
further increasing Whole Foods’ performance in this category.
Inventory:  Despite its robust seafood standards, Whole Foods’ desire 
to carry a wide selection of species continues to affect its inventory 
score. For example, instead of refusing to carry Chilean sea bass, 
Whole Foods sells an MSC certified product. While Whole Foods is 
certainly not the only retailer to use this loophole, it is disappointing 
to see an industry leader in so many other areas continue to use 
this strategy with such a sensitive species. Whole Foods should also 
discontinue bigeye tuna.
xiii For purposes of this report, Whole Foods is still being evaluated as its own entity.
xiv Whole Foods should heed the call from labor groups like ILRF and support legally binding agreements for seafood workers’ rights.
xv Henceforth called “the 2018 tuna RFMO letter. ” This refers to a letter sponsored by a coalition of NGOs (the NGO Tuna Forum), which was first submitted to key RFMOs in May 2018, 
and will continue to accumulate business and NGO signatories throughout 2018. For more, see www.seafoodsource.com/news/environment-sustainability/118-organizations-make-
sustainability-appeal-for-global-tuna-fisheries . 

Carting Away the Oceans    19
Headquarters:  West Des Moines, IA
Stores and Banners:  245 stores operating as Hy-Vee and Hy-Vee 
Drugstore
Background:  Hy-Vee is an employee-owned company with stores 
located in the Midwest. Its FY 2017 revenue was $10 billion.
Greenpeace Comments: This Midwest retailer continues its rapid 
ascent in the rankings, and has moved ahead of Wegmans into 
second place. Hy-Vee was the category winner for the initiatives and 
the transparency categories. Hy-Vee has released a shelf-stable tuna 
policy, has finished converting all of its private label canned tuna to 
be sustainably sourced, and is investigating the concerns associated 
with transshipment at sea. Greenpeace encourages Hy-Vee to quickly 
complete its work to ensure, like Whole Foods, that all shelf-stable 
tuna sold in its stores is sustainable. Hy-Vee should build on its zero-
waste initiatives to release strong public commitments and a policy 
to tackle single-use plastics, and join labor organizations like ILRF to 
support legally binding agreements for workers’ rights in the seafood 
industry.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  Hy-Vee’s seafood policy requires that it 
source only seafood that is green or yellow rated according to Seafood 
Watch, from a certified equivalent, or in a time-bound FIP or AIP . The 
policy encompasses its fresh and frozen seafood, shelf-stable, sushi, 
and deli categories. Since December 2017, Hy-Vee has sold only 
sustainable private label tuna (e.g., pole and line, FAD-free),69 and is 
currently working with its NGO partner FishWise on plans to ensure 
that any national tuna brands sold in stores also meet its policy. Given 
the relative strength of its shelf-stable tuna policy, it is odd that Hy-
Vee has a preferential sourcing requirement of ISSF participating 
companies, which would not ensure Hy-Vee receives sustainable, 
ethical shelf-stable tuna (see page 9). Hy-Vee should seek to emulate 
Whole Foods’ policy,70 only source one-by-one caught tuna, and stick 
with its stronger policy standards that go beyond ISSF’s insufficient 
supplier requirements. While Hy-Vee appears to have extensive 
internal social standards, in contrast to some other top-five ranked 
retailers, Hy-Vee lacks a comprehensive public policy regarding labor 
and human rights.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Hy-Vee conducts supply chain 
audits to determine whether its products are in compliance with its 
sustainability, traceability, and IUU fishing/social risk standards. The 
retailer relies on the combined Trygg Mat Tracking IUU vessel list71 to identify whether the listed vessels are linked to its supply chains. Hy-
Vee is currently considering its approach to addressing transshipment 
at sea in the tuna industry, and signed the 2018 tuna RFMO letter, 
building on years of calling for improved RFMO fisheries management. 
To further integrate its focus on ethical seafood procurement, Hy-Vee 
should support ILRF’s call to action for legally binding agreements 
that protect seafood workers’ rights (see pages 7–8). 
In conjunction with its distribution subsidiary Perishable Distributors 
of Iowa, Hy-Vee has focused on waste reduction, including plastics 
recycling and encouraging its customers to use reusable bags. 
Because recycling alone will not solve the global plastic pollution 
crisis, Greenpeace urges Hy-Vee to build on its sustainable seafood 
leadership and announce bold commitments to phase out single-use 
plastics in its operations.
Labeling and Transparency:  Hy-Vee’s Seafoodies blog72 educates 
its customers on sustainable seafood and even advises them which 
species to avoid (e.g., Chilean sea bass). On multiple industry 
conference panels, Hy-Vee representatives make a concerted 
effort to explain to others in the industry why sustainability makes 
business sense, and to urge action among their peers. In stores, its 
staff is trained to answer sustainability questions. Hy-Vee places a 
“Responsible Choice” label on service cases, the frozen section, sushi 
bars, in-store restaurants, and the canned tuna aisle for products that 
are green or yellow rated by Seafood Watch or a certified equivalent. 
Hy-Vee can improve by providing additional traceability labeling at 
the point of sale, whether on the packaging itself, through signage, or 
in other displays.
Inventory: Greenpeace commends Hy-Vee for avoiding Chilean sea 
bass for sustainability reasons, and communicating this policy to its 
customers.73 Other top-five retailers Whole Foods and Giant Eagle 
should take note of this leadership. According to its seafood policy, 
Hy-Vee works to mitigate concerns associated with its wild-caught 
and farmed sourcing, which it employs with Atlantic cod, for example. 
However, Hy-Vee’s reintroduction of Atlantic cod and the need to 
improve its pangasius sourcing precipitated a drop in its inventory 
score. As Hy-Vee works to improve the sustainability of national 
canned tuna brands sold in its stores, it should also ensure that any 
salmon and shrimp sold is green rated by Seafood Watch.#2 Hy-Vee

Carting Away the Oceans    20
Headquarters: Batavia, IL
Stores and Banners: 1,695 stores operating as ALDI
Background:  ALDI US (“ALDI”) is a rapidly expanding discount chain 
that sells mostly private label products, and is owned by German 
parent company ALDI Süd. Its FY 2017 revenue was $16.8 billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  ALDI made enough progress this year to 
earn a spot in the green category. Greenpeace applauds the retailer 
for this first-time achievement. Since the last assessment, ALDI has 
been busy: it released a comprehensive shelf-stable tuna policy, 
launched a sustainable line of private label canned tuna, and has 
advocated for tuna fisheries management improvements. ALDI should 
continue to improve its tuna procurement, especially its longline 
caught albacore, as well as strengthen its farmed salmon and shrimp 
sourcing. Like every profiled retailer, ALDI needs a comprehensive 
policy to phase out single-use plastics and should build on its social 
compliance policies by joining ILRF’s call to action for legally binding 
agreements to protect seafood workers’ rights.
Sustainable Seafood Policy: ALDI has a public policy that covers 
its seafood storewide. It consults FishSource to inform its sourcing, 
particularly for its wild-caught assortment, and it will only source 
from FIPs that achieve an A, B, or C rating as assessed by SFP . ALDI 
may preferentially source MSC or Best Aquaculture Practices (BAP) 
certified products, and for shelf-stable tuna, its policy requires 
preferential sourcing of pole and line or FAD-free tuna. While ALDI also 
preferentially sources albacore from mitigated longlines (e.g., circle 
hooks), this alone will not comprehensively guarantee sustainability, 
as noted in an SFP guide on longline bycatch mitigation.74 And given 
concerns with transshipment at sea (see page 9), ALDI would fare 
better to switch to pole and line tuna altogether. ALDI could benefit 
from strengthening its policy so that it sells only sustainably caught 
tuna storewide, which should be easier to accomplish because it 
does not sell any national tuna brands. Such a move would put ALDI 
shoulder to shoulder with Whole Foods on selling only  sustainable  
canned tuna; no shopper could mistakenly purchase a can of 
destructively caught tuna.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  ALDI was among the first U.S. 
retailers to release a public shelf-stable tuna policy. ALDI permits 
transshipment at sea only with 100% observer coverage, and signed the 2018 tuna RFMO letter. Greenpeace commends ALDI on its social 
standards, which are publicly available and more robust than those of 
most retailers. As a signatory of the Accord on Fire and Building Safety 
in Bangladesh,75 this suggests that ALDI recognizes the value of legally 
binding agreements between businesses, NGOs, and labor unions to 
improve workers’ safety and rights. Given that social certifications 
and initiatives like the Seafood Task Force alone will not create the 
transformation needed, Greenpeace urges ALDI to build on its work 
in the textile industry and join ILRF’s call to action for legally binding 
agreements in the seafood industry (see pages 7–8). 
ALDI appears to be in the early stages of developing a larger strategy 
to address single-use plastics, which is encouraging because U.S. 
retailers need to quickly address the plastics crisis. Especially given 
its business model focused on private label products, ALDI has the 
potential to markedly reduce its reliance on single-use plastics and 
set the bar for other retailers to follow.
Labeling and Transparency:  ALDI leads among profiled retailers 
regarding on-package labeling of seafood products: it communicates 
to customers the species’ scientific name, catch or production 
method, and Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) catch area (if 
applicable). ALDI should publish this information on its website or 
elsewhere online. For example, other retailers like Publix, Walmart, 
and Giant Eagle have opted to provide some of their wild-caught 
sourcing data online via ODP . ALDI could go further by also disclosing 
its farmed sourcing data, and ensuring data for all of its seafood sold 
in stores are available through this resource.
Inventory:  ALDI is among the top performers in this category, in 
part because it carries a limited variety of seafood. It also tends to 
source certified products, which can sometimes help mitigate issues 
associated with species like shrimp and farmed salmon. However, 
no certification fully addresses the environmental issues associated 
with these species. Furthermore, most popular certification schemes 
ignore or ineffectively address serious labor and human rights 
concerns in seafood supply chains (see page 8). ALDI sells both pole 
and line and FAD-free skipjack tuna, and its yellowfin tuna is either 
handline caught or FAD-free. ALDI needs to improve its albacore tuna 
sourcing immediately.#3 ALDI


Carting Away the Oceans    21
Headquarters:  Minneapolis, MN
Stores and Banners:  1,834 stores operating as Target, CityTarget, and 
TargetExpress
Background:  Target continues to invest in its grocery division, 
acquiring Shipt to better compete in online grocery delivery as 
it spends $1 billion to modernize stores. Its FY 2017 revenue (for 
consumables) was approximately $30.9 billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  Since 2010, Target had one constant 
source of pride: unlike every other profiled retailer, it never buckled 
under industry pressure to sell farmed salmon, instead carrying only 
sustainably caught wild salmon. Until now. Since the last survey 
Target has quietly begun selling farmed salmon once again. Industrial-
farmed salmon is a dirty business,76, 77 and unfortunately Target is 
once again a customer. Due to improvements in other areas, Target’s 
overall score improved slightly from the last assessment, enough to 
push it from 5th place to 4th place. To remain in the top five, Target 
has to improve its seafood procurement, tackle plastic pollution, and 
ensure workers’ rights throughout its supply chains.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  In November 2017, Target expanded its 
publicly available sustainable seafood policy to include shelf-stable 
tuna and sushi. Target is working with its NGO partner FishWise to 
develop a strategy and timeline to transition its unsustainable shelf-
stable tuna products to sources that meet its policy. The retailer 
requires that its seafood be green or yellow rated according to 
Seafood Watch, from a certified equivalent, or in a “credible, ‘time-
bound improvement process. ’”78 All of Target’s farmed seafood is 
either BAP or Aquaculture Stewardship Council (ASC) certified. 
Despite Target’s public commitment to not sell GE seafood, it is 
unclear whether this policy applies only to its private label Simply 
Balanced products, or also to national brands.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Target relies on internal and 
external audits to assess its supply chain, and is involved in various 
industry-led fora to address seafood traceability and human rights abuses in the seafood industry,xvi though doubts remain as to the 
effectiveness of these bodies. To help make transformative changes 
in the global seafood industry, Target should embrace ILRF’s 
call to action for legally binding agreements to protect seafood 
workers’ rights (see pages 7–8). Target is currently investigating the 
issues associated with transshipment at sea in the tuna industry. 
Greenpeace urges Target to require strong supplier standards if it 
opts to continue sourcing transshipped tuna, and not to outsource 
its position to insufficient standards such as ISSF (see page 9). Target 
has joined a growing number of businesses and NGOs calling on tuna 
RFMOs to improve their fisheries management. 
Target has a guideline to avoid using polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and is 
working to eliminate polystyrene packaging in its own brands. The 
retailer must significantly ramp up its efforts to phase out single-use 
plastic packaging to more effectively mitigate its role in the global 
plastics crisis.
Labeling and Transparency:  Target has improved in this category 
since the last assessment, though it is not fully on par with its higher 
scores in the other categories. Target has finally devoted some on-
package labeling and in-store signage to sustainability messaging. 
As the retailer continues to focus on traceability and ethical supply 
chains, it should also make a point to communicate to the public 
updates regarding these initiatives, like it does on its progress toward 
compliance with its seafood policy.
Inventory:  Target dropped in this category following the last 
assessment, reflecting its regrettable decision to reintroduce farmed 
salmon. Target should discontinue farmed salmon, and stick with 
wild-caught salmon. Fortunately, the company does not sell red list 
species such as orange roughy or Chilean sea bass. As some retailers 
succumb to reintroducing these species with the promise of “certified 
sustainable, ” Greenpeace urges Target to keep these species off its 
shelves. Target should improve its farmed shrimp procurement and 
ensure all tuna sold in its stores, even national brands, is sustainably 
sourced.#4 Target
xvi E.g., Seafood Task Force, Global Dialogue on Seafood Traceability.

Carting Away the Oceans    22
Headquarters: Pittsburgh, PA
Stores and Banners:  412 stores operating as Giant Eagle, Giant Eagle 
Express, Market District, Market District Express, and GetGo
Background: Giant Eagle is a privately owned, regional retailer, with 
its largest presence in Pennsylvania and Ohio. Its FY 2017 revenue was 
$8.9 billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  Giant Eagle was the dark horse of this year’s 
rankings, climbing six spots to round out the top five—an impressive 
feat for a retailer that was ranked 16th just a few years ago. After 
being the first U.S. retailer to release a shelf-stable tuna policy, it 
introduced a pole and line private label canned albacore product. 
Now, Giant Eagle needs to convert the rest of its shelf-stable category 
(private label and national brands) to sustainable sourcing. The 
retailer advocates for better fisheries management and has increased 
its transparency, from sharing its policies to publishing some of its 
sourcing data online. Greenpeace commends Giant Eagle for its year-
over-year improvements, and urges the retailer to join the rest of the 
top-five retailers by discontinuing orange roughy and mostxvii top-five 
retailers by discontinuing Chilean sea bass. Both are long-lived, slow-
growing species that—based on sustainability and/or IUU fishing 
concerns—should not be commercially available, regardless of MSC 
certification.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  Giant Eagle primarily relies on the 
FishSource database to inform its procurement, and sources from a 
variety of FIPs, most of which are performing well. While the retailer 
has basic wild-caught standards, they could be strengthened with 
regard to how it ensures supplier compliance. Giant Eagle’s farmed 
seafood standards could be interpreted as “carry as much BAP 
certified product as possible” based upon its actual inventory, but 
this could also be clarified. Virtually all of its inventory is BAP 2-star 
certified, and for farmed salmon, tilapia, and private label shrimp, 
Giant Eagle carries up to 4-star certification. Its canned tuna policy 
requires 100% observer coverage and has a goal to avoid sourcing 
from longline vessels that transship at sea.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Giant Eagle takes a proactive 
approach to ensure that its suppliers are well versed in seafood 
sustainability and that they understand the company’s expectations. Surprisingly, the retailer lacks a social responsibility code of conduct, 
and must address this oversight immediately. Especially given 
rampant labor and human rights abuses in the industry, relying on 
third-party certifications is inadequate; instead, leading retailers 
should support legally binding agreements that protect workers’ 
rights (see pages 7–8). Giant Eagle added its support for improved 
fisheries management by signing the 2018 tuna RFMO letter. 
While Giant Eagle has taken steps to reduce the amount of plastic 
bags used in stores, it does not have a comprehensive single-use 
plastic reduction policy or commitments to address its contribution 
to the global plastics crisis. This should be of utmost priority as Giant 
Eagle moves forward in its responsible seafood program.
Labeling and Transparency:  Giant Eagle has made some data on its 
wild-caught sourcing available online via ODP . While encouraging, 
it must ensure that all data on seafood it sources, including farmed, 
are also available through this transparency initiative. The retailer has 
also increased its in-store labeling for customers, and has released a 
video detailing its commitment to sustainable seafood. Giant Eagle 
should continue to update its customers and the public on its efforts 
to improve on seafood sustainability and social responsibility.
Inventory:  This is Giant Eagle’s weakest category. Similar to 
some other retailers, it over-relies on eco-certifications. Simply 
because a fishery is MSC certified does not necessarily mean it is 
ethical or sustainable (see page 8). To continue to remain in the top 
five, Giant Eagle should immediately discontinue sales of orange 
roughy and Chilean sea bass. Greenpeace commends Giant Eagle 
for dropping tongol tuna because of sustainability concerns and 
poor management, and urges the retailer to use this momentum 
to improve its skipjack tuna sourcing, and ensure that the rest of its 
private label and national brand shelf-stable tuna is sustainable (e.g., 
pole and line). Giant Eagle’s farmed seafood is probably its most 
stringent sourcing. However, industrially farmed salmon and farmed 
shrimp—however mitigated—are still associated with a host of 
environmental and social problems.#5 Giant Eagle
xvii Surprisingly, Whole Foods continues to sell Chilean sea bass, despite sustainability and IUU fishing concerns.

Carting Away the Oceans    23
#6 Wegmans
Headquarters:  Rochester, NY
Stores and Banners: 97 stores operating as Wegmans
Background:  Wegmans is a regional, family-owned and -operated 
retailer based in the U.S. Northeast, and has a growing presence in 
Virginia. Its FY 2017 revenue was $8.7 billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  Three short years after it was on the heels 
of Whole Foods for the number-one ranking, and following the 
departure of a veteran sustainable seafood champion, Wegmans’ 
ranking dropped from an industry leader to a modest performer. 
Wegmans’ jaw-dropping decision to procure both orange roughy and 
farmed Pacific bluefin tuna (for special events) has made it the only 
previously green rated retailer to either introduce or reintroduce such 
top-priority red list species. Greenpeace is concerned about these 
developments, and urges Wegmans to heed the warnings from many 
other NGOs and scientists regarding species like orange roughy and 
bluefin tuna, as well as maintain its focus on sustainable seafood.
Sustainable Seafood Policy: Wegmans’ sustainable seafood policy 
covers fresh and frozen seafood, and shelf-stable tuna. While it relies 
on SFP for advice, Wegmans simply requires MSC certification, a 
FIP , or the seafood to be caught in domestic waters. Its standards 
for farmed products could use clarification. Wegmans boasts 100% 
traceability, but works with the Global Aquaculture Alliance and ASC 
“when appropriate”79—indeed, much of its supply is derived from 
these certified sources. To its credit, Wegmans lists best practices for 
farmed salmon, but does not specify if these practices are required 
of suppliers. While Wegmans suggests that it will not sell GE salmon 
(or seafood),80 it should commit to doing so and state this in its public 
seafood policy, especially since GE salmon is now available on the 
market.81
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Wegmans relies on SFP and Trace 
Register to determine whether wild-caught seafood is coming from 
legal sources. The retailer indicates it has 100% traceability for all of 
its farmed seafood. While Wegmans has a social code of conduct, it is 
unclear what standards are included in its internal policy. Wegmans 
should make this policy public and work with respected labor and 
human rights organizations to ensure its standards and grievance 
mechanisms are satisfactory. Furthermore, it should support legally binding agreements to protect seafood workers’ rights (see pages 
7–8). Wegmans is active in the public policy arena, from supporting 
marine reserves to stopping IUU fishing, and most recently signing the 
2018 tuna RFMO letter urging improved fisheries management. 
Wegmans has partnered with a private-sector company and a 
research entity to test packaging innovations that either substantially 
reduce the amount of virgin plastic used or replace it entirely with 
plant-derived substances. Greenpeace commends Wegmans on its 
initiatives and, especially because recycling cannot fix this problem 
(see page 12), urges Wegmans to announce ambitious commitments 
to phase out single-use plastics altogether.
Labeling and Transparency: The updated Wegmans website re-
moved some seafood traceability information that was available 
years ago (e.g., species-by-species pictures and geographical 
sourcing information). However, to its credit, its rebranded site still 
features a substantial amount of policy information and specific eco-
certifications for farmed seafood products. 
Earlier in 2018, Wegmans partnered with the National Aquarium to 
promote responsible aquaculture via an in-store pilot program in 
the seafood department called “Seafood Smart. ”xviii The retailer has 
communicated to its customers information about its private label 
pole and line shelf-stable tuna through direct mail, signs at the point 
of sale, product demos, and at its pharmacy counters. Greenpeace 
hopes that Wegmans applies this same level of energy to other items 
in its wild-caught inventory, and ensures that the Seafood Smart 
program does not inadvertently steer customers toward some of the 
less responsibly farmed products that it currently sells.
Inventory:  Wegmans dropped significantly in this category with 
its introduction of orange roughy and farmed Pacific bluefin tuna 
(the latter only available at special events). In general, Greenpeace 
acknowledges retailers’ efforts to use their buying power to make 
improvements (e.g., FIPs and AIPs). And even though this may be 
Wegmans’ intent, it is highly problematic, as orange roughy and 
Pacific bluefin tuna (both wild and farmed stocksxix) are so imperiled 
that they should not be commercially available, regardless of any 
certifications or attempts at improvements. Wegmans must get back 
on track and discontinue these species immediately.
xviii This education program seeks to inform customers of responsibly harvested fish, shellfish, and sea vegetables. Later in 2018, Wegmans plans to expand this transparency initiative 
companywide.
xix Wild Pacific bluefin tuna stocks have been decimated, and farming even hatchery-raised Pacific bluefin tuna is a wasteful, destructive enterprise. Farming large predators has a high 
environmental cost (and net protein loss) in terms of wild-caught fish used for feed, which could also directly compete with imperiled wild Pacific bluefin tuna populations. And there are 
many additional concerns (e.g., forcing a highly migratory species to live in cages, lack of data and government regulation, risks farms pose to blacktip reef sharks, effluent, antibiotic 
use, potential for disease transfer from farmed to wild fish). Greenpeace urges Wegmans to swiftly discontinue selling bluefin tuna of any kind. For more information, see Seafood Watch’s 
assessment: www.seafoodwatch.org/-/m/sfw/pdf/reports/t/mba_seafoodwatch_bluefintuna_japanfarmedreport.pdf .

Carting Away the Oceans    24
#7 Albertsons Companies
Headquarters:  Boise, ID
Stores and Banners: More than 2,300 stores operating as Albertsons, 
Safeway, Vons, Jewel-Osco, Shaw’s, Acme, Tom Thumb, Randalls, 
United Supermarkets, Pavilions, Star Market, Carrs, and Haggen
Background:  This is the first assessment that profiles Albertsons 
and Safeway together, both operating as banners of Albertsons 
Companies (“Albertsons”), now one of the largest grocery retailers in 
the United States. Albertsons is expanding its online grocery delivery 
capabilities with Instacart and owns meal-kit company Plated. Its FY 
2017 revenue was approximately $60.2 billion.
Greenpeace Comments: After years of inaction, Albertsons is making 
a concerted effort to tackle seafood sustainability, and has recently 
partnered with FishWise and Trace Register to ensure that 94% of its 
seafood will be green or yellow rated according to Seafood Watch (or 
be in a measurable, time-bound FIP or AIP) by 2022.82 While Albertsons 
did not achieve a green ranking, which its former competitor (and 
now subsidiary) Safeway held, it performed well, with strong scores in 
three out of four ranking criteria. However, Albertsons outright failed 
the inventory category, clearly indicating where it needs to most 
improve. Especially given the size of its footprint, the faster Albertsons 
can reach its 2022 goals, the better.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  Albertsons is actively implementing 
improvements to ensure by 2022 that all of its seafood is Seafood 
Watch green or yellow rated, from a certified equivalent, or in a 
time-bound and measurable FIP or AIP . This policy applies to all of 
its fresh, frozen, and shelf-stable seafood, including sushi made in 
its prepared foods department. The retailer has also publicly stated 
that it will not carry GE salmon.83 Greenpeace applauds Albertsons for 
making good on its policy commitment to discontinue eel, given the 
endangered status of wild-caught freshwater eel, the environmental 
impacts of farmed eel, and the illegal activity associated with the 
eel trade. Albertsons not only took action, it also began with a 
public commitment and then followed with additional press when 
it had discontinued eel, communicating why action is necessary.84 
Other retailers should follow Albertsons’ lead by discontinuing eel, 
and Albertsons should continue with this level of ambition as it 
implements its broader seafood policy.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives: Albertsons usually conducts 
external audits annually, now works with Trace Register to conduct 
internal inventory audits in real time, and is establishing protocols to monitor IUU vessel lists. Greenpeace commends Albertsons for 
beginning to ask tough questions of its tuna suppliers, including 
identifying how to address transshipment at sea within its supply 
chains. Albertsons has supplier standards for labor and human rights, 
and as a member of the Seafood Task Force, it must adhere to its code 
of conduct. However, it must go further by supporting legally binding 
agreements to protect workers’ rights (see pages 7–8). The retailer 
is well engaged in the policy arena, including publicly supporting 
improved tuna fisheries management. 
Albertsons has also discontinued Styrofoam trays in some markets, 
has reduced the volume of plastics used in milk jugs and water 
bottles, has encouraged industry to use plant-based meat trays 
instead of polystyrene, and is actively seeking advocacy and 
innovation opportunities to realize additional reductions. Albertsons 
should build on this work by announcing a public commitment and 
timeline to phase out its reliance on single-use plastics.
Labeling and Transparency:  Albertsons works with several external 
partners to improve its operations, promote its sustainability 
initiatives, and educate the public through a variety of online 
methods. Similar to other FishWise-partnered retailers, Albertsons 
has increased its media coverage of its various initiatives, from 
progress updates on its sustainable seafood program, to when 
it joined the Seafood Task Force, and most recently to when it 
discontinued eel. Other retailers should take note; this is how to keep 
customers, industry, and NGOs well informed about the case for 
sustainability and how to collectively work toward improvements. 
Albertsons’ in-store labeling for customers is a bit sparse and 
needs more attention. Greenpeace urges the retailer to make more 
traceability and sustainability information available at the point of 
sale.
Inventory: As one of the largest U.S. retailers, it is problematic that 
Albertsons performed poorly in this category. Fortunately, this should 
change as Albertsons discontinues red list species and implements 
its sustainable seafood policy. Albertsons should lead with the same 
principled approach that it did with eel, and immediately discontinue 
orange roughy, Chilean sea bass, and bigeye tuna. Additionally, it 
must rapidly transition to improved sourcing for most of its other 
high-volume products and continue to make improvements in 
its fresh, frozen, and shelf-stable tuna categories (i.e., only sell 
sustainable private label and national brand products).

Carting Away the Oceans    25
Headquarters:  Phoenix, AZ
Stores and Banners: 300 stores operating as Sprouts Farmers Market
Background:  Sprouts is a rapidly growing national retailer, with its 
highest concentration of stores in California and Texas. Its FY 2017 
revenue was approximately $4.7 billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  Sprouts’ 2018 debut in Carting Away the 
Oceans  was strong, even scoring higher in the inventory category 
than most retailers, including Whole Foods. Sprouts is investing in 
staff education and online and in-store communications about its 
sustainable seafood initiatives—a great move that will better inform 
its customers about sustainable seafood. As Sprouts increases its 
market share, it also has an increased responsibility to leverage 
its brand and buying power for marked improvements in the 
seafood industry. Sprouts needs to publicly advocate for better 
fisheries management and for workers’ rights, and announce strong 
commitments to reduce single-use plastics in its operations.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  Sprouts recently released its seafood 
policy on its website. By 2020, Sprouts has a goal to source only from 
the following certified sources for all of its fresh, frozen, and self-
stable seafood: BAP (3 star and higher), MSC, ASC, Alaska Responsible 
Fisheries Management, or Iceland Responsible Fisheries. Especially 
given concerns about reauthorization of the Magnuson-Stevens 
Act, it is imperative for Sprouts and other retailers relying on U.S. 
fisheries standards to advocate for strong, science-based protections. 
Currently, about two-thirds of Sprouts’ wild-caught seafood is MSC 
certified, and the remainder is either in a FIP or not certified. As 
Sprouts implements its policy, it must also consider the shortcomings 
of eco-certifications, which alone will not ensure sustainable seafood 
(see page 8). Two-thirds of its private label canned tuna is pole and 
line, with a goal of 100% by end of 2019. Sprouts will not purchase GE 
seafood, including GE salmon.Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Sprouts prohibits transshipment 
at sea unless there is 100% observer coverage. Sprouts conducts 
some third-party audits and has supplier agreements regarding legal 
and ethical procurement; however, given continued labor and human 
rights abuses in the seafood industry, it should strengthen its social 
standards and support initiatives like ILRF’s call for legally binding 
agreements (see pages 7–8). It is unclear what Sprouts has done 
recently to advocate for improvements in fisheries management. With 
its new policy and public communications strategy, the retailer should 
use this momentum to advocate publicly for improvements, such as 
signing the 2018 tuna RFMO letter.85
Sprouts engages its private label suppliers on plastic packaging 
alternatives; it has a milk bottle take-back program in many stores 
to mitigate the need for single-use plastic milk jugs; and it is piloting 
the use of reusable and refillable containers for bulk honey, vinegar, 
and oil. To build on these initiatives, Sprouts could set the bar for U.S. 
retail with a comprehensive plan to reduce single-use plastics.
Labeling and Transparency:  At the time of this writing, Sprouts has 
yet to robustly engage its customers either online or in stores about 
its sustainable seafood policy and products. Fortunately, Sprouts 
is focusing on a communications plan this year and also has plans 
to label certain products with sustainability information. As these 
initiatives roll out, Sprouts’ performance will improve in this category.
Inventory:  Sprouts performed better than most retailers in this 
category. It does not carry several red list species for sustainability 
reasons, including orange roughy, Chilean sea bass, shark, and 
bigeye tuna. Greenpeace applauds Sprouts for this leadership and 
encourages it to stipulate in its seafood policy that it will not sell 
orange roughy, Chilean sea bass, and bigeye tuna in the future. 
The retailer is also making improvements in the shelf-stable tuna 
category and working to improve its swordfish procurement. Sprouts 
must improve its sourcing of Atlantic cod and grouper, among other 
species.#8 Sprouts Farmers Market

Carting Away the Oceans    26
#9 Ahold Delhaize
Headquarters: Quincy, MA, and Salisbury, NC
Stores and Banners:  1,960 stores operating as Stop & Shop, Giant, 
Martin’s, Food Lion, and Hannaford
Background:  In the previous assessment, Ahold and Delhaize were 
profiled separately. Following their 2016 merger, this is the first time 
that Ahold and Delhaize are profiled together. Ahold Delhaize USA 
continues to represent the largest share of the Dutch-owned global 
grocery giant’s portfolio. Its FY 2017 revenue was $42.3 billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  While it is difficult to exactly compare the 
merged company’s performance with the separate evaluations of 
Ahold and Delhaize in 2015, its overall score increased slightly and 
its ranking remains largely the same. Ahold Delhaize’s policy and 
transparency scores improved, although the retailer experienced 
a noteworthy drop in the inventory category, attributed largely 
to its lack of sustainable tuna options. As rivals Albertsons and 
Kroger continue to implement improvements and climb in the 
rankings, Ahold Delhaize has a chance to follow suit, or risk losing its 
standing as a top-ten retailer in this assessment. With procurement 
improvements and a focus on initiatives such as reducing its 
single-use plastic footprint, Ahold Delhaize can continue to remain 
competitive in this assessment and among the nation’s largest 
retailers advocating for sustainable seafood and healthy oceans.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  Ahold Delhaize’s sustainable seafood 
policy applies to its fresh, frozen, and shelf-stable categories. Its 
policy for wild-caught seafood is encouraging, but by consulting so 
many outside standards (MSC, ASMI, or IRF certified, or assessed  by 
GMRI, New England Aquarium, or Seafood Watch yellow and higher, 
or in a CASS certified FIP)xx, this alphabet soup of acceptable wild-
caught seafood results in little clarity regarding what is not allowed to 
be carried due to sustainability concerns. Ahold Delhaize must narrow 
its focus. The retailer’s policy toward farmed seafood is clearer: it 
requires products that are at least 2-star BAP certified or equivalent, 
and products that are produced in a high-risk country to be audited 
against a Business Social Compliance Initiative or an equivalent social 
compliance standard. For shelf-stable tuna, Ahold Delhaize appears to 
require its suppliers only to be ISSF members, which will not ensure 
sustainable tuna or address high-risk practices like transshipment at 
sea with longline vessels (see page 9).
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Food Lion and Hannaford 
banners work with Trace Register to conduct internal inventory 
audits in real time. Ahold Delhaize aims to expand this capability for its other banners. As a Seafood Task Force member, and requiring 
that suppliers undergo social compliance review (in certain high-risk 
countries), Ahold Delhaize is working to address social responsibility 
in such a risky industry; however, it should engage labor and human 
rights organizations to ensure it is taking strong enough action. The 
retailer should join ILRF’s call to action for legally binding agreements 
for workers’ rights in the seafood industry (see pages 7–8). 
Additionally, Ahold Delhaize must take a position on transshipment at 
sea, to mitigate the environmental and human rights risks associated 
with this practice. The retailer uses its brand and buying power 
to publicly call for industrywide improvements, most recently by 
signing the 2018 tuna RFMO letter advocating for improved fisheries 
management. 
Unfortunately, Ahold Delhaize is failing to adequately reduce its 
reliance on single-use plastics. As a top-five U.S. retailer by sales, 
Ahold Delhaize has a responsibility to lead and help tackle the global 
plastic pollution crisis.
Labeling and Transparency:  Ahold Delhaize scored higher than 
both Ahold and Delhaize in the transparency category in the last 
assessment. Each of its banners conducts staff trainings and features 
its seafood policy online to engage customers in sustainable seafood 
questions. Ahold Delhaize features in-store signage that includes 
QR codes for traceability purposes, and notes “sustainable choice” 
products for customers. The retailer frequently participates in 
industry conferences and panels, as well as initiatives (e.g., Seafood 
Task Force, Food Marketing Institute, Global Sustainable Seafood 
Initiative (GSSI)). Ahold Delhaize should continue to provide 
customers information online and at the point of sale, including 
updates on its progress with responsible seafood procurement. It 
also has an opportunity to include sustainability information with its 
Peapod grocery delivery service.
Inventory:  This is Ahold Delhaize’s weakest category. In 2017, 
Greenpeace reported favorably on Ahold Delhaize’s pole and line 
tuna through its Nature’s Promise brand, which unfortunately has 
been discontinued, along with its entire private label line. Rather 
than discontinue sustainable tuna, Ahold Delhaize should stop 
selling Chilean sea bass, and improve its sourcing of swordfish (or 
discontinue it altogether). Ahold Delhaize needs to swiftly turn a 
corner and invest in sourcing improvements like many other top-ten 
retailers.
xx ASMI: Alaska Seafood Marketing Institute; IRF: Iceland Responsible Fisheries; GMRI: Gulf of Maine Research Institute; CASS: Conservation Alliance for Seafood Solutions.

Carting Away the Oceans    27
#10 Meijer
Headquarters:  Grand Rapids, MI
Stores and Banners:  237 stores operating as Meijer and one as Bridge 
Street Market
Background:  Meijer is a family-owned retailer with stores in Michigan, 
Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Kentucky, and Wisconsin. Meijer is testing a 
smaller, urban store concept (Bridge Street Market) in Grand Rapids, 
MI. Its FY 2017 revenue was approximately $18.9 billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  Meijer’s score improved slightly since the 
last assessment, although as Giant Eagle, Albertsons, and Sprouts 
entered the top ten, Meijer’s overall ranking did not change. The 
retailer has significantly improved its private label canned tuna, plans 
to increase its transparency on wild-caught sourcing, and is working 
to update its seafood policy. Meijer performed relatively well in the 
inventory category, although it must improve its Atlantic salmon 
procurement. The retailer has room for improvement on public 
advocacy, particularly regarding fisheries management, and needs to 
release a comprehensive, public plan to reduce single-use plastics in 
its operations.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  Meijer’s sustainable seafood policy 
covers its wild, farmed, and shelf-stable categories. Meijer relies on 
its NGO partner SFP’s advice for its sourcing decisions, particularly 
regarding wild-caught seafood. Meijer requires MSC (or equivalent) 
certifications or FIPs for its wild-caught seafood procurement. For 
farmed seafood, it is striving for BAP 4-star certification across all 
species. Meijer is currently updating its seafood policy, and should 
reaffirm its public commitment to prohibit sourcing GE seafood, 
implement measures that address problematic transshipment at sea 
(see page 9), and account for gaps in eco-certifications (see page 8). 
Meijer has a public supplier code of conduct, which includes basic 
standards on labor and human rights.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Meijer engages in internal 
and external audits for most of its products, and has significantly 
improved its private label tuna. All of its private label shelf-stable skipjack, albacore, and yellowfin tuna is pole and line caught. The 
next step for Meijer is to ensure that the rest of its shelf-stable tuna 
(i.e., national brands) is more responsibly sourced, like Whole Foods. 
Meijer could improve in the initiatives category by sharing any 
updates on its efforts to influence responsible fisheries or aquaculture 
management at the local, national, or international level. At the time 
of this writing, Meijer has not joined a growing number of retailers in 
2018 calling on tuna RFMOs to improve on fisheries management.86
It is unclear how Meijer will comprehensively work to phase out 
single-use plastics, since its efforts to shift to more recyclable plastics 
alone will not solve the problem. Placing the burden squarely on the 
consumer will do little to stem the onslaught of single-use plastic 
pollution into our oceans.
Labeling and Transparency: Meijer promotes its sustainable seafood 
program and provides some traceability information online, but 
needs to do far more to communicate to customers at the point of 
sale in stores. Fortunately, it appears that Meijer is working to provide 
more information about its seafood procurement. The retailer is 
active on sustainable seafood in retail industry gatherings, and is 
especially outspoken regarding seafood fraud. This advocacy is 
timely, as IUU fishing and other scandals highlight the challenges with 
traceability in the U.S. seafood industry.87
Inventory:  Meijer performed better than many retailers in this 
category, and has avoided sourcing problematic red list species. 
Greenpeace applauds Meijer for not selling orange roughy and 
Chilean sea bass, and encourages it to maintain this course. According 
to survey results, its Atlantic salmon procurement must be swiftly 
improved. Additionally, to complement its improvements in canned 
tuna, Meijer should discontinue bigeye and tongol tuna, given 
sustainability concerns, poor management, and lack of fisheries data 
(for tongol tuna) to ensure proper management.

Carting Away the Oceans    28
Headquarters: Cincinnati, OH
Stores and Banners:  2,782 supermarkets and multi-department 
stores88 operating as Kroger, Ralphs, Dillons, Smith’s, King Soopers, 
Fry’s, QFC, City Market, Owen’s, Jay C, Pay Less, Baker’s, Gerbes, Harris 
Teeter, Pick ‘n Save, Copps, Metro Market, Mariano’s, Fred Meyer, Food 
4 Less, and Foods Co89
Background: The Kroger Co. (“Kroger”) is the second largest U.S. 
retailer behind Walmart and, like Walmart, has markedly increased 
its store count and revenue since the last assessment. In a counter to 
Amazon, Kroger debuted ClickList, allowing customers to order online 
groceries that are then bagged and ready for store pickup, and is 
planning to use automated warehouses to fulfill online grocery orders 
with UK firm Orcado.90 Kroger’s FY 2017 revenue (for consumables) 
was approximately $117.9 billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  After years of lackluster performance, 
Kroger improved significantly in this year’s assessment. The retailer 
performed best in the policy and initiatives categories, making 
progress on its sustainable seafood goals and using its brand and 
buying power to advocate for fisheries reforms ranging from the 
global tuna industry to domestic fisheries. As Kroger achieves its 
sustainability goals, Greenpeace urges the retailer to account for 
gaps in eco-certifications (see page 8). Kroger must improve in the 
inventory category—the retailer still sells MSC certified species 
that even its NGO partner World Wildlife Fund (WWF) agrees are 
problematic.91 As plastic pollution continues to choke our oceans 
and the very seafood Kroger aims to sell for the foreseeable future, 
the retailer must release strong public commitments and a policy to 
reduce its reliance on single-use plastics (see page 12).
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  Kroger’s improved sustainable seafood 
policy applies to wild-caught and farmed seafood, and shelf-stable 
tuna. The retailer has a wild-caught seafood goal of 100% MSC (or 
equivalent) certification or in a FIP by 2020, and is currently 86% of 
the way there for its fresh and frozen categories. For farmed seafood, 
Kroger carries mostly BAP 2-star products, and is working to achieve 
BAP 4-star certification for its private label products only . Kroger 
should expand this goal to cover all farmed seafood it sells. While 
Greenpeace does not endorse either of these certification schemes, 
at least Kroger provides measurable standards by which to track its 
progress. Kroger’s policy for shelf-stable tuna is weak, as it merely requires that suppliers be ISSF members. This does not ensure 
sustainable tuna or address problem practices like transshipment at 
sea with longline vessels (see page 9). Kroger has publicly committed 
to not sell GE seafood.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Kroger conducts annual 
sustainability audits, including a focus on potential IUU seafood. 
Kroger has a vendor code of conduct and a social audit program. The 
retailer is known to proactively use its buying power with suppliers 
when sustainability and labor abuse pose risks to its supply chains. 
Greenpeace urges Kroger to support legally binding agreements for 
seafood workers’ rights (see pages 7–8). Kroger has recently signed 
multiple advocacy letters in support of improved tuna fisheries 
management and has sent letters to Louisiana state officials calling 
for sustainable fisheries management. 
Kroger has increased its use of reusable plastic crates for internal 
distribution, has reduced the volume of plastics used in milk jugs 
and water bottles, and has recycled more than 60 million pounds of 
plastics since 2016. However, because recycling alone will not solve 
the plastics crisis, Kroger must unveil a robust, ambitious plan for 
reducing single-use plastics.
Labeling and Transparency:  Greenpeace commends Kroger for 
publicly sharing its sustainability goals and providing detailed 
updates online. Kroger also provides significant transparency online 
for its private label product standards, including the audit questions 
it asks its suppliers.92 While Kroger has in-store promotion of its 
sustainability goals, it must do more to provide product traceability 
information to customers in a manner that is accessible in the store. 
As the retailer pivots more to online sales, traceability information 
must likewise be embedded with seafood product listings online.
Inventory:  While Kroger improved in this category, its failure to 
discontinue red list species is disastrous for our oceans. Kroger sells 
orange roughy, bigeye tuna, and Chilean sea bass—three species 
that should not be sold by any retailer committed to seafood 
sustainability. While the retailer carries some sustainably caught or 
farmed species, it is unclear what percentage is from better sources 
(e.g., shrimp and salmon, and albacore, skipjack, and yellowfin tuna). 
Greenpeace reported in its 2017 T una Shopping Guide93 that Kroger 
was developing a private label pole and line tuna product; however, 
more than one year later it is unclear if this product will ever launch.#11 Kroger

Carting Away the Oceans    29
#12 SUPERV ALU
Headquarters: Eden Prairie, MN
Stores and Banners:  114 stores operating as Cub Foods, Shoppers 
Food & Pharmacy, Hornbacher’s, and Rainbow94
Background:  Shortly before publication of this report, United Natural 
Foods agreed to acquire SUPERVALU with the intent to divest from its 
retail operations. SUPERVALU’s FY 2017 revenue was approximately 
$15.9 billion.
Greenpeace Comments: Greenpeace encourages United 
Natural Foods and SUPERVALU leadership to heed the following 
recommendations, and looks forward to a productive dialogue with 
United Natural Foods on seafood sustainability, ocean health, and 
seafood workers’ rights. 
SUPERVALU’s inventory largely demonstrates compliance with its 
moderately robust seafood policy. The company can most improve 
in the initiatives and transparency categories. SUPERVALU needs to 
swiftly address the following: shelf-stable tuna, social responsibility, 
and more transparent communication of traceability to its customers. 
And while this assessment evaluates only SUPERVALU’s retail 
operations, as the company transitions to wholesale distribution, 
it has a growing opportunity to ensure more sustainable seafood is 
available among independent grocers, as well as tackle its single-use 
plastic footprint.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  SUPERVALU partnered with WWF to 
develop and implement its sustainable seafood policy. SUPERVALU 
requires wild-caught seafood to be sourced from fisheries that are 
MSC certified, in full assessment, or in a comprehensive FIP . For 
farmed seafood, it requires that its vendors achieve BAP 2-star or 
higher (or equivalent) certification, and is urging them to achieve BAP 
4-star certification as quickly as possible. While Greenpeace always 
encourages strengthened supplier standards, SUPERVALU must 
also consider the shortcomings of eco-certifications, which cannot 
guarantee fully sustainable, ethical seafood (see pages 7–8). The 
company’s shelf-stable tuna policy has a low bar of merely requiring 
that the suppliers be members of ISSF. SUPERVALU appears opposed 
to GE salmon and seafood; it should make this standard part of its 
policy, rather than outsource its commitment to various certification 
schemes.Seafood Sustainability Initiatives: SUPERVALU relies on WWF to 
review its supply chain for compliance with its sustainability policy. 
Rather than having official policies on IUU fishing or transshipment 
at sea, the retailer only relies on ISSF standards, which alone, will 
not guarantee sustainable, ethical seafood (see page 9). Fortunately, 
SUPERVALU is developing a social code of conduct this year. While 
SUPERVALU would investigate any labor abuse allegations and stop 
relying on a supplier if these abuses were confirmed, like all profiled 
retailers, it should use its buying power to constructively improve a 
supplier’s operations before terminating the relationship. SUPERVALU 
signed the 2018 tuna RFMO letter, sent a letter to the Indonesian 
Ministry of Maritime Affairs and Fisheries regarding sustainable tuna 
management, and sent letters supporting management of its FIPs. 
Many SUPERVALU retail stores have converted their deli hot-food 
containers from Styrofoam to post-consumer recyclable packaging. 
However, the company needs to release a comprehensive, public 
policy to phase out single-use plastics.
Labeling and Transparency:  SUPERVALU needs to improve its 
communication of traceability and sustainability information to its 
customers. While the company features a paragraph on its website, it 
does not contain enough information on traceability, nor does it do a 
sufficient job in communicating this information at the point of sale. 
The exception is that SUPERVALU features a QR code on its private 
label canned tuna (Essential Everyday and sustainable pole and line 
Wild Harvest brands) that provides some sourcing information.
Inventory: SUPERVALU performed better than many of its peers in 
this category. Greenpeace commends SUPERVALU for refusing to 
carry Chilean sea bass and orange roughy. The company has made 
welcomed improvements toward more selective gear types for tuna 
(e.g., one-by-one albacore and yellowfin tuna); however, it needs 
to improve its shelf-stable skipjack tuna procurement. SUPERVALU 
must also immediately address its poor sourcing of Atlantic halibut, 
pangasius, and farmed shrimp.

Carting Away the Oceans    30
#13 Walmart
Headquarters: Bentonville, AR
Stores and Banners:  5,834 stores operating as Walmart, Walmart 
Supercenter, Neighborhood Market, and Sam’s Club
Background:  Walmart continues to grow, and remains the largest 
U.S. retailer, although it is facing competition from Amazon. Walmart 
purchased Jet.com, began online grocery delivery for Sam’s Club with 
Instacart, and has tested online grocery delivery for Walmart stores. 
Its FY 2017 revenue was approximately $266.2 billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  Walmart’s score increased in this year’s 
assessment, though it dropped in the rankings as other retailers 
made stronger improvements. Following a Greenpeace campaign 
to improve Walmart’s shelf-stable tuna, the retailer responded with 
a tepid version of a sustainable shelf-stable tuna policy that has 
goals as far out as 2025.95 Rooted in ISSF standards, this policy will 
not result in the kind of sustainability and social responsibility that 
other retailers like Whole Foods deliver today on shelf-stable tuna.xxi 
Walmart is making progress on its wild and farmed seafood sourcing 
goals and is exploring what could be transformative traceability 
solutions with blockchain. Unfortunately, Walmart is failing to tackle 
the plastics crisis and, as the world’s largest retailer, must urgently 
improve.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  This year, Walmart has achieved 
compliance with its stated sustainability policy for fresh and frozen 
seafood; however, it has until 2025 to comply with its lackluster 
shelf-stable tuna policy. Its wild-caught fresh/frozen seafood policy 
requires MSC (or GSSI equivalent) certification, or sourcing from 
a FIP . At the moment, 76% of all private label and national brand 
seafood sold by Walmart is certified, with the remainder in a FIP . 
Moreover, 98% of all private label and national brand farmed products 
are either BAP or ASC certified, with less than 2% in AIPs. While it is 
encouraging that Walmart is hitting its stated goals on these policies, 
eco-certification schemes still have a host of problems (see page 8), 
which Walmart does not seem to address. Its shelf-stable tuna policy 
is weak,96 as the retailer does not have robust supplier standards that 
would ensure responsibly caught tuna.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives: Greenpeace commends Walmart 
for signing the 2018 tuna RFMO letter in support of better fisheries 
management, which is meaningful given Walmart’s size and influence in global supply chains. Walmart works with various auditing firms 
to assess social compliance and participates in industry initiatives 
like the Seafood Task Force. However, participation in industry 
initiatives at their current, low level of ambition will not result in 
systemic changes in an industry fraught with labor and human rights 
violations. Walmart must support legally binding agreements for 
seafood workers’ rights (see pages 7–8) and must comprehensively 
address IUU fishing and transshipment at sea in its tuna policy, which 
it fails to do by relying on ISSF standards (see page 9). 
Walmart must take leadership to address the plastic pollution crisis 
and strengthen its goals, which are mainly focused on recycling.xxii 
By prioritizing recyclable single-use packaging rather than phasing 
out plastics altogether, Walmart is shifting the burden to consumers, 
which is an outdated, ineffective strategy that will not stop the flow of 
plastics into our oceans (see page 12).
Labeling and Transparency:  Walmart is one of three U.S. retailers 
publicly sharing sourcing information for its wild-caught seafood via 
ODP . Greenpeace commends Walmart for modeling transparency; 
however, because retailers may choose which data to provide via 
ODP , this picture is incomplete (e.g., skipjack tuna is not listed). 
Walmart should take this opportunity to voluntarily disclose all of its 
seafood sourcing information, including its wild-caught and farmed 
data for its fresh, frozen, and shelf-stable categories. Walmart is 
investing in blockchain for traceability solutions, which could help 
create standards for other retailers to follow. Greenpeace encourages 
Walmart to share publicly if and how it will use this technology in its 
seafood supply chains. Walmart has substantial information online 
about its policies, including some information on social responsibility, 
and provides some signage for customers in stores as well, although it 
could markedly improve in this area.
Inventory: Fortunately, Walmart does not sell red list species like 
orange roughy and Chilean sea bass. It needs to improve its sourcing 
of swordfish, and must immediately address its tuna procurement, 
as only a small portion of its tuna is sourced sustainably. Walmart 
needs to further improve sourcing of its salmon and shrimp, two 
important species by volume. Given the retailer’s size, any modest 
improvements would benefit the sustainability of global seafood 
supply chains.
xxi Walmart’s shelf-stable tuna policy can be met by myriad options, which inherently creates loopholes for the retailer to avoid sourcing from more sustainable options. Moreover, the 
policy starts with a disclaimer that this is all subject to “price, availability, quality, customer demand, and unique regulatory environments across our global retail markets[.]” Additionally, 
its reliance on ISSF standards will not ensure sustainable, ethical tuna procurement (see page 9). Walmart’s shelf-stable tuna policy is in need of true reform.
xxii Goals like 100% recycled material for private label brand packaging by 2025 will help, but are far too weak given the scope of the problem and Walmart’s behemoth single-use plastic 
footprint.

Carting Away the Oceans    31xxiii Trader Joe’s still lacks a robust, public sustainable seafood policy and carries some species that may not be as sustainably sourced as other available options. Without additional 
transparency, it is hard to know. These are similar concerns that Greenpeace noted years ago.
#14 Trader Joe’s
Headquarters:  Monrovia, CA
Stores and Banners:  480 stores operating as Trader Joe’s
Background:  Trader Joe’s is a nationwide chain known for its unique 
private label products. Its FY 2017 revenue was approximately $13.6 
billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  After making significant improvements 
earlier in the decade, Trader Joe’s continues its recent trend 
of underperforming in this assessment. Some reasons for this 
disappointing decline from leading retailer to mediocre performer 
include Trader Joe’s inability to follow through on some of its more 
ambitious sustainability goalsxxiii and its lack of transparency with 
its customers and for this assessment. Questions remain about the 
sustainability of some species (e.g., farmed salmon, shrimp) and, 
in the absence of a formal, public seafood policy that is the norm 
among retailers in 2018, what standards Trader Joe’s has to ensure 
responsible seafood procurement. Given its limited seafood inventory 
compared with more conventional retailers, Trader Joe’s was the 
category winner for inventory; however, it will continue to lag behind 
without marked improvements on its policy, advocacy initiatives, and 
transparency.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  Trader Joe’s has publicly committed 
to prohibit GE seafood in its stores. Trader Joe’s prides itself on not 
paying “third-party entities to provide us with a sticker that we can 
put on our labels”; instead the retailer claims to hold itself and its 
vendors accountable for responsible seafood procurement.97 It is not 
entirely clear what this means. Greenpeace does not fault Trader Joe’s 
for avoiding third-party certifications, because several are fraught 
with problems of their own. (Other retailers should take note and 
reconsider their unquestioned allegiance to third-party certifications.) 
However, Trader Joe’s could markedly improve the clarity of its policy 
and standards online. In a years-old statement,98 the retailer simply 
notes that all of its seafood comes from sustainable sources, and that 
it references Seafood Watch for sourcing decisions. While Greenpeace 
commends Trader Joe’s for its work to discontinue unsustainable 
species in alignment with this public statement, more than five years 
later, it is time for Trader Joe’s to release a formal public policy.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  As stated on its website, Trader 
Joe’s conducts internal and external audits of its suppliers’ facilities.99 
While the retailer did not provide hard evidence, it most likely has 
a better handle on its supply chain than its competitors, given its smaller inventory and vertically integrated supply chain. Trader Joe’s 
does not have a policy regarding transshipment at sea for tuna, which 
it should pursue, given that its sourcing of longline caught albacore 
exposes its supply chain to risks of IUU fishing and labor and human 
rights abuses (see page 9). Greenpeace encourages Trader Joe’s to 
publish online its social responsibility code of conduct, strengthen 
it with input from labor and human rights organizations, and take 
proactive steps to monitor compliance. 
Last year, after a campaign led by dozens of conservation NGOs, 
Trader Joe’s committed to stop buying Mexican shrimp,100 which is 
harvested by gillnets that entangle and kill the endangered vaquita. 
This year, Trader Joe’s parent company, ALDI Nord, signed the 2018 
tuna RFMO letter. Both are encouraging developments; however, it 
remains unclear if Trader Joe’s has a strategy to proactively  advocate 
for ocean health and human rights. 
Greenpeace commends Trader Joe’s for phasing out polystyrene. 
However, given the copious amount of single-use plastics wrapped 
around Trader Joe’s products, the retailer must announce strong 
public commitments and a policy to phase out single-use plastics.
Labeling and Transparency:  Trader Joe’s failed this category. It has 
limited sustainability information at the point of sale, aside from 
more sustainable gear types (e.g., pole and line) on some of its canned 
tuna products. Aside from industry and marketing groups, the retailer 
does not appear to actively work with seafood scientists or NGOs. 
Trader Joe’s must be more transparent with the public about its 
sourcing policies and initiatives, and engage labor and sustainability 
experts to improve its operations.
Inventory:  Trader Joe’s earned a category winner badge for its 
inventory, largely because it carries far fewer species than more 
conventional retailers. Greenpeace commends Trader Joe’s for 
dropping several red list species years before other retailers—it 
does not sell orange roughy, Chilean sea bass, bigeye tuna, or shark. 
However, questions remain regarding the sustainability of its farmed 
salmon and shrimp sourcing, whether its swordfish is responsibly 
sourced, and whether it will convert its longline canned albacore to 
pole and line, following retailers like Whole Foods, Hy-Vee, and Meijer.

Carting Away the Oceans    32
Headquarters:  Issaquah, WA
Stores and Banners:  611 stores operating as Costco
Background:  Costco is the third largest U.S. retailer (by revenue), and 
the largest membership warehouse club in the country. As Costco’s 
sales continue to increase and it aggressively competes with rival 
Amazon, it is pushing suppliers to lower prices and is growing its 
private label brand to offer products that can be found only at Costco. 
Its FY 2017 revenue (for consumables) was $66.1 billion.
Greenpeace Comments: While Costco’s score improved slightly this 
year, its ranking remained stale as other retailers climbed higher. 
The retailer has made big changes over the years, from discontinuing 
several red list species to improving its aquaculture standards and 
calling for stronger fisheries management. Costco has an opportunity 
and responsibility to set the bar for initiatives from tackling plastic 
pollution to confronting human rights abuses in seafood supply 
chains. As competition intensifies with Amazon, Walmart, Kroger, and 
others, Costco must leverage its popular brand and purchasing power 
for healthy oceans and workers’ rights, creating additional incentives 
for its competitors to follow suit.
Sustainable Seafood Policy: Costco’s seafood policy is available 
online and describes the retailer’s core principles and strategies. 
Greenpeace commends Costco for providing this information and 
including links to its various initiatives for customers who want 
to learn more about its sustainable seafood program. Costco has 
publicly committed to not sell GE salmon, which is reassuring because 
it sells enormous amounts of farmed salmon every week.101 And while 
Costco relies on ASC standards for species like salmon, concerns with 
eco-certifications continue (see page 8). Greenpeace urges Costco to 
strengthen its policy to go beyond MSC and ASC standards, and for 
its tuna policy to go beyond ISSF standards, which do not sufficiently 
address issues like transshipment at sea with longline vessels (see 
page 9). Costco also has social standards and has adopted the 
Seafood Task Force code of conduct.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Costco is a founding member 
of the Seafood Task Force. Greenpeace commends Costco for its 
efforts, and urges the retailer to use its influence to ensure the Task 
Force raises its ambition to produce results (e.g., publicly call on the Thai government to legalize unions and adopt key ILO conventions 
(see pages 7–8)). Additionally, Costco should rally Seafood Task Force 
members to support legally binding agreements for workers’ rights. 
Costco is among dozens of retailers that signed the 2018 tuna RFMO 
letter calling for improved fisheries management. 
Costco is developing a plastics packaging policy, which, if strong 
enough, will present an opportunity for one of the nation’s largest 
retailers to announce sweeping commitments that set the bar for 
other U.S. retailers. This would be big news, given the public’s interest 
and desire to see businesses and government act on plastic pollution.
Labeling and Transparency:  Costco can most improve in this 
category. Its minimalist approach with store layouts and packaging 
makes it difficult for customers to know which products are truly 
sustainable. Online, Costco has invested in a traceability website 
for its Kirkland Signature albacore,102 which is a great way to 
communicate additional information about products to customers. 
However, as younger generations seek companies to patronize 
that uphold strong ethics, Costco needs to better communicate its 
initiatives to the public.
Inventory:  Greenpeace applauded Costco for discontinuing 
red list species like orange roughy and Chilean sea bass in 2011. 
Unfortunately, both species now have some MSC certified sourcing, 
which means that some retailers have begun to sell them once again. 
Costco now sells Chilean sea bass, which is a long-lived, slow-growing 
species that should not be commercially available. Greenpeace urges 
Costco to reinstate its 2011 ban on Chilean sea bass. In 2014, Costco 
made waves when it launched its FAD-free Kirkland Signature skipjack 
tuna product.103 Unfortunately, it has since been discontinued, 
leaving Costco without a single sustainable private label canned tuna 
product. It remains unclear if Costco will improve its shelf-stable tuna 
for both its private label and national brand products in stores.#15 Costco

Carting Away the Oceans    33
#16 Southeastern Grocers
Headquarters:  Jacksonville, FL
Stores and Banners:  575 stores operating as Bi-Lo, Harveys 
Supermarket, Winn-Dixie, and Fresco y Más
Background: As its name implies, Southeastern Grocers is regionally 
located in the U.S. Southeast. The retailer made headlines this 
year after filing for bankruptcy. As of late May, it had successfully 
completed its financial restructure, which included several store 
closures. Its FY 2017 sales were $9.9 billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  Despite its financial woes, Southeastern 
Grocers’ momentum on sustainable seafood appears to have 
continued, which is a testament to recent years of leadership and 
collaboration from its seafood team. In yet another Carting Away 
the Oceans first, Southeastern Grocers received a passing score,104 
continuing to climb the ranks after being the most improved retailer in 
the last assessment. While it still requires significant work to provide 
its customers with responsibly sourced seafood, Southeastern 
Grocers is on the right track and must continue this work to promote 
healthy oceans and support workers’ rights.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  Southeastern Grocers has a public 
policy that covers its fresh and frozen farmed seafood, with a goal 
of 100% BAP 4-star procurement by the end of 2018. It is working to 
incorporate wild-caught and shelf-stable seafood into its policy, 
which will help ensure improvements in categories like shelf-stable 
tuna. Especially given its focus on farmed seafood in its policy, 
Southeastern Grocers should swiftly incorporate a ban on any GE 
seafood, including GE salmon. While Southeastern Grocers has a 
code of conduct for its suppliers, given ongoing labor and human 
rights abuses in the seafood industry, this is an important moment 
for Southeastern Grocers to strengthen and publicly share its social 
standards.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Southeastern Grocers was the 
first U.S. retailer to become a member of the International Pole & Line 
Foundation (IPNLF). Through this work, the retailer has launched a private label canned pole and line albacore tuna product. To continue 
its sustainable tuna advocacy, Southeastern Grocers should join a 
growing list of businesses and NGOs calling on tuna RFMOs to better 
manage tuna fisheries.105 The retailer also participates in a variety of 
FIPs, which reflects its partnership with SFP , and references IUU vessel 
lists to help prevent IUU seafood from entering its supply chains. 
Southeastern Grocers can strengthen its sourcing by addressing 
problems associated with transshipment at sea (see page 9) and, 
more broadly, by supporting legally binding agreements for seafood 
workers’ rights (see pages 7–8). 
Aside from encouraging recycling and providing customers with the 
option of reusable or paper bags, it is unclear if Southeastern Grocers 
will help tackle the plastic pollution crisis by phasing out single-use 
plastics in its operations.
Labeling and Transparency:  Southeastern Grocers now has its 
seafood policy online and continues to promote its certified products 
to its customers. It publicly promoted joining IPNLF and launching 
its pole and line albacore product, citing the need for sustainable 
tuna fisheries.106 Through its work with SFP , Southeastern Grocers 
has increased the amount of data available on its sourcing, which, in 
theory, could be available to customers upon request. As tools like 
blockchain become more widespread and customers want to know 
about the origins of their food, Southeastern Grocers must expand 
its information available at the point of sale and online so that its 
customers can make informed decisions.
Inventory:  Southeastern Grocers markedly improved in 2015 
after swiftly discontinuing orange roughy, shark, and monkfish for 
sustainability reasons. Greenpeace commends Southeastern Grocers 
for not selling these species or bigeye tuna, for discontinuing Atlantic 
halibut, and for introducing pole and line albacore tuna. The retailer 
must now ensure that the rest of its private label and national 
brand shelf-stable tuna is more sustainably sourced. Additionally, 
Southeastern Grocers should join many of the top-five retailers 
by immediately discontinuing Chilean sea bass for sustainability 
reasons, regardless of its MSC certification.

Carting Away the Oceans    34
#17 Publix
Headquarters:  Lakeland, FL
Stores and Banners: 1,164 stores operating as Publix, Publix Sabor, 
and Publix GreenWise Market
Background:  Publix is a large retailer historically known for its strong 
Florida presence. Publix is continuing its expansion into new markets, 
including Richmond, VA, where it acquired ten stores following the 
Ahold Delhaize merger, and is increasing its presence in the Carolinas 
and Tennessee. Publix’s FY 2017 sales were approximately $34.3 
billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  Publix is another in the firsts category for 
this assessment, finally  achieving a passing score a full ten years after 
Greenpeace began evaluating Publix on seafood sustainability. Much 
of its improvement is a result of transparency initiatives such as ODP . 
Publix has a public seafood policy and invests time and resources to 
improve its sourcing; however, it continues to sell species of concern 
(e.g., orange roughy, shark, tongol tuna), which it must discontinue 
immediately. The invitation is still standing for Publix to engage in a 
productive dialogue with Greenpeace.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  Publix has a public policy and flashy 
interactive website that features information about its companywide 
sustainability initiatives, including those focused on seafood. It 
lays out the retailer’s strategy of working toward more responsible 
seafood procurement, mainly through FIPs and AIPs. For shelf-stable 
tuna, Publix relies on ISSF standards, which do not ensure that tuna 
is sustainably caught or that significant labor issues associated 
with practices like transshipment at sea with longline vessels are 
addressed (see page 9). While it is encouraging that Publix shares its 
sustainable seafood approach in a variety of formats online, it does 
not provide Greenpeace with enough specifics to fully assess the 
retailer in this category.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Due in part to its partnership with 
SFP , Publix is a big proponent of FIPs and engages in Gulf of Mexico 
shrimp and snapper/grouper FIPs. While it is encouraging that Publix and other retailers work to improve fisheries, sometimes it is best to 
stop sourcing a species when the particular fishery is poorly managed 
or experiencing overfishing, to allow time for recovery. In a welcome 
move, Publix signed on to the 2018 tuna RFMO letter, calling for 
improvements in tuna fisheries management. Publix is a participant 
in various industry panels and fora, including those focused on labor 
and human rights. However, it is unclear what Publix’s policy and 
commitments are regarding labor and human rights in the seafood 
industry. 
Publix uses post-consumer recycled content for deli packaging, has 
various initiatives on bag reduction, and relies on reusable shipping 
containers for seafood. These initial steps are encouraging, but Publix 
needs to prioritize launching strong public commitments and a 
policy to phase out single-use plastics. This should be especially high 
on Publix’s radar, given that most of its stores are near the beautiful 
Florida coastline, and because of the company’s reliance on local 
seafood sourcing, which, like all marine life, is increasingly threatened 
as plastics flood into our oceans.
Labeling and Transparency:  Publix rose in the rankings largely 
because of a marked increase in transparency. Publix was the first 
U.S. retailer to disclose some  of its wild sourcing information via 
ODP . Greenpeace commends Publix on publicly providing this 
information and encourages it to ensure that all of its wild-caught 
and farmed seafood sourcing information, including that of national 
brands, is available online. In addition to the ODP website, Publix has 
information online and in stores to educate customers, although it 
could improve in-store access to information so that customers can 
evaluate whether a species is sustainably sourced.
Inventory: Publix continues to fail the inventory category. Many of 
the species Publix sells are red listed for good reason (e.g., high levels 
of bycatch, poor management, habitat destruction). Publix continues 
to sell orange roughy, shark, tongol tuna, and Chilean sea bass. It 
must discontinue these species immediately, improve its overall tuna 
sourcing, and clarify what improvements it has made on its farmed 
seafood procurement.

Carting Away the Oceans    35
#18 WinCo
Headquarters: Boise, ID
Stores and Banners: 119 stores operating as WinCo Foods and 
Waremart by WinCo
Background: WinCo Foods is an employee-owned retailer with stores 
in the U.S. West, Southwest, Oklahoma, and Texas. Its FY 2017 sales 
were approximately $7 billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  In recent years, WinCo’s seafood team has 
invested time and resources in sustainable seafood, making steady 
improvements. Especially as WinCo continues to grow, it must use its 
brand and purchasing power to publicly call for improvements in the 
seafood industry. Greenpeace urges WinCo to seize this moment for 
leadership as labor and human rights abuses remain rampant in the 
seafood industry and the plastic pollution crisis worsens.
Sustainable Seafood Policy: WinCo has a sustainable seafood policy 
that covers some of its wild and farmed seafood, although it has work 
to do to ensure that 100% is covered, including shelf-stable seafood. 
As the retailer considers policy improvements, it should formally 
incorporate its commitment not to sell GE seafood. Unlike many 
retailers that source MSC, BAP , and other certified products, WinCo 
has additional measures in place, from referencing the Seafood 
Watch recommendations to IUU vessel lists. As part of its seafood 
program, WinCo must also clarify its policy on labor and human 
rights. Together, these actions will help strengthen its goal of sourcing 
responsible seafood, and will also improve its performance in this 
category.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives: WinCo responds swiftly to 
incidents of labor or human rights violations that could be linked to 
its supply chains, including engaging suppliers regarding its concerns. In addition to publicly sharing a social code of conduct, Greenpeace 
encourages WinCo to require action plans that remedy labor abuses 
if they occur, so that it can leverage its buying power to help make 
improvements throughout the industry. WinCo must create and 
implement a strong policy that addresses transshipment at sea in 
its tuna supply chains, given the practice’s association with labor 
and human rights abuses. With the dire state of the ocean plastics 
crisis, WinCo must outline its policy and initiatives to tackle plastic 
pollution, beyond the commonplace initiatives that some retailers 
espouse (e.g., recycling, reusable bags).
Labeling and Transparency:  While WinCo performed poorly in 
this category, change is coming. The retailer currently has memos 
posted in stores noting that it sells certified seafood and providing 
information about its BAP requirements on wet cases. WinCo is 
working to make its policy available online, will ensure customers 
can easily access this policy while in stores via QR codes, and will 
communicate its progress on sourcing improvements. Greenpeace 
encourages WinCo to also provide information on the various groups 
it works with, and to ensure it engages a variety of stakeholders from 
industry to NGOs, scientists, and regulatory bodies.
Inventory:  This is WinCo’s strongest category. The retailer sources 
BAP 4-star farmed seafood for nearly all fresh and frozen products, 
and does not sell red list species like Chilean sea bass and bigeye 
tuna, although it does carry orange roughy in a small percentage 
of stores. Greenpeace urges WinCo to discontinue orange roughy 
immediately; to ensure all tuna sold in stores, whether private label 
or national brands, is sustainable; and to not sell any additional red 
list species.

Carting Away the Oceans    36
#19 H-E-B
Headquarters:  San Antonio, TX
Stores and Banners:  336 stores operating as H-E-B, H-E-B Plus!, Mi 
Tienda, Joe V’s Smart Shop, and Central Market
Background:  H-E-B is a privately held retailer with a large presence 
throughout Texas. Its FY 2017 sales were approximately $23.1 billion.
Greenpeace Comments: Yet another year goes by and H-E-B refuses 
Greenpeace’s invitation to engage in a dialogue on sustainable 
seafood. While it posts some promising standards online, H-E-B 
has made questionable moves since the last assessment, like 
reintroducing orange roughy. The retailer’s score dropped because 
of a lack of available information on new initiatives and its poor 
performance in the inventory category. Significant questions remain 
about its policies on and commitments to labor and human rights and 
its efforts to phase out single-use plastics.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  When it comes to publicly available 
policies, H-E-B has a policy that makes clear its core issues in an easily 
accessible format for the public.107 The retailer sources some certified 
seafood, is publicly opposed to GE seafood, and explains when it 
will not sell seafood because of sustainability concerns. It is unclear, 
however, whether H-E-B has standards regarding shelf-stable tuna or 
has a policy regarding labor and human rights.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  H-E-B failed this category. 
While it supports local seafood from the Gulf Wild program and 
uses Trace Register for traceability (and to avoid IUU seafood), it is 
largely unclear what new  initiatives H-E-B is undertaking, especially 
regarding labor and human rights abuses in the seafood industry. 
H-E-B must enact strong standards regarding transshipment at sea to 
mitigate the risks of IUU fishing and labor and human rights abuses 
associated with this practice, and must support efforts to create 
legally binding agreements for workers’ rights (see pages 7–8). H-E-B has invested in some measures to curb plastic pollution. This 
past Earth Day, it gave away nearly 200,000 reusable bags. However, 
it is unclear how H-E-B will comprehensively address the plastic 
pollution crisis and work to phase out single-use plastics in its 
operations. This should be a major priority for a retailer that prides 
itself on sourcing from the nearby Gulf of Mexico, which is already 
threatened by offshore drilling and agricultural runoff.
Labeling and Transparency:  Greenpeace commends H-E-B for 
providing detailed information online, such as species sold and their 
sustainability status—an initiative that existed well before ODP . While 
it provides gear type for some species, the retailer should provide 
it for all species , share its sourcing for all seafood sold across its 
banners, and provide detailed instructions on how customers can 
use this list to make informed purchases. H-E-B shares online which 
species it will not sell and has videos featuring sustainable seafood. 
Like most retailers, H-E-B could increase its sustainability information 
at the point of sale. Online, the retailer has ample opportunity 
to provide details about seafood sustainability in the “product 
description” area, but it does not do so for most of its seafood 
products.
Inventory:  H-E-B failed this category. Despite some promising 
standards,108 H-E-B continues to sell several problematic species. 
Given the level of concern expressed by multiple NGOs about bigeye 
and tongol tuna, orange roughy, and Chilean sea bass, it is surprising 
that H-E-B still carries these species. Despite its MSC certification, 
orange roughy in particular has been fraught with controversy and 
concerns from multiple global organizations.109, 110 Sometimes a 
species should not be commercially available. If H-E-B were to truly 
take a precautionary approach, it would swiftly discontinue orange 
roughy and the aforementioned red list species.

Carting Away the Oceans    37
Headquarters: Schenectady, NY
Stores and Banners: 134 operating as Price Chopper, Market 32, and 
Market Bistro
Background: Price Chopper is a privately held regional retailer in the 
U.S. Northeast. Its FY 2017 sales were $3.84 billion.
Greenpeace Comments: Price Chopper’s drop in this year’s ranking 
reflects a need for strengthened policies, advocacy, transparency, 
and sourcing improvements. Fortunately, it appears that things may 
soon improve, which is great news for our oceans. The retailer just 
discontinued monkfish for sustainability reasons and is developing 
a shelf-stable tuna policy. As Price Chopper invests in its Market 32 
brand, it should revamp not only its stores, but also its policies and 
approach to customers who want responsible seafood.
Sustainable Seafood Policy: Price Chopper’s policy covers wild and 
farmed seafood. The retailer references the Seafood Watch red list 
and incorporates various certified products from Fair Trade to MSC 
and BAP . Historically, Price Chopper has opposed GE seafood, but 
lacks a formal policy. Price Chopper is developing a shelf-stable tuna 
policy, which should go beyond basic, ISSF-influenced standards that 
some other retailers rely on, as these standards do not fully account 
for massive amounts of bycatch or problematic transshipment at sea 
(see page 9).xxiv  As Price Chopper updates its seafood policy, it should 
also publicly disclose its social standards policy to address rampant 
labor and human rights abuses in the seafood industry.
Seafood Sustainability Initiatives: Price Chopper failed this 
category. It is unclear whether Price Chopper is working with 
conservation NGOs, scientists, and industry to advocate for seafood 
sustainability. To its credit, the retailer has historically made efforts 
to mitigate seafood fraud (e.g., DNA testing of its seafood), currently works with Trace Register, and engages suppliers on safe working 
conditions and fair wages. However, in a time when even local 
seafood is apparently not local,111 it is vital to have a strong chain 
of custody and measures to ensure legal, sustainable, and ethical 
seafood. Price Chopper should join calls from labor for legally binding 
agreements that protect seafood workers’ rights (see pages 7–8). Price 
Chopper must leverage its position in the U.S. market to advocate 
for reforms, for example, by joining other retailers that are calling 
for action from tuna RFMOs.112 It is encouraging that Price Chopper 
supports plastic bag bans, although to comprehensively tackle plastic 
pollution, it needs a policy and commitments to phase out single-use 
plastics.
Labeling and Transparency:  Price Chopper performed poorly 
in this category. The retailer must improve by comprehensively 
communicating with its customers about sustainable seafood 
and how to make informed decisions in stores and online. A major 
first step is reinstating its website on sustainable seafood, which 
includes its policy.113 This is an opportunity to incorporate any policy 
improvements and launch new education initiatives online and at the 
point of sale.xxv
Inventory:  Price Chopper references the Seafood Watch 
recommendations, including its red list. The retailer should be 
commended for discontinuing monkfish (even though it is yellow 
rated) because of bycatch and seafloor impacts. Other retailers should 
follow Price Chopper’s lead and seriously consider whether a “better 
alternative” species should be sold, given outstanding concerns. This 
level of foresight should help Price Chopper consider other ways to 
improve its sourcing, from tuna to farmed seafood such as pangasius. 
And while it may be MSC certified, Chilean sea bass is one whitefish 
that should never be commercially available. Greenpeace urges Price 
Chopper to join retailers like Hy-Vee and Save Mart and discontinue 
Chilean sea bass.#20 Price Chopper
xxiv Greenpeace encourages Price Chopper to reference policies from top-ranked retailers like Whole Foods, Hy-Vee, and ALDI, and seek input from reputable environmental and labor NGOs 
during policy development.
xxv For examples, see transparency and education initiatives employed by top-ranked retailers such as Whole Foods and Hy-Vee.

Carting Away the Oceans    38
#21 The Save Mart Companies
Headquarters: Modesto, CA
Stores and Banners: 207 stores operating as Save Mart, S-Mart, 
Lucky, Lucky California, FoodMaxx, and MaxxValue Foods
Background: The Save Mart Companies (“Save Mart”) operates stores 
in northern and central California as well as Nevada. Its FY 2017 sales 
were $4.1 billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  Save Mart failed this year’s assessment. 
Nonetheless, the retailer continues to improve and is within reach 
of a passing score. It performed moderately well in the policy and 
inventory categories, although it must markedly improve in the 
initiatives and transparency categories, which would propel it further 
in the rankings. Greenpeace encourages Save Mart to strengthen 
its focus on labor and human rights in the seafood industry and to 
address plastic pollution. As Save Mart continues to implement its 
sustainable seafood program, all indications suggest this could be the 
last time it will be in the red. 
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  Save Mart made significant 
improvements, releasing a public sustainable seafood policy,114 which 
is an important first step. Save Mart should strengthen its policy 
in several areas. For example, while there are some well-managed 
domestic fisheries, not all fall into this category. Even more alarming, 
some companies are marketing their products as domestic when 
they are anything but.115 Having additional traceability and auditing 
standards can help improve Save Mart’s policy, including more 
developed standards on labor and human rights. While ISSF is a start 
for its shelf-stable tuna policy, this approach alone leaves several gaps 
that will not ensure sustainable, ethical tuna (see page 9). Greenpeace 
encourages Save Mart to continue improving its policy and standards 
as a part of its larger strategy to source responsible seafood.Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Save Mart failed this category. 
While the retailer conducts internal audits of its seafood for 
traceability purposes and consults its suppliers on changes in 
fisheries management and stock health, Save Mart has work 
to do to better ensure more responsible operations. Examples 
include referencing combined IUU vessel lists116 to ensure it is 
not inadvertently sourcing illegally caught seafood; developing 
policies and communicating with suppliers Save Mart’s position 
on transshipment at sea; publicly advocating for marine reserves; 
joining a growing number of businesses and NGOs calling for 
improved management of tuna fisheries;117 and making strong, public 
commitments and policies to phase out single-use plastics. Beyond 
its suppliers, Save Mart must engage industry, NGOs, scientists, and 
regulatory bodies to help ensure healthy oceans and safe, equitable 
working conditions for seafood workers.
Labeling and Transparency:  Save Mart failed this category. While 
Greenpeace commends Save Mart for releasing a public policy, the 
retailer must now ensure this policy and key data are available to 
customers online and in stores so that they can make informed 
purchases regarding responsible seafood. Fortunately, Save Mart 
should soon have more communications initiatives regarding its 
seafood program. Save Mart should look to retailers that score high 
in this category (e.g., Hy-Vee, Whole Foods) for examples of exenstive 
online and in-store communications strategies.
Inventory:  Greenpeace commends Save Mart for working to 
discontinue both orange roughy and Chilean sea bass, which, given 
sustainability concerns, should not be commercially available. With 
this move, Save Mart will join the ranks of leading retailers that have 
also discontinued these species for sustainability reasons. Save Mart 
must make improvements in its tuna category and its farmed seafood 
procurement, from Atlantic salmon to shrimp and pangasius.

Carting Away the Oceans    39Headquarters: Keasbey, NJ
Stores and Banners:  96 stores owned outright under Price Rite 
and ShopRite banners, as well as supplying hundreds more stores, 
including additional ShopRite stores, The Fresh Grocer, Dearborn 
Market, Village Supermarkets, and Inserra Supermarkets
Background:  Wakefern is the largest supermarket retailers’ 
cooperative in the country,118 supplying all Price Rite and ShopRite 
banners, and owning several stores outright. Its FY 2017 revenue was 
$16.3 billion.
Greenpeace Comments:  Wakefern went from moderate performance 
in 2015 to the worst-ranked retailer in this year’s assessment. 
While it may be continuing its efforts on sustainable seafood, 
this is impossible to assess given Wakefern’s lack of transparency 
online, in the press, or via Greenpeace’s survey process used for this 
assessment. However, the company’s selection of seafood for sale 
suggests little has been done. Greenpeace encourages Wakefern to 
review this report, increase its transparency, and accept Greenpeace’s 
long-standing invitation for a meaningful dialogue on sustainable 
seafood.
Sustainable Seafood Policy:  While Wakefern has a policy, it has 
very limited information available online, except for the last line in 
its Q&A section noting its work with MSC and the Global Aquaculture 
Alliance to source certified seafood.119 As of 2015, Wakefern did not 
sell GE seafood, although it remains unclear if the retailer has a 
companywide policy banning the purchase of GE seafood. It is also 
unclear how Wakefern ensures its seafood is responsibly sourced, 
noting the significant gaps in certifications that fail to guarantee 
seafood is not associated with labor or human rights violations (see 
pages 7–8). Seafood Sustainability Initiatives:  Beyond sourcing some 
certified products, very little information is available regarding any 
Wakefern initiatives to ensure responsible seafood. Greenpeace 
expects all retailers to leverage their purchasing power, not just to 
engage suppliers, but to publicly call for sweeping industrywide 
and regulatory improvements. While Wakefern may be active in 
some arenas, it needs to better communicate its work. Aside from 
encouraging its customers to recycle and use reusable bags, it is 
unclear what policies or commitments Wakefern has to tackle plastic 
pollution.
Labeling and Transparency: After a solid start in 2014 with press 
about its sustainable seafood program120 and some 2016 stories 
about BAP 4-star shrimp products,121 there has been limited press 
about Wakefern’s initiatives. Ironically, the most recent press for a 
Wakefern banner in May has this headline: “ShopRite is making it 
easier to eat more fish. ”122 Rather than eating more fish, Greenpeace 
encourages Wakefern’s topline message to be about how it is working 
to responsibly source seafood and what tools customers can use, 
beyond flawed certifications, to ensure they purchase sustainable, 
ethical seafood. As long as any retailer profits from seafood, it must 
be a top advocate for ocean health and seafood workers. This means 
being significantly more transparent with customers, NGOs, and the 
public.
Inventory: Wakefern should discontinue Chilean sea bass, clean up 
its tuna sourcing, and ensure it does not make the mistake of some 
other retailers by selling orange roughy simply because it is MSC 
certified.#22 Wakefern


Carting Away the Oceans    40Glossary
AIP:  Aquaculture improvement project
Aquaculture Stewardship Council (ASC):  A certification 
scheme for farmed species. ASC certified products are 
supposed to meet certain criteria for responsibly farmed 
seafood. While it may be a start, it is best for companies 
to avoid exclusively relying on third-party certifiers. 
Best Aquaculture Practices (BAP):  These third-
party standards seek to address environmental and 
social responsibility, animal welfare, food safety, and 
traceability in a voluntary certification program for 
aquaculture facilities. BAP primarily covers shrimp, 
salmon, tilapia, pangasius, channel catfish, and mussels. 
Companies sometimes source BAP certified products 
according to a coding system (e.g., BAP 2-star, BAP 
3-star). While it may be a start, it is best for companies to 
avoid exclusively relying on third-party certifiers.
Bycatch:  Marine life unintentionally caught and often 
killed when fishing, like sharks, turtles, seabirds, and 
juvenile fish. Wasteful fishing practices from bottom 
trawls to longlines are highly destructive for marine life 
and habitats, and supermarkets should sell only the 
most sustainably harvested seafood available, otherwise 
refuse to sell it.
FAD-free:  Fishing without the use of FADs, or setting 
purse seine nets on free schools of tuna. Other marine life 
is less impacted when fishing free school, so it is a better 
option.
FCF:  Fong Chun Formosa Fishery Company
FIP: Fishery improvement project
Fish aggregating device (FAD):  An artificial, floating 
object that attracts schools of tuna, along with the 
(indiscriminate) aggregation of all kinds of marine life. 
Fishing with FADs leads to unintended collateral damage, 
or bycatch, in the form of dead sea turtles, sharks, and 
other fish.123
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO):  Among other fisheries-related initiatives, 
this entity has categorized the oceans’ “major fishing 
areas” by a numeric code. This information helps people 
to identify where a particular species was caught.FRN:  Fishers’ Rights Network
GE: Genetically engineered, specifically with regard  
to salmon. Often used interchangeably with GMO 
(genetically modified organism) salmon.
Gear type: The fishing method used to catch a particular 
species of fish. Some gear types (like pole and line for 
tuna) are far more favorable to the environment than 
others (like trawling for flatfish, which scrapes and 
damages the ocean floor).
GSSI:  Global Sustainable Seafood Initiative
ILO:  United Nations International Labour Organization
ILO Core Conventions:  Eight conventions that 
the International Labour Organization deems as 
fundamental principles and rights at work. Retailers 
should only source from vessels, companies, canneries, 
and processors that operate in full compliance with 
international labor standards, including ILO Core 
Conventions, the ILO Maritime Labour Convention, and 
the ILO Work in Fishing Convention.
ILRF:  International Labor Rights Forum
IPNLF:  International Pole & Line Foundation
ISSF: International Seafood Sustainability Foundation
IUU:  Illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing (also 
known as pirate fishing)
Longline:  Fishing lines, sometimes dozens of miles 
long, baited with thousands of hooks. This is a very 
indiscriminate, highly destructive fishing gear.124
Marine Stewardship Council (MSC):  Nonprofit 
organization that runs a certification scheme for wild 
fisheries. MSC certified products are supposed to 
meet certain sustainability criteria. In some cases, this 
certification is not the best barometer for whether a wild-
caught species was truly caught sustainably. While it 
may be a start, it is best for retailers to avoid exclusively 
relying on third-party certifiers.
NGO:  Non-governmental organization

Carting Away the Oceans    41ODP:  Ocean Disclosure Project
One-by-one:  Refers to a series of highly selective gear 
types for tuna fishing (e.g., pole and line, troll, handline) 
that have virtually no bycatch.125
Pole and line:  A highly selective form of fishing that has 
virtually no bycatch, as tuna are caught one-by-one with 
a fishing pole and a line. See the definition for one-by-
one.
QR: Quick response
Red list: A list of species of seafood that should not be 
bought or sold for various sustainability reasons, ranging 
from stock status to farming conditions, to method of 
capture. Any red list species in this report is classified as 
“avoid” according to Seafood Watch recommendations. 
Seafood Watch does not assess some species and/or 
defers to eco-certifications. Because of existing concerns 
with eco-certifications (see page 8), for this report, 
Greenpeace considers any species not evaluated by 
Seafood Watch as a red list species.
Regional Fishery Management Organization (RFMO):  
An “international body of countries sharing a practical 
and/or financial interest in managing and conserving 
fish stocks in a particular region. ”126 There are about 17 
RFMOs covering large areas of our oceans. RFMOs are 
established by international agreements or treaties and 
can take different forms. RFMO decisions are binding for 
member countries.
Responsible seafood:  Sustainable, ethical seafood
Responsible tuna: Sustainable, ethical tuna
Seafood Task Force:  Formerly known as the Shrimp 
Sustainable Supply Chain Task Force, this multi-
stakeholder body aims to confront forced labor, human 
trafficking, and unsustainable fishing in the Thai seafood 
industry.
Seafood Watch:  A part of Monterey Bay Aquarium, 
Seafood Watch educates consumers and businesses 
through its sustainable seafood recommendations (e.g., 
Best Choices, Good Alternatives, or Avoid). Greenpeace 
used Seafood Watch recommendations to evaluate 
retailers for the inventory category of this assessment; 
see the definition above for red list.
 SFP:  Sustainable Fisheries Partnership
Species name:  Also known as the Latin name or 
scientific name, the species name clarifies precisely 
what species is in the package. Given that mislabeled 
seafood is a common problem in the industry and many 
species of fish are known by several names, retailers are 
encouraged to provide this information at the point of 
sale.
Sustainable, ethical seafood:  Wild-caught or farm-
raised seafood using best available fishing/farming 
practices that mitigate adverse environmental and social 
impacts. This includes sourcing from healthy stocks, 
using harvest methods that limit environmental impacts, 
and sourcing from suppliers that treat workers ethically 
(e.g., in accordance with ILO Core Conventions, the ILO 
Maritime Labour Convention, and the ILO Work in Fishing 
Convention).
Sustainable, ethical tuna:  Tuna sourced from healthy 
stocks; caught using sustainable fishing methods, such 
as pole and line, handline, troll-caught, or purse seine 
fishing on free schools (i.e., FAD-free); and supplied by 
workers who are treated ethically (e.g., in accordance 
with ILO Core Conventions, the ILO Maritime Labour 
Convention, and the ILO Work in Fishing Convention).
Third-party audit: An audit conducted by an 
independent party, unaffiliated with either the company 
or the certifying group, checking whether the product 
or process meets the standard holder’s standards. 
While an extremely valuable tool, a third-party auditor’s 
performance is only as good as the standards, which 
serve as the baseline for the audit.
Transshipment at sea:  A legal practice wherein one 
vessel transfers its cargo from its hold to that of another 
vessel directly next to it, without needing to go to port. 
This practice is often how unethical companies can 
commingle legally caught and  illegally caught seafood 
and essentially “launder” pirated seafood as well as hide 
labor abuse (see page 9).
UN:  United Nations 
WWF:  World Wildlife Fund

Carting Away the Oceans    42
© Edward Beskow  / Greenpeace

Carting Away the Oceans    43Endnotes
1 Environmental Justice Foundation. Pirates and Slaves: How Overfishing in 
Thailand Fuels Human Trafficking and the Plundering of Our Oceans . 2015. 
ejfoundation.org/resources/downloads/EJF_Pirates_and_Slaves_2015_0.
pdf at page 5 .
2 “Revealed: Asian Slave Labour Producing Prawns for Supermarkets in US, UK. ” 
UK Guardian  10 June 2014. www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/
jun/10/supermarket-prawns-thailand-produced-slave-labour .
3 Mason, Margie, et. al. “Global Supermarkets Selling Shrimp Peeled by Slaves. ” 
Associated Press  14 Dec. 2015. www.ap.org/explore/seafood-from-slaves/
global-supermarkets-selling-shrimp-peeled-by-slaves.html .
4 Greenpeace Southeast Asia. T urn The Tide: Human Rights Abuses and Illegal 
Fishing in Thailand’s Overseas Fishing Industry . Dec. 2016. www.greenpeace.org/
seasia/Press-Centre/publications/Turn-The-Tide .
5  Greenpeace USA. “2017 Tuna Shopping Guide. ” www.greenpeace.org/usa/
oceans/tuna-guide .
6 Amazon acquired Whole Foods on August 28, 2017. For purposes of this report, 
Whole Foods is still evaluated as a separate entity, as most of its progress on 
seafood sustainability was planned and executed while still a separate entity.
7 Greenwood, Chelsea. “Americans Are Starting to Shop More Like Europeans—
and That Should Terrify Frito-Lay, Coca-Cola, and Kraft. ” Business Insider  3 May 
2018. uk.businessinsider.com/aldi-traderjoes-lidl-retail-revolution-brand-
names-2018-3 .
8 Jones, Charisse. “Costco Sales Continue to Soar, Keeping Up with Amazon. ” USA 
Today 7 Mar. 2018. www.usatoday.com/story/money/2018/03/07/costco-sales-
continue-soar-keeping-up-amazon/400224002 .
9 Boyle, Matthew. “Costco’s Squeeze on Suppliers Signifies Pain for P&G, Nestle. ” 
Bloomberg.com 9 Mar. 2018. www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-03-07/
costco-outshines-other-discounters-but-broader-concerns-linger .
10 See “How We Work. ” oceandisclosureproject.org/about-us .
11 World Economic Forum. The New Plastics Economy: Rethinking the Future of 
Plastics . 2016. www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_New_Plastics_Economy.
pdf.
12 United Nations Environment Programme. UNEP Year Book 2011: Emerging 
Issues in Our Global Environment . 2011. wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/
handle/20.500.11822/8276/-UNEP%20Year%20Book%202012_%20
emerging%20issues%20in%20our%20global%20environment-2011UNEP_
YEARBOOK_Fullreport.pdf?sequence=5&isAllowed=y .
13 Greenpeace. “All Supermarkets Should Join Iceland In Going Plastic-Free. ” 17 
Jan. 2018. www.greenpeace.org.uk/plastic-free-supermarkets .
14 Taylor, Matthew. “World’s First Plastic-Free Aisle Opens in Netherlands 
Supermarket. ” The Guardian  28 Feb. 2018. www.theguardian.com/
environment/2018/feb/28/worlds-first-plastic-free-aisle-opens-in-
netherlands-supermarket .
15 Human Rights Watch. Hidden Chains | Rights Abuses and Forced Labor in 
Thailand’s Fishing Industry . 23 Jan. 2018. www.hrw.org/report/2018/01/23/
hidden-chains/rights-abuses-and-forced-labor-thailands-fishing-industry .
16 International Labor Rights Forum. Taking Stock: Labor Exploitation, Illegal 
Fishing and Brand Responsibility in the Seafood Industry . 11 May 2018. 
laborrights.org/publications/labor-exploitation-illegal-fishing-and-brand-
responsibility-seafood-industry .
17 Greenpeace International. “Taiwanese Seafood Giant Linked to Human Rights 
Violations—Greenpeace. ” 24 May 2018. www.greenpeace.org/international/
press-release/16676/taiwanese-seafood-giant-linked-to-human-rights-
violations-greenpeace .
18 Oxfam America. Behind the Barcodes—Ripe for Change: Ending Human Suffering 
in Supermarket Supply Chains . 20 June 2018. www.oxfamamerica.org/explore/
research-publications/behind-the-barcodes .
19Oxfam America. U.S. Supermarket Supply Chains: Ending the Human Suffering 
Behind Our Food . 2018. www.oxfamamerica.org/static/media/files/US-
Supermarket-Supply-Chains-End-the-Human-Suffering-Behind-our-Food-
report.pdf  at page 18.20 The Seafood Task Force must expand its stakeholder engagement, advocate 
for Thai government legal reform, engage groups such as the Civil Society 
Organisation Coalition for Ethical and Sustainable Seafood and FRN, and support 
legally binding agreements to protect workers’ rights. Without marked action 
and improvements in its operation, the Seafood Task Force is yet another flashy 
industry initiative that amounts to wasted opportunity as labor and human 
rights abuses persist in the seafood industry. For more, see oxfamilibrary.
openrepository.com/bitstream/handle/10546/620480/cs-supermarket-
responsibilities-workers-rights-seafood-210618-en.pdf?sequence=1  (page 
17) and blogs.oxfam.org/en/blogs/18-07-03-4-critical-ways-global-seafood-
retailers-can-give-their-consumers-confidence .
21 ILO C087—Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise 
Convention, 1948; ILO C098—Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining 
Convention, 1949; ILO C108—Seafarers’ Identity Documents Convention, 1958; 
ILO C188—Work in Fishing Convention, 2007. For more, visit www.ilo.org/dyn/
normlex/en/f?p=1000:12000:::NO:::
22 Prachatai English. “Independent, Democratic Fishers’ Union Officially Launches 
in Thailand. ” 30 May 2018. prachatai.com/english/node/7761 .
23 Greenpeace International. “Taiwanese Seafood Giant Linked to Human Rights 
Violations—Greenpeace. ”
24 International Labor Rights Forum. “Comments to the Marine Stewardship 
Council Regarding Proposed Labor Requirements. ” 14 May 2017. laborrights.
org/publications/comments-marine-stewardship-council-regarding-
proposed-labor-requirements .
25 International Labor Rights Forum. “Comments to the Marine Stewardship 
Council Regarding Proposed Labor Requirements. ” 15 Apr. 2018. laborrights.org/
publications/comments-marine-stewardship-council-regarding-proposed-
labor-requirements-0 .
26 Kruk, Sake, and Henk Peters. “Towards a Socially Responsible Aquaculture 
Stewardship Council. ” Oxfam International. 25 June 2018. www.oxfam.org/en/
research/towards-socially-responsible-aquaculture-stewardship-council .
27 AFL-CIO. Responsibility Outsourced: Social Audits, Workplace Certification and 
Twenty Years of Failure to Protect Worker Rights . 23 Apr. 2013. aflcio.org/reports/
responsibility-outsourced .
28 International Labor Rights Forum. Taking Stock .
29 Food & Water Watch. De-Coding Seafood Eco-Labels: Why We Need Public 
Standards . 2010. www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/public_
comments/guides-use-environmental-marketing-claims-project-no.
p954501-00152%C2%A0/00152-56693.pdf .
30 Arnold, Shannon, and Kelly Roebuck. What’s Behind the Label? Assessing the 
Impact of MSC and ASC Seafood Certifications in Canada . SeaChoice. 2017.  www.
seachoice.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Seachoice-ASCMSC-Report-
Online.pdf .
31 SeaChoice. “ASC Certified Salmon Isn’t Really a ‘Good Alternative’ Seafood. ” 
5 June 2017. www.seachoice.org/asc-certified-salmon-isnt-really-a-good-
alternative-seafood .
32 Make Stewardship Count. Home page. 2018. www.make-stewardship-count.
org.
33 White, Cliff. “50 NGOs Critique MSC Over Bycatch. ” SeafoodSource  25 Jan. 
2017. www.seafoodsource.com/news/environment-sustainability/50-ngos-
critique-msc-over-bycatch .
34 Ramsden, Neil. “NGO Group Dissatisfied with MSC Approach to Reforms. ” 
Undercurrent News  6 Feb. 2018. www.undercurrentnews.com/2018/02/06/ngo-
group-unsatisfied-by-mscs-approach-to-reforms .
35 Many retailers believe eco-certifications such as the Aquaculture Stewardship 
Council (ASC) means more responsibly harvested farmed salmon. In July 2018, 
900,000 salmon escaped from an ASC certified farm (Marine Harvest’s Punta 
Redonda facility) in Huar Island, Chile. Guzman, Daniela. “Great Salmon Escape 
Threatens to Taint Chile’s Fish Farms. ” Bloomberg.com. 10 July 2018. www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-07-09/great-salmon-escape-threatens-
to-taint-chile-fish-farm-industry . See ASC certification at marineharvest.
com/globalassets/planet/asc-dashboard/chile/punta-redonda/2018/pta.-
redonda-2018-mayo.pdf .

Carting Away the Oceans    4436 Malakoff, David. “Trump’s New Oceans Policy Washes Away Obama’s Emphasis 
on Conservation and Climate. ” Science | AAAS  20 June 2018. www.sciencemag.
org/news/2018/06/trump-s-new-oceans-policy-washes-away-obama-s-
emphasis-conservation-and-climate .
37 Huffman, Jason. “US House Approves Young’s Magnuson-Stevens Update after 
Sticky Provision Cut. ” Undercurrent News  12 July 2018. www.undercurrentnews.
com/2018/07/12/us-house-approves-youngs-magnuson-stevens-update-
after-sticky-provision-cut .
38 Masterton, Molly. “Congress Is About to Gut the Law That Restored Our 
Fisheries. ” NRDC. 10 July 2018. www.nrdc.org/experts/molly-masterton/
congress-about-gut-law-restored-our-fisheries .
39 Greenpeace International. “Thai Union Commits to More Sustainable, Socially-
Responsible Seafood. ” 11 Jul. 2017. www.greenpeace.org/international/press-
release/7207/thai-union-commits-to-more-sustainable-socially-responsible-
seafood .
40 Environmental Justice Foundation. Pirates and Slaves , p. 5. 
41 Greenpeace Southeast Asia. T urn the Tide .
42 Greenpeace International. “Thai Union Commits to More Sustainable, Socially-
Responsible Seafood. ”
43 Hocevar, John. “Mars and Nestlé Just Stepped Up to Protect the Ocean 
and Workers. Here’s How. ” Greenpeace International. 16 Mar. 2017. www.
greenpeace.org/archive-international/en/news/Blogs/makingwaves/mars-
and-nestle-petfood-protect-the-oceans-stop-transshipment/blog/58957 .
44 Ibid.
45 Aramark. “Aramark Reports Progress on Sustainable Seafood Sourcing 
Goals. ” Business Wire  12 Oct. 2017. www.businesswire.com/news/
home/20171012005867/en/Aramark-Reports-Progress-Sustainable-Seafood-
Sourcing-Goals .
46 ALDI US. “ALDI US Seafood Buying Policy. ” 2016. corporate.aldi.us/
fileadmin/fm-dam/Corporate_Responsibility2/ALDI_US_Seafood_Buying_
Policy__2016_update__FOR_WEBSITE_1_.PDF .
47 Wegmans. “Wegmans Tuna Procurement Policy. ” July 2016. www.wegmans.
com/content/dam/wegmans/pdf/sustainability/Tuna-Procurement-Policy.
pdf.
48 Giant Eagle. “Tuna Policy. ” 2018. www.gianteagle.com/about-us/sustainable-
seafood/tuna-policy .
49 Sprouts Famers Market. “Sustainable Seafood Policy. ” about.sprouts.com/
sustainable-sourcing/sustainable-seafood-policy .
50 Like this 2018 letter circulated to tuna RFMOs: White, Cliff. “118 Organizations 
Make Sustainability Appeal for Global Tuna Fisheries. ” SeafoodSource  18 May 
2018. www.seafoodsource.com/news/environment-sustainability/118-
organizations-make-sustainability-appeal-for-global-tuna-fisheries .
51 World Economic Forum. The New Plastics Economy .
52 van Sebille, Erik, et al. “A Global Inventory of Small Floating Plastic Debris. ” 
Environmental Research Letters  vol. 10, no. 12, 8 Dec. 2015, p. 124006. 
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/12/124006.
53 Katzenberger, T ., and K. Thorpe. Evidence: Assessing the Impact of Exposure to 
Microplastics in Fish . United Kingdom Environment Agency, Report—SC120056. 
Mar. 2015. assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/411982/Assessing_the_impact_of_exposure_
to_microplastics_in_fish_report.pdf .
54 Rochman, Chelsea M., et al. “Anthropogenic Debris in Seafood: Plastic Debris 
and Fibers from Textiles in Fish and Bivalves Sold for Human Consumption. ” 
Scientific Reports  vol. 5, no. 1, 24 Sept. 2015. doi:10.1038/srep14340.
55 Carrington, Damian. “Plastic Fibres Found in Tap Water around the 
World, Study Reveals. ” The Guardian  6 Sept. 2017. www.theguardian.com/
environment/2017/sep/06/plastic-fibres-found-tap-water-around-world-
study-reveals .
56 Laville, Sandra, and Matthew Taylor. “A Million Bottles a Minute: World’s Plastic 
Binge ‘as Dangerous as Climate Change. ’” The Guardian  28 June 2017. www.
theguardian.com/environment/2017/jun/28/a-million-a-minute-worlds-
plastic-bottle-binge-as-dangerous-as-climate-change .
57 United Nations Environment Programme. UNEP Year Book 2011 .
58 United States Environmental Protection Agency. Advancing Sustainable 
Materials Management: 2014 Tables and Figures. 2016. www.epa.gov/sites/
production/files/2016-11/documents/2014_smm_tablesfigures_508.pdf . 59 World Economic Forum and Ellen MacArthur Foundation. The New Plastics 
Economy: Catalysing Action . 2017. www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/
downloads/New-Plastics-Economy_Catalysing-Action_13-1-17.pdf .
60 Luo, Kevin. “Are You Breathing Plastic Air at Home? Here’s How Microplastics Are 
Polluting Our Lungs. ” World Economic Forum. 4 June 2018. www.weforum.org/
agenda/2018/06/microplastic-pollution-in-air-pollutes-our-lungs .
61 See the Break Free From Plastic website: www.breakfreefromplastic.org .
62 Ipsos Global @dvisor. “Global Views on the Environment—2018. ” 2018. www.
ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/news/documents/2018-05/earth_day-2018.
pdf.
63 The David and Lucile Packard Foundation. “American Millennials: Plastic 
Pollution as the Gateway to Engaging the Next Generation of Ocean 
Conservationists. ” May 2017. www.packard.org/insights/resource/millennial-
ocean-plastics-research-plastics-gateway-engaging-next-generation-ocean-
conservationists .
64 International Maritime Organization. GESAMP Report 90: Sources, Fate, 
and Effects of Microplastics in the Marine Environment: A Global Assessment . 
2015. ec.europa.eu/environment/marine/good-environmental-status/
descriptor-10/pdf/GESAMP_microplastics%20full%20study.pdf .
65 Both Bumble Bee and StarKist source tuna from purse seines fishing on FADs 
and longlines, which result in high levels of bycatch. While Bumble Bee offers 
a more sustainable, pole and line caught brand, this is a niche product that is 
not under its flagship brand. StarKist has been associated with poor working 
conditions on vessels from which it sources and, given several incidences of labor 
and human rights abuses in the seafood industry, including the tuna sector, 
companies that do not source from fishing methods that mitigate the risks of 
labor or human rights abuses remain at risk. For more, see www.bumblebee.
com/about-us/seafood-school/tuna-101/ ; starkist.com/sites/default/files/
contentImages/Tuna_Facts_Infographics.pdf ; medium.com/matter/mutiny-
on-the-majestic-blue-80e3d2fbb345 ; www.greenpeace.org/usa/these-are-
the-videos-the-tuna-industry-doesnt-want-you-to-see/ ; www.alternet.org/
labor/why-its-almost-impossible-avoid-being-complicit-slavery-when-you-
buy-tuna-fish .
66 Monterey Bay Aquarium Seafood Watch. “The Seafood Watch App. ” www.
seafoodwatch.org/seafood-recommendations/our-app .
67 This includes Whole Foods sales and other consumables purchased on 
Amazon.com . 
68 Whole Foods Market. “Sustainable Canned Tuna. ” www.wholefoodsmarket.
com/sustainable-canned-tuna .
69 Hy-Vee. “100 Percent of Hy-Vee’s Private-Brand Shelf-Stable Tuna Products Are 
Now Responsibly Sourced. ” Hy-Vee Corporate News  28 Dec. 2017. www.hy-vee.
com/corporate/news-events/news-press-releases/private-brand-tuna-now-
responsibly-sourced .
70 Whole Foods Market. “Sustainable Canned Tuna. ”
71 Trygg Mat Tracking. “Combined IUU Vessel List. ” 2018. iuu-vessels.org/iuu .
72 Hy-Vee. “Seafoodies: A Responsible Choice Blog. ” seafoodies.hy-vee.com .
73 Rohrs, John. “Hy-Vee Commits to Healthy Oceans by Refusing to Sell Chilean 
Sea Bass. ” Hy-Vee Seafoodies. 10 Feb. 2015. seafoodies.hy-vee.com/hy-vee-
commits-to-healthy-oceansby-refusing-to-sell-chilean-sea-bass .
74 Murphy, Sean, ed. “New Report Highlights Threatened Species Bycatch Issues 
in Global Longline Tuna Fishing, Urges Action. ” Sustainable Fisheries Partnership. 
29 Mar. 2018. www.sustainablefish.org/News/New-report-highlights-
threatened-species-bycatch-issues-in-global-longline-tuna-fishing-urges-
action .
75 ALDI US. “Ethical Working Conditions. ” 2018. corporate.aldi.us/en/corporate-
responsibility/supply-chain/ethical-working-conditions .
76 Vidal, John. “Salmon Farming in Crisis: ‘We Are Seeing a Chemical Arms 
Race in the Seas. ’” The Guardian  1 Apr. 2017. www.theguardian.com/
environment/2017/apr/01/is-farming-salmon-bad-for-the-environment . Also 
see endnote 35, which notes the July 2018 escape of 900,000 farmed salmon from 
an ASC certified Marine Harvest facility in Chile.
77 Even Norwegian salmon farms are not problem-free (e.g., sea lice, salmon 
escapes). See www.nytimes.com/2017/11/06/world/europe/salmon-norway-
fish-farms.html .
78 Target. “Target Sustainable Seafood Policy. ” corporate.target.com/_media/
TargetCorp/csr/pdf/Target-Sustainable-Seafood-Policy.pdf .
79 Wegmans. “Seafood Sustainability. ” 2018. www.wegmans.com/about-us/
making-a-difference/sustainability-at-wegmans/seafood-sustainability.
html .

Carting Away the Oceans    4580 Wegmans. “GMOs. ” 2018. www.wegmans.com/service/faq/gmos.html .
81 Wegmans clarifies on its website that it does not currently carry GMO salmon, 
noting that “signing pledges is not something we ever do” (see endnote 80). 
Although Wegmans has made pledges before—it says so directly in its seafood 
policy, committing not to source seafood from the Ross Sea (see endnote 79), 
which Greenpeace has praised as strong leadership. Semantics aside, Wegmans 
should join a majority of retailers profiled in this report and stipulate it will never 
sell GMO seafood.
82 Albertsons Companies. “Albertsons Companies Partners with Trace Register to 
Elevate Seafood Traceability. ” GlobeNewswire  6 Mar. 2018. globenewswire.com/
news-release/2018/03/06/1416071/0/en/Albertsons-Companies-Partners-
with-Trace-Register-to-Elevate-Seafood-Traceability.html .
83 Albertsons Companies. “GMOs. ” 2018. albertsonscompanies.com/gmos .
84 Albertsons Companies. “Albertsons Companies Marks World Oceans Day by 
Taking Actions to Fulfill Our Pledge to End Use of Eel in Sushi. ” 3BL Media. 8 June 
2018. 3blmedia.com/News/Albertsons-Companies-Marks-World-Oceans-Day-
Taking-Actions-Fulfill-our-Pledge-End-Use-Eel-Sushi .
85 White. “118 Organizations Make Sustainability Appeal. ”
86 Ibid.
87 McDowell, Robin, et al. “AP Investigation: Fish Billed as Local Isn’t Always Local. ” 
AP News  15 June 2018. apnews.com/73646ad2aaac4666a7124806b2e6a5bc.
88 This accounts for Kroger’s grocery retail operations:  www.thekrogerco.com/
about-kroger/our-business .
89For a complete list of Kroger’s retailer operations, visit  www.thekrogerco.com/
about-kroger/our-business .
90 Low, Elaine. “Kroger’s Newest Weapon In Online Grocery Delivery Wars: British 
Robots. ” Investor’s Business Daily  17 May 2018. www.investors.com/news/
krogers-ocado-online-grocery-delivery-british-robots .
91 WWF Global. “WWF Disappointed about Certification of New Zealand 
Orange Roughy Fishery. ” 8 Dec. 2016. wwf.panda.org/wwf_news/press_
releases/?287431/WWF-disappointed-about-certification-of-New-Zealand-
orange-roughy-fishery .
92 The Kroger Co. “Social Compliance Program Requirements. ” Jul. 2018. www.
thekrogerco.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/The-Kroger-Co._Social-
Compliance-Program_2018-July.pdf .
93 Greenpeace USA. “2017 Tuna Shopping Guide. ” 
94 As of February 24, 2018.
95 Walmart Corporate. “Walmart Policies and Guidelines. ” 2018. corporate.
walmart.com/policies .
96 Pinsky, David. “Walmart Defends Its Destructive Canned Tuna as Tesco Takes 
Action. ” Greenpeace USA. www.greenpeace.org/usa/campaign-updates/
walmart-defends-destructive-canned-tuna-tesco-takes-action .
97 Trader Joe’s. “FAQs: Product Information. ” www.traderjoes.com/faqs/
general-information?categoryid=2 .
98 Ibid.
99 Trader Joe’s. “Legal Stuff: California Transparency in Supply Chains Act of 
2010. ” 29 Dec. 2011. www.traderjoes.com/home/CA-Transparency-In-Supply-
Chains-Act-Of-2010 .
100 Center for Biological Diversity. “Trader Joe’s Stops Buying Mexican Shrimp 
After Pressure to Protect Vaquita. ” EcoWatch  12 Oct. 2017.  www.ecowatch.com/
trader-joe-mexican-shrimp-2495881800.html .
101 Esposito, Anthony. “Addicted to Antibiotics, Chile’s Salmon Flops at Costco, 
Grocers. ” Reuters  23 July 2015. www.reuters.com/article/us-chile-salmon-
antibiotics-feature/addicted-to-antibiotics-chiles-salmon-flops-at-costco-
grocers-idUSKCN0PX1IG20150723 .
102 Kirkland Signature. “Follow the Path to Traceability. ” www.
tracemyalbacoretuna.com .
103 Bode, Laura. “There’s a New Tuna in Town. ” Costco Connection  vol. 30: 78-79, 
Feb. 2015. www.costcoconnection.com/connection/201502?pg=92#pg92 .
104 Formerly Bi-Lo Holdings, and prior to that, evaluated as Winn-Dixie.
105 White. “118 Organizations Make Sustainability Appeal for Global Tuna 
Fisheries. ”106 Southeastern Grocers. “Southeastern Grocers Becomes the First North 
American Retail Member of the International Pole & Line Foundation. ” Business 
Wire  21 Apr. 2017. www.businesswire.com/news/home/20170421005147/en/
Southeastern-Grocers-North-American-Retail-Member-International .
107 H-E-B. “H-E-B Seafood Policy. ” www.heb.com/static-page/article-template/
H-E-B-Seafood-Policy .
108 H-E-B. “Seafood Frequently Asked Questions. ” www.heb.com/static-pages/
faq?page=Seafood-FAQ .
109 “MSC Attacked over Certification of NZ Orange Roughy. ” Undercurrent News  
8 Dec. 2016. www.undercurrentnews.com/2016/12/08/msc-attacked-over-
certification-of-nz-orange-roughy .
110 WWF Global. “WWF Disappointed about Certification. ”
111 McDowell et al. “AP Investigation: Fish Billed as Local Isn’t Always Local. ”
112 White. “118 Organizations Make Sustainability Appeal. ”
113 As of this writing, Price Chopper’s sustainable seafood policy is not available 
on its newly designed website. The policy is slated to be published on the new 
website in the coming months.
114 The Save Mart Companies. “A Commitment to Seafood Sustainability. ” 2018. 
www.thesavemartcompanies.com/social-responsibility/sustainability/
seafood .
115 McDowell et al. “AP Investigation: Fish Billed as Local Isn’t Always Local. ”
116Trygg Mat Tracking. “Combined IUU Vessel List. ” 2018. 
117 White. “118 Organizations Make Sustainability Appeal. ”
118 Wakefern Food Corp. “Who We Are. ” www2.wakefern.com/home/who-we-
are.
119 ShopRite. “Seafood 101—ShopRite. ” www.shoprite.com/seafood101 .
120 Wakefern Food Corp. “Wakefern Launches Sustainable Seafood Program. ” 17 
Jan. 2014. newsroom.wakefern.com/wakefern/news/wakefern-launches-
sustainable-seafood-program.htm .
121 “ShopRite Commits to Source Four-Star BAP Certified Seafood Products. ” 
SeafoodNews  29 Feb. 2016. www.seafoodnews.com/Story/1009928/ShopRite-
Commits-to-Source-Four-Star-BAP-Certified-Seafood-Products .
122 Ritacco, Joseph, and Stephanie Romine. “ShopRite Is Making It Easier to Eat 
More Fish. ” North Jersey.com. 17 May 2018, www.northjersey.com/story/
sponsor-story/shoprite/2018/05/17/shoprite-offers-variety-sustainable-
seafood/618791002 .
123 Greenpeace USA. “FADs—Scourge of the Sea. ” 28 Nov. 2011. www.greenpeace.
org/usa/fads-scourge-of-the-sea .
124 Bours, Helene, et. al. Out of Line: The Failure of the Global T una Longline 
Fisheries . Greenpeace International. Nov. 2013. www.greenpeace.org/new-
zealand/publication/out-of-line-the-failure-of-the-global-tuna-longline-
fisheries .
125 International Pole & Line Foundation. “What We Do: More about One-by-One 
Fishing. ” 2018. ipnlf.org/what-we-do/resources/what-is-one-by-one-fishing .
126 Pew Trusts. “FAQ: What Is a Regional Fishery Management Organization?” 
23 Feb. 2012. www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/fact-
sheets/2012/02/23/faq-what-is-a-regional-fishery-management-
organization .

Carting Away the Oceans    46
 © Will Rose / Greenpeace