# Archivo original: carving-up-the-congo-part-2.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:41:14 -03 2025

CARVING UP THE CONGO 10
THE WORLD BANK C ONDONES
LOGGING AS A POTENTIAL QUICK FIX ... IN THE NAME OF DE VELOPMENT


CARVING UP THE CONGO
Tropical rainforest destruction and climate
change6are two fundamental drivers
responsible for the world entering a period of
mass species extinction on a scale not seen
since the age of the dinosaurs.7
Climate change is the greatest threat the
world faces today. This global problem
demands a global solution. In February 2007, 
anew report8from the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) underlined thecase for immediate action to reduce all sources
of climate changing GHG emissions, including
deforestation and degradation of forestedland.
9By storing carbon, forests play a
powerful role in mitigating the growing
instability of the climate. 
The Congo rainforests of Central Africa form
the second largest remaining block of largelyintact tropical forest in the world. Yet theseglobally critical carbon reserves are rapidlybeing degraded both by deforestation and by
forestfragment ation – fif tymillion hec tares 
of rainforest is being carved up by logging
companies in C entralAfrica
10(that is an ar ea
the siz eof Spain) – and impor tant c arbon
stocks lost.
The recent return of peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC), the holding ofdemocr atic elec tions f or the firs ttime in the
country’s history and the review of the legality
of current forestry titles provide a uniqueopportunity for the international community 
to support genuine development in one of the
world’s poorest countries and take critical
action to protect the global climate. 
The recovery of the logging industry is probably
the mos tsignific ant change impac ting the
DRC’s forests in the post-war period.
11
Agencies such as the W orld Bank ar eusing
their enormous financial influence to impose
strategies for economic development on
countries such as the DRC. The DRC’s rich
rainforest and mineral resources, the mainstakes of its recent wars, are now at the core
of donor or ganisations ’assumptions about
reconstruction. They are viewed as a quick
source of tax revenue and foreign earnings to
kick-s tartthe c ountr y’s collapsed economy,
and thereby, supposedly, to lift the country’s
people out of poverty.
12‘There is a growing consensus
that the traditionalconcession-based industriallogging model does notgenerate the desiredeconomic, social andenvironmental benefits.’
5
Baroness Amos, Leader of the
UK Government House ofLords and UK Governmentspokesperson on internationaldevelopment, 2006
11
©Greenpeace/Davison

CARVING UP THE CONGO 12
In this report, Greenpeace looks at the World
Bank ’sstrategyof forestryreform against the
Bank’s own measures of the effectiveness of
its pr ogrammes in pov erty alleviation. These
measures, ac cording to the Bank’s ‘Annual
review of development effectiveness 2006:
Getting results’, include: 
1 . accountable and capable governance 2. effective delivery of essential services 
to the poor 
3. sustainable and inclusive economic
development
The firs tsection of this report looks at the
reforms themselves. The second section,
based on Gr eenpe aceresearch and field
investigations, chronicles the governance, 
and social and environmental impacts of
indus trial logging.
Our work shows that even against the Bank’s
own measures, its strategy for forestry sector
reform is set to fail. This strategy isunsustainable since it fails to protect Africa’s
remaining r ainforests, their biodiversity and
their critic al contribution t oprotecting the
global climate. The strategy has also proved
ineffectivein neighbouring c ountries at
tackling corruption or driving genuine
development by supporting the rights and
needs of forest-dwelling communities.THE DRC: LARGEST STRONGHOLD
OF CENTRAL AFRICA’S GLOBALLYSIGNIFICANT CONGO RAINFORESTS
The spectacular Congo rainforests of Central
Africa form the second largest rainforest blockon earth after the Amazon forest, covering
more than 1 72 million hectares.
14The
rainforest contains numerous species of plants
and animals found nowhere else on earth. The
Congo forests are critical to the survival of our
closest animal relatives: the bonobo, thechimpanzee and the gorilla. Millions of people,
too, rely on the rainforest for shelter, medicine,
food and their cultural survival. 
In global terms, the forest plays a critical role
in keeping the planet’s climate stable by
storing carbon.
15The DRC alone accounts for
over 8% of that part of the world’s carbon
stocks which is held in forest biomass and75% of those left in the tropical rainforests ofCentral and West Africa.
16
But the futur eof DR C’srainforestand of the
life that depends upon it is in jeopardy. The
expansion of indus trial logging int oremaining
areas of int actforest is the single largest
threat to these forests.17Across Central Africa,
widespread destruction has been brought by
industrial logging, both directly and via theinflux of settlers, poachers and artisanal orsmall-sc ale miners that ar riveoncelogging
roads have opened a way into the forest.
Outside the DRC, 71% of the richest Congorainforest area is slated for logging.
18
Intact areas of rainforest are critical for
biodiversity protection and global
envir onment al services. Two-thirds19of the
remaining intact areas of Central Africa’s Congo
rainforestlies within the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (DRC).20Ironically, as a result of
decades of despotism and war, much of the
DRC’srainforesthas not yet been destroyed by
the large-scale industrial logging and forest
clearance that has ravaged the rainforests
elsewhere in Africa. Consequently, the DRC has
the largest remaining unbroken areas of largelyintact rainforest, vital to healthy ecosystem
functioning and the sur vival of large forest
mammals such as elephants.
21Well ov er a
quarter22of the DRC is still covered with large
areas of int actrainforest, covering some 60
million hectares.23Within Central Africa as a
whole, only 8.5% of the remaining areas of
intact rainforest enjoys ‘protected’ status.24It is not simply a question of
restoring gov ernanc esystems
and r estarting a dormant
economy [in the DRC], butrather the much moredifficult challenge of totallyreforming existing, ill-adaptedgovernance and economicsystems. This will involve
controlling criminal and
corrupt s ystems and
gradually replacing them with
transparent, equitable anddemocr atic s ystems and
institutions.’
13
2003 report for USAID
©Greenpeace/Davison


CARVING UP THE CONGO
THE BATTLE FOR THE DRC’S
RESOURCES: WINNERS ANDLOSERS
Local people and the wildlife of the DRC have
all suffered as a result of years of conflict inthe battle for control over the country’s rich
resources. With the end of war and democratic
elections in the DRC, the international
community now has a unique opportunity to
ensure that this rainforest is conserved. This is
important for the well-being of thecommunities whose way of life and future
depend upon it, the region’s unique wildlife,
and the sake of the global climate. Urgentaction is needed to avoid replicating the
failures of the past.
In order to understand why the World Bank-
led reforms to the forestry sector in the DRC
are an inappropriate development model forpoverty alleviation, they must be seenagainst the background of the precedingdecade of upheaval. 
Since 1996 with the overthrow of General
Mobutu, c ontinuing thr ough nearly a decade offerocious fighting and atrocities against the
civilian population, and up to the country’s firstmultiparty democratic parliamentary elections
at the end of 2006, the DRC has been a
battleground in a fight for control of naturalresources.
25
Atits height, at least seven foreign armies
were involved in the war. For these forces –
both foreign and Congolese – conflict was
primarily an opportunity to loot the DRC’sresources.
26‘Corrupt and criminal elites’,
backed by foreign multinationals, joined in the
free-for-all for control of the natural wealth of the DRC.
27
During the w ar, extensive logging titles were
awarded. One incentive for this large-scale
speculation was the price: until 2003, a
200,000-hectare logging title cost only $286per year in forest area tax.
28These low taxes
encouraged companies to acquire titles toforest they were not in a position to exploit,
hoping t osuble ase t oother inv estors onc e
economic and political stability was
established.
29‘The danger posed by war 
to all of humanity and to ourplanet is at least matched by the climate crisis andglobal warming.’
30
UN Secretary General 
Ban Ki-moon, 2007
13
©Greenpeace/Verbelen


CARVING UP THE CONGO 14
By 2002, even though production was at a
virtual standstill because of the war, about43.5 million hectares of forest – an area larger
than California and twice the size of the United
Kingdom – were controlled by the loggingindustry
31(in addition to a dubious
arrangement with the Zimbabwean army to
log 34 million hectares of forests made,
ostensibly, in return for Zimbabwean military
support for the Kinshasa authorities32).
Requests for new titles have continued to pourinto the Ministry of Environment.
33
The 285 long-term holdings current in 2002
overlapped with villages, agricultural lands and
biodiversity hotspots, depriving forest
communities of the right to manage their own
forests. The establishment of new protected
areas or community forests, or of forest-based
activities other than logging, was madeimpossible in these areas.
34As a World Bank-
led forestry sector review summarises thesituation: ‘Forests were seized by logging
interests and ther ewas little spac eleftfor
other forest uses.’
35
These pr oblems r emain t oday .
After the war, a new fight for control of 
the rainforest 
According to Transparency International, the
DRCis one of the mos tcorrupt c ountries in
the w orld.36It has been clas sified as the classic
‘failed state’ in Africa – unable to control itsterritory or resources – in a report
commissioned by the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID),
37among
other sources.38
While war obviously provided a critical
oppor tunit yfor mas sive land grabbing in
recent years, the heart of the problem can be
ascribed to the economy of plunder and the
institutional c orruption that has long
characterised the DRC’s political class. For
forty years, public office has been synonymous
with personal profit.39The rule of law does
not exist in the DRC.The logging sector is characterised by
corruption.41As elsewhere, lawlessness and
corruption are an open invitation to loggers to
log irresponsibly without fear of sanction. This
situation has the ef fectof attr acting the most
unscrupulous companies to the DRC, providing
even greater stimulus to corruption. As a
repor tfor USAID on c onflic ttimber s tates: 
‘The DRC’s unenviable reputation as one of the
world’s most corrupt countries in fact
discourages honest logging companies fromoperating in the country because they
recognise that the ywill be competing against a
setofcompanies ac customed to operating in
highly corrupt environments. Dishonest,
aggressivecompanies – “ oper ators” – may,
however, find such an environment attractive
because they see opportunities for quick‘Deforestation is a very large
GHG emission source in thedeveloping world, accountingfor up to 20% of globalemissions – an amountroughly comparable to theentire annual fossil fuelemissions of the UnitedStates. Given the urgency ofthe climate change threat andthe ongoing drastic loss ofbiodiversity, the costeffectiveness and thepotential for relatively rapidemissions reductions fromdeforestation and forestdegradation make it a vital
component of the global
effort to prevent dangerousclimate change.’
40
Climate Action Network
International (CAN), 2007


CARVING UP THE CONGO
profits in a context where rules are poorly
enforced, bribery is commonplace, and
unscrupulous entr epreneurs have broad leeway
to operate as they will. These firms are well
capitalised, as witnes sed by the half million
dollar bribe reportedly offered by a Malaysian
lumber company to the DRC’s timber
allocation unit t oobtain logging c oncessions.’42
In the words of the International Security
Information Service, ‘It is questionable whether
alegitimate industry can even exist in the DRC
where corruption is rampant and accountability
minimal.’43
Anew battle for control of the DRC’s
rainforestis now in full s wing ,with the
interests of logging companies and corrupt
officials set against the rights of forest-dwelling communities and the fate of the
global environment. It is widely feared that 
the imminent c onclusion of the W orld Bank-
led legal review of current forest holdings is
settoconfirm the v ast majority of logging
titles and to open the way to the issuing of
further concessions. The battle is now at a
turning point .
The questions that must be asked are: why
does the World Bank persist in supporting an
industrial logging-led model as the basis fordevelopment, when this model is clearly
unable t omakeameaningful contribution to
the fight agains tcorruption, pov erty
alleviation, or environmental protection? How
does it pr opose t ohelp mee tthe monument al
challenge of supporting genuine development
in the DRC?
15
Above: ©Schlossman
Top: ©Greenpeace/Davison


CARVING UP THE CONGO 16
DRC RAINFOREST DESTRUCTION:
THE WORLD BANK IS A POWERFUL PLAYER
THE WORLD BANK HOLDS THE PURSE
STRINGS BUT WHO CALLS THE SHOTS?
Controlled by rich industrialised countries, the
World Bank is one of the world’s largest
sources of funding for developing countries. It
is the most important international donor in
the DRC, with direct influence on government
policy through its contribution to statefinances. Donor aid currently accounts for
nearly 60% of the DRC’s national budget.
44
The World Bank suspended financial assistance
to the DRC during the conflicts of the 1990s
and r esumed lending in 2001. By August 2006,
the World Bank Group had approved loans,
credits and grants to the DRC worth more
than $4 billion.45
The World Bank is by far the most influential
international actor behind the reform of the
DRCforestrysector.Several of the World
Bank’s budgetary support operations in the
DRChavebeen specific ally linked to the
implement ation of f orestreform measures. 
In June 2002, the World Bank approved a
$450 million Economic Recovery Credit for theDRC. The release of $15 million of this wasmade c onditional on the adoption of the DR C
Forestry Code.
46The nego tiations on this
structural credit between the World Bank andthe interim DRC Government also resulted in
the May 2002 moratorium on the granting of
new logging titles.
47
One objec tiveof the World Bank’s December
2005 $90 million budgetary support was that
the 2 002moratorium be maintained until the
completion of a legal review of existing titles
and the development of a three-year
geogr aphic al dis tribution plan f or futur e
concessions. In response, the President Kabila
issued a presidential decree in October 2005
upholding the moratorium and laying out
criteria and a timeline for a legal review.48
The W orld Bank ’smission in the context of the
DRC’sforests is to help tackle corruption,
alleviate poverty, promote and supportsustainable development and consolidate
peace, while safeguarding the DRC’s globallyimportant natural heritage.
49However, the
Bank’s actual policy and project work on the
ground in the DRC focuses on generatingexport-derived revenue for the Government
on the basis of exploitation of the DRC’s
natural resources. The DRC’s rich rainforest and
mineral resources are at the core of the Bank’s
assumptions about reconstruction. They are
viewed as a quick source of tax revenue andforeign earnings to kick-start the country’s
collapsed economy,
50and thereby to lift the
country’s people out of poverty.
The majority of the World Bank’s operations
havebeen classified as either ‘emergency
lending’, or adjustment loans for policy reforms
and budget support, for which the Bank’s
social and environmental safeguard policies donot apply.
51Further, because the reforms are
more an expression of the World Bank than theautonomous political vision of the DRC
Government ,their viabilit yis ques tionable,
given the potential lack of political will for 
their on-the-gr ound implement ation in ye ars
tocome.
52
The real decision-makers at the World Bank
are member governments. Membergovernments exercise the direction of theWorld Bank thr ough a Boar dof Gov ernors.
Thereis one governor for each of the 184
member countries, consisting mainly of financeand development ministers from the
represented countries.
53The Board usually
meets once a year to review operations and
basic policies; it also controls the budget. The
Boar ddelegat es the day-to-day running of the
Bank to 24 full-time Executive Directors based
at the Bank ’sheadquar ters in Washington DC.
Unlike the United Nations, where each member
nation has an equal vote, voting power at the
World Bank is de termined by a nation ’s
financial contribution. Five countries control
nearly 40% of all votes: France, Germany,
Japan, the United Kingdom and the United
States.54
The W orld Bank and those who c ontrol it have
notyetexercised their influence to ensure that
the Bank’s financial support for the DRC is
used appr opriat ely or ef fectively to achieve
genuine development.‘All loans are governed by our
operational policies, whichmake sure that operations wefund are economically,financially, socially andenvironmentally sound.’
55
World Bank Group brochure,
2006
‘The ultimate goal was
harnessing the potential offorests to reduce poverty.’
56
World Bank, 2005


CARVING UP THE CONGO
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS EXPOSE 
THE FLAW IN WORLD BANK STRATEGY
Greenpeace’s field investigations in both
Cameroon and the DRC expose how counting
on the logging industry to fight poverty tendsto have the opposite result, compromising
efforts to tackle corruption and build good
governance, and failing to meet the needs of
the poor or to ensure the long-term health of
the global environment.
Beyond the rhetoric, the World Bank’s
commitment to the principle of using the
forestry sector to generate revenue that canbe ‘trickled down’ to benefit forest dwelling
communities and protect the environment has
been implement ed to only a limited extent in
the DRC, resulting in little positive impact. 
The practical application of the principle so far
amounts to the devolution of tax revenue forlocal development projects, and the proposedformalisation of a pre-existing ad hoc systemwhereby logging companies enter into social
responsibilit ycontracts (c ahiers des char ges)
with forest dwelling communities to provide
social as sistance, facilities and infrastructure –
these ‘ contracts of shame ’amount to little
more than licenses to loot.
Taxes or private income? 
Central to World Bank strategy is the concept
that by alloc ating r ainforestto logging
companies and collecting tax on it, the DRC
Government will have money for developmentfor rainforest communities. In 2003–2006, no
taxes have been redistributed to local
authorities in the DRC. No accounting or
distribution systems at the provincial or
territory levels have been established by the
DRC Government to distribute taxes.
57
Greenpeace fears that the same mechanisms
of fraud, corruption and embezzlement of
public funds that sank C amer oon’sforest
reform will become prevalent in the DRC
forestry sector.Social responsibility contracts are little more
than licences to loot
World Bank-driven reforms formalise a colonial
tradition whereby a logging company deals
with local communities in an area of forestwhere the company wishes to prospect or log.
Rather than genuinely contributing to poverty
alleviation, this approach produces forest
community dependency on the industry in
exchange for the loss of their forest resources.
Building schools and hospitals is a centralfunction of the state, and should not be reliant
on handouts from profit-making companies –
which generally complete such projects to verylow standards or fail to carry them out
altogether. When entering into these contracts
the objec tive of logging companies is simply to
‘buy’ social peace by offering the most meagre
benefits they can get away with – the deals
are depicted by one source as ‘wood in returnfor beer and a football pitch’.
60
AWorld Bank-led forestry sector review
concedes that these c ontracts areapoor
substitute for state provision:
‘In w ell func tioning S tates, the State provides
social services throughout the country. In the
DRC context, the cahier des charges [social
responsibility contract] makes up for theState’s inability to provide such services inremoteareas.’
61
Bydefending this arrangement as a ‘legitimate’
substitute for properly planned and equitable
development, without any suggestion that 
this will be a purely temporary arrangement
until the State can build up sufficient capacity
toassume these responsibilities, the World
Bank is helping build dependence on logging
rather than f ostering genuine development 
in the DRC.‘[For 40 years, World Bank 
aid has been] helping thewrong people, doing thewrong things. … The endresult is very little good for Afric ans.’
58
Robert Calderisi, former
World Bank spok esman 
on Afric a, 2006
‘It is common knowledge 
that the revenues earned inthe logging sector wereshared directly by politicalelites and the logger s
themselves with little concern
for loc al populations or the
environment. This continues
to generate seriousconflic ts.’
59
Theodor Trefon, 2006
17
©Greenpeace/Davison


CARVING UP THE CONGO 18
The following timeline describes the key
events in international involvement in the DRC
during and following the wars. As this shows,while many international bodies have called 
for the corrupt system of control of natural
resources – including the rainforest – to be
tackled, in many respects the problem has
increased.
April 1999 – 
Recommendation to cancel dormant
logging titles
In April 1999, a DRC Government
Interministerial Committee on Timber
recommends ‘rescinding all agreements and
contracts for non inventoried, abandoned
and/or undeveloped forests’.62No immediate
action is taken by the Government.
June 2000 – 
UN Security Council sets up fact
finding mission
In June 2000, the UN Security Council (UNSC)
establishes a panel of e xperts to collect
information on ac tivities of illegal e xploit ation
of natural resources in the DRC.63Although
the panel’s fact finding mission is intended to
include diamonds, gold, coltan, copper, cobalt,timber, wildlife reserves, fiscal resources andtrade in gener al, mos tof the w ork of the panel
pertains to mineral resources. The panel
publishes its findings in October 2002 (seebelow).
November 2001 –
UN Security Council recommends 
the imposition of a boycott on the trade in resources including
hardwood originating in 
rebel-held zones
2001 – 
World Bank resumes aid to the DRC
In 2001, the World Bank re-engages with the
DRC. By August 2006, the World Bank has
approved loans, credits and grants to the DRCworth more than $4 billion.
64Much of this is
linked toreform of the forestry sector. April 2002 – 
Commission to review wartime title
allocations
The Sun City Agreement, signed in South
Africa in April 2002, establishes the transitional
DRC Government to run the country until
democratic elections can be held, and provides
for a parliamentary commission to review the
legality of extractive titles allocated during therecent wars to make sure they conform with
Congolese law and that taxes due to the State
in respect of them have been paid.
67
The commission’s report, known as the
Lutundula Report,68is no tsubmitted to
parliament until June 2005, by which time
events have overtaken it; moreover it focuses
largely on mining rather than the loggingindustry. Nevertheless, that it is commissionedat all shows that the Government alreadyrecognises that the allocation of rights to
extractiveindus tries poses a pr oblem. 
April 2002 – 
Tax review leads to cancellation
of logging titles covering 18
million hectares
THE NUMBERS GAME 
–AREA OF FOREST CONTROLLED 
BY LOGGING COMPANIES:PRE-TAX REVIEW 
285 logging titles covering 
43.5 million hectares of
rainforest
69
POST-TAX REVIEW 
122 logging titles covering 18 million hectares of
rainforest
70
In April 2002, a ministerial decree initiates a
firstreview of the s tatus of 285 logging
contracts covering 43.5 million hectares of
rainforest. Although this initial review only
looks at payment of taxes, it leads to the
cancelling of 163 contracts covering 25.5million hectares of rainforest,
71according to
the Minis tryof Envir onment’s June 2002
compendium.72‘A moratorium should be
declared for a specific periodof time banning the purchaseand importing of preciousproducts such as coltan,diamonds, gold, copper,cobalt, timber and coffeeoriginating in areas whereforeign troops are present inthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, as well as interritories under the controlof rebel groups.’
65
UNSC 
‘With more than 90% of the
1.2 billion people living inextreme pov ertydependent
on forests for some part of
their liv elihoods, good f orest
sector gov ernanc eis int egral
to the Bank’s mission of
poverty reduction, and a keycomponent of the Bank’sfight against corruption.’
66
Katherine Sier ra, Vic e
President for Sustainable
Development, World Bank,2006
THE REFORM PROCESS: A CATALOGUE OF DELAYS AND FAILURES


CARVING UP THE CONGO
May 2002 – 
Moratorium on the issuing of newlogging titles is imposed and
immediately violated
In May 2002, as part of negotiations over
budgetary support, the World Bank persuades
the transitional Government to impose a
moratorium on the issuing of new logging
titles. This is intended to allow time to review
the legalit yof the logging c ontracts that
remained after the initial April 2002 tax review
and to complete all the legal decrees necessary
toimplement the new fr amew ork F orestry
Code (see below), also developed under
pressure from the Bank.73
On 14 May 2002, the Ministry of
Environment issues a decree74suspending
the alloc ation of new indus trial logging
titles75and the r enew al or e xtension of
existing ones, pending ‘the adoption of
transpar ent alloc ation pr ocedur es’.76How ever,the mor atorium is violated almost
immediat ely. New logging contracts for
Soforma and CFT are signed on 31 May 2002–barely two weeks after the moratorium 
is imposed.
77
August 2002 – 
The Forestry Code adopted
Modelled on the Forestry Law that the World
Bank dev eloped f or Camer oon in 1994, the
Forestry Code is to be the principal legal tool
for reform of the forestry sector in the DRC.
Asin Camer oon, the law is pushed thr ough by
the World Bank. The release of $15 million of
budgetary support is made conditional on its
adoption78and consequently law 11/2002 is
adopted by the transitional Government of theDRC in August 2002, replacing the 1949
colonial f orestry regulations. The Forestry Code
claims t omakeakeycontribution to
environmentally responsible and socially just
development :
19
©Greenpeac e/Davison
‘It is common knowledge that
the revenues earned in thelogging sector were shareddirectly by political elites andthe loggers themselves withlittle c oncern for local
populations or the
envir onment .This c ontinues
to generate serious conflicts
between stakeholders.’
79
Theodor T refon, 2 006

CARVING UP THE CONGO 20
‘The forestry system aims to promote rational
and sustainable management of forest
resources to increase their contribution to the
economic, social and cultural development fortoday’s generation while preserving the forest
ecosystems and biodiversity for the benefit of
future generations.’
80
October 2002 – 
UN Security Council recommendsreview of wartime logging titles
In October 2002, the UNSC finally publishes
the findings of its independent panel ofexperts on the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of the DRC.
81Its
recommendations include the examination of
wartime-issued logging titles, and calls for the
World Bank among others to provide the
support necessary for such a review:
‘Reforms of the mining and the forestry sectors
should include the review of all concessions
and c ontr acts signed dur ing bo th w ars.On
the basis of the Panel’s findings, this could also
targetall informal agreements on the awarding
of concessions and the implement ation of
contracts. The international community,
including the World Bank, the International
Finance Corporation and UNDP, could
collaborate closely with this commission and
provide the suppor tnecessaryfor it to carry
out its w ork in a thorough and objective
manner.’82(Greenpeace emphasis)
June 2002–May 2003 – 
New titles granted
THE NUMBERS GAME
May 2003: 132 loggingtitles covering 19,403,498hectares of rainforest
83
Ayear af ter the decr ee ins tituting a
moratorium on new allocations of logging
titles, a first list is published of existing titles to
be subject to legal review prior to conversion
to concessions in line with the new ForestryCode. The list published on 24 May 2003 in le
Potentiel
84–the DR C’sleading newspaper –
includes logging titles c overing an additional
1.5 million hectares of rainforest that do not
appe ar on the Minis tryof Envir onment ’s
unpublished 2002 list of 122 titles covering 
18 million hectares.852003 – 
The World Bank extractive
industries review completed
The World Bank-commissioned Extractive
Industries Review (EIR) evaluation of the
contribution of World Bank projects is
completed. It concludes that, where basic
conditions of good governance are absent, the
oil, gas and mining sectors have no record and
little hope of contributing to povertyreduction.
86
Its final report presents a series of
recommendations, including that the World
Bank should not support private investment 
in extractive industries in countries where 
pro-poor governance is inadequate.87
In August 2004, the World Bank Group
responds by making commitments to changeits operations and policies.
88
June 2005 – 
Lutundula report published
The Lutundula Report on extractive titles
issued during w artime advises that the
management of natur al resour ces has
worsened during the transitional period in the
lead up to democratic elections (2002-2006),
recommends that many titles be reviewed andurges that no new ones be allocated.
89
July 2005 – 
Ministry of Finance tax review 
of logging contracts
In July 2005 the Ministry of Finance publishes
how much area tax had been collected for the
year 2004. About 45% of area tax (annual tax
on the land ar ea) is unpaid by logging
companies, which suggests that contracts
covering many millions of hec tares are being
held by operators who fail to comply with the
terms of their contracts.90Companies included
on the published lis tof def aulters include
Trans-M, Siforco, and Soforma (NST).91
According to the Ministry of Environment, only
18 contracts covering 2.1 million are cancelled
in 2005.92
October 2005 – 
‘The legal review’: another legalreview of logging titles
Between July 2 004and Sept ember 2005, four
successive ministerial decrees93on the process
for conversion of logging titles are signed
outlining the rules for the conversion of forest


CARVING UP THE CONGO
titles to concessions in accordance with the
Forestry Code. 
Finally, under further pressure from the World
Bank as a result of the weaknesses of these
ministerial decrees and the continued
moratorium violations, on 24 October 2005
the president of the DRC issues a decree94
confirming the validity of the May 2002
moratorium, and extending the criteria to bemet before it can be lifted. In addition, the
presidential decree formally initiates a legal
review requiring an assessment of the validityof all existing logging titles submitted 
for conversion in line with the new 
Forestry Code.
95
The decree commits the DRC Government to
maintaining the moratorium on the awardingof new concessions until new rules for theawarding of logging titles through publicauction are adopted, until the legal review is
comple ted, and until the adoption of ‘ athree-
year rolling plan for future concessions based
on par ticipat oryprocess of public consultation
…so that e xcessively large forest areas are not
opened up too quickly’.
96
November 2005 – 
More new titles
THE NUMBERS GAME
November 2005: 141 contracts covering20,354,861 hectares
97
Although the Ministry of Environment’s
compendium in June 2 002 lists just 122 titles
covering 18 million hectares, an official list
published in Nov ember 2 005reports 141 titles
covering nearly 20.4 million hectares, a net
increase of some 2.4 million hectares. These
titles include 1 00dated af ter the M ay 2002
moratorium, covering a total of 15 million
hectares.98
April 2006 – 
Titles put forward for conversion
THE NUMBERS G AME
April 2006: 156 logging titles c overing some
21 million hectares of rainforest are put
forwardfor conversion and legal review99In April 2006, a list is published in the DRC
newspaper l’Avenir of the logging titles being
put forward for legal review and conversion to
logging concessions under the new system.100
The list includes many contracts signed after
the moratorium.
Other illegalities, such as social and
environmental crimes and failure to pay tax,
are not disclosed by the list. 
February 2007 – 
Un Security Council calls forurgent action against all illegal
natural resource exploitation
On 25 Januar y2007, the UNSC panel of
experts presents its latest report.101
It recommends: 
‘Urgent intervention against all forms of illegalnatural resource exploitation is required … TheGroup of Experts recommends that theexisting laws of the Democratic Republic of
the C ongo ,particularly the r egulations
governing natural resources and their orderly
exploit ation, be used as a baseline f or a new
sanc tions r egime.’
102
Late 2007? – 
Legal review grants successfulcompanies four year license toloot?
Oncethe legal review is completed, logging
companies whose titles have been acceptedfor conversion will have four years in which to
put together a forest management plan
addressing social and environmental issues. If
the example of Cameroon’s experience is
indic ative, during this time they may carry on
their unregulated plunder of the rainforests as
usual. What will happen t ocancelled titles is
still unclear. The 2005 presidential decree
states that companies have the right to appeal,
but loc al communities dir ectly af fected by the
outcome do not. Will legal challenges allow
companies whose titles have been cancelled to
continue exploiting them while their challenges
proceed through the courts, a process thatcould take years?
21
©Greenpeace/Davison

CARVING UP THE CONGO 22
WITHOUT ENFORCEMENT, WORLD
BANK-LED FORESTRY INITIATIVESCAN MAKE POVERTY WORSE
The World Bank states that good governance
and anti-corruption are central to povertyalleviation. 
The World Bank congratulates itself for the
April 2002 (tax) review which cancelled
forestry titles covering 25 million hectares. Its
online Q & A celebrates this ‘cancellation ofnon-compliant concessions [sic]’ as ‘an
unprecedented move anywhere in the world’,
critical to ‘slow[ing] the expansion of logging’and ‘free[ing] up space for potential new
protected areas in the rainforest part of the
country.’
103In fact, in the absence of good
governance, the cancellation of non-compliant
titles has freed up space for new, predatory
logging operations. 
The key initiatives introduced by the World
Bank to regain control of the industrial logging
indus try–the mor atorium on the alloc ation of
new forest holdings, the legal review of current
forestholdings, and the Forestry Code
governing the management of the f orest–are
set to fail because they do not challenge the
corruption that characterises business and
politics in the DRC. The legal review’s narrowscope (which may not even be rigorouslyapplied), the f ailuretoenac tdecrees to
implement the k ey social and environmental
provisions of the Forestry Code, and theabsence of mechanisms to enforce both the
Forestry Code and the moratorium and to
penalise infractions, all contribute to undermine
forestry reform.
While few new areas have been protected since
the 2 002moratorium, the DRC Government
has signed logging contracts for new titles
(new allocations), new title boundaries
(extended titles), and r enew al of e xisting titles. 
In some cases, new contracts have been signed
for titles in areas previously occupied by ‘non-
compliant titles’, many of them in intact forestlandscapes. Apparent examples include CFT,
Forabola, ITB, Sic obois,  Sodefor, and Trans-M.
104
The legal review – another World Bank-led
attempt t obring the logging indus tryin the
DRC under control – also looks set to endorse
the de facto expansion of industrial logging.The r emit of this legal review amounts to a
paper review. Beyond payment of tax and thetitle having been obtained following due
process, to pass the legal review a logging title
must ‘[comply] with boundaries as defined by
the contract and the topographical map
attached t osaid contract’. 
This is a critic al issue bec ause many c ompanies
(eg Sodefor and Siforco) handed back forest
post-2002 when taxes were set to increase.
Theymay hav ebeen gr anted new (updat ed)
contracts at this stage to reflect the change
and may have taken the opportunity to redraw
their boundaries. This means that companies
will have had the opportunity to effectivelylaunder new forest holdings through the legal
paper r eview (no on the gr ound check shave
been pos sible). 
The po tential bypas sing of due pr ocessto gain
new forest holdings is a governance,
environmental and a social issue. On the latter‘Contrary to the moratorium
on such contracts, in early2003 concessions covering6-9 million hectares wereallocated by mutualagreement (alloc ation de gr é
àgré), and c ertain contracts
that had been cancelled in
April 2002 w erereinstated,
by way of exception, in 
early 2004.’
105
Government of the DRC, 2004
©Greenpeace/Davison


CARVING UP THE CONGO
point, while the Forestry Code does recognise
the rights of forest dwelling communities in theprocess of allocating new areas of forest, they
will effectively be marginalised by the legal
review due to inadequate consultation with noappropriate mechanisms to resolve outstanding
conflicts. This is left to the development of
forest management plans, which companies
have four years to prepare. 
Fundamentally, in the context of the DRC – as
elsewhere in Africa – focusing primarily on the
raising of state revenue through industry
reform does not create the necessarypreconditions to bring genuine development
because it does not tackle corruption.
THE MORATORIUM HAS FAILED TO PREVENT
MILLIONS OF HECTARES OF LOGGING TITLES
BEING AWARDED
As the numbers show (see pp82–85), the
moratorium – while intended to allow time for the development of a more considered,
coherent and ef fectiveapproach t othe
management of the DRC’s forest resource –
has f ailed t oclamp down on the alloc ation of
new f oresttitles.
Right from the start of the moratorium in May
2002, ‘interest groups began to undermine thereform strategy by taking advantage of thefragile c oalition gov ernment ’.
107Asaresult ,
indus trial logging rights have continued to be
granted. The official list published in November2005 includes 1 00 forestry contracts signed
after the moratorium began, covering a total
of 15 million hectares.
108
How hav elogging c ompanies and officials
allowed this violation of the law to happen? 
AWorld Bank-led f orestry sector review
identifies various irregularities. For instance:
‘Companies reportedly relinquished forests
theyfound non-pr oduc tiveor the yhad alr eady
logged over, but in some cases these low-
value forests were exchanged for new ones.
Thirty-two contracts covering 4.6 million
hectares were reportedly awarded in 2003under the guise of such “remapping” or
“exchange” of old titles. Similar transactions
seem t ohavecontinued in 2 004 and 2005
under the guise of “readjustments” and
“relocations ”.’
109While such ‘exchanges’ do not necessarily
increase the total area under title, they are inall but name, new titles. They open up new
areas of forest to logging with all the
associated impacts, without proper land useplanning, without transparency, without open
and competitive allocation, and without
consideration to other forest uses (see NST
case study below). The review also notes that
across these 32 titles ‘there appears to be a
discrepancy of more than 1 million hectares’between the forest area described in the titles
and the boundaries drawn on the maps
attached to them.
110Another irregularity
identified by the World Bank-led forestry
sector review is the ‘rehabilitation’ of at least 7
titles that w ere cancelled in 2002, covering
2.4 million hectares.
This information, available in a recent joint
World Bank report to which the World Bankcontributed,
111leads to two important
conclusions. Firstly, that the scale of the
problem is mas sive(what ever the ac tual ar ea
of forest involved). And secondly, that it is
impos sible f or anyone o ther than the World
Bank, the Independant Obser ver – ov erseeing
the legal review of logging titles pre- or post-
monatorium – and the DRC Government to
make considered judgement of the situationdue to the opacity with which informationrelating t othe indus tryis presented (for
instance, the failure to name logging
companies or to present maps). Throughoutthe reform process, no maps have been made
publicly available by either the DRC
Government or the Independent Observer,
further obstructing efforts to expose
moratorium violations through improved
transparency.
Areport funded by the UK Department for
International Development alleges that many
of the logging titles alloc ated following the
moratorium have represented a valuable
‘currency’ to members of the political elite.
112
Hence, in the absence of enforcement – either
by the appropriate State authorities, or throughother forms of action against those profiting
from c orruption – foreign companies have not
only benefit ed fr om but cle arly r einforced the
political corruption that has controlled the
DRC’sresour ces throughout its history. [I]n spite of the moratorium 
agross 15 million hectares
were reportedly exchanged orrelocated. These
transactions reflect theweight o fthe interests
involved.’
106
World Bank-led f orestry
sector review, 2007 
23


CARVING UP THE CONGO 24
NORD-SUD TIMBER CASHES IN 
ON 3 MILLION HECTARES OFRAINFOREST IN BREACH OF THE MORATORIUM
During 2002–03 the companies of the
Liechtenstein-based, Portuguese-owned and
managed Nordsudtimber (NST) group, in
collaboration with officials in the DRC’s Ministry
ofEnvironment organised a major restructuring
of the group’s forest titles.113The DRC State
has been a shareholder in at least one of the
NST group of companies, and the present level
of state participation or political shareholdersNST or its subsidiaries (Sodefor, Soforma,
Forabola, CFT) is unclear.
114
Perhaps motivated by the increase in the forest
area tax from $0.062/ha in 2003 to $0.50/ha
in 2007,115NST abandoned large areas of
unproductive forest (logged-out forests andareas unsuitable for logging such as savannahor swamp). Certain NST logging titles were
comple tely abandoned, and o thers only
partially, with boundaries being modified to
exclude the non-pr oductive forest.
116Atthe
same time, how ever,the gr oup ob tained a
number of new logging titles after the
moratorium was signed.117
Figures on how much new forest NST obtained
vary,but c onser vative estimates indicate that
the v ast majority of NST’s forest holdings (over
65%, covering more than 3 million hectares)are new forest areas which it did not control
prior to the moratorium.
118  
In 2004 and 2005, the then Vice President
Abdoulaye Y érodia and then Minister of
Forestry Anselme Enerunga confirmed the
‘legalit y’of these titles,119notwiths tanding
their post-moratorium allocation.
NSTargues that all these new titles ar e
legitimate: it claims not to have been aware of
the existence of the moratorium, and
everything was arranged with the Ministry of
Environment.120
NSTdoes no tdisput ethat it is logging in areas
it did no tcontrol at the time of the mor atorium
–only it prefers not to call the titles in question
‘new aw ards’. In a 2 004response to
Greenpeace’s request for information, Sodefor
(an NST company) manager José Albano MaiaTrindade explained:‘Recently, 
aredefinition of part of Sodefor’s
concessions was carried out with the objective
of effectively allocating useful logging areas, in
conformity with the permits we controlled, andwhich would give us the means to restart our
activities at the end of the war years. It’s thus
not a question of the award of new
concessions.’
121[Greenpeace emphasis]
Clearly numerous new titles have been
allocated under the guise of a ‘redefinition’ or
‘exchange’ of old titles. These awards
nevertheless constitute new acquisitions, andthus violate the moratorium. 
In addition, these new NS Ttitles seem to
violate the new DRC Forestry Code:
122 
sMethod of allocation: NST post-moratorium
titles were all arranged via discretionaryprocedures rather than via a public auctionprocedure. It is difficult to argue that the
allocations of sev eral do zen titles c overing
three million hectares can all be presented as
‘exceptional cases’, as required by Article 83
of the C ode. 
sSale price for allocation: Since no floor price
for auctioning concessions had been set atthe time the new titles were allocated, it wasimpos sible t ofix a pric efor discr etionary
allocations as required by Article 86. 
sArea of allocation: The area obtained has
been largely in excess of 500,000 hectares,
in contravention of Article 92 which limits
the area of new titles that any one company
can ob tain.
sConsult ation with loc al communities: There
was no public consultation on the new
allocations, in contravention of Article 94
(indeed, the rules f or public c onsult ation
were yet to be defined by ministerial decree
at the time NST’s new titles were arranged)
sRedundant framework: Finally, the new titles
are referred to as ‘letter of intent’ and ‘wood
produc tsupply guar antee’. Neither of these
types of permit ar erecognised in the new
Forestry Code and they can no longer legally
be alloc ated.©Greenpeace/Daniels


CARVING UP THE CONGO
These new NST title allocations have also been
granted in the absenc eof land use planning ,
since the process of forest zoning stipulated in
the Forestry Code has been stalled (see page
58–63). Proper land use planning prior to any
increase in forest controlled by industriallogging interests is essential to ensuring socially
justand envir onment ally responsible
development f or the DR C.
Many of the NS Ttitles ar elocated in int act
forest landscapes and other areas of high
conservation value, including bonobo habitat,and may also overlap with villages and otherareas where local people depend heavily on the
forest.For example, Compagnie Forestière et
de Transformation (CFT) title GA 15/03
(Orientale Province) and Soforma GA 06/03
(Equateur Province) are both partially located in
the Maringa-Lopori-Wamba landscape (seepp61–62), an area which has been identified 
as a priorit ylandsc ape f or conservation by the
Congo Basin F orestPartnership (CBFP).
123
Timber fr om the NS Tgroup is impor ted into
European countries, including Belgium, France,
Germany, Sweden, Italy and Portugal.124
25
Nioki
OshweSODEF OR
SODEF OR
SODEFORSODEF OR SODEF ORSODEFOR
SODEFOR
SODEFOR
SODEF ORSODEF ORSODEF ORSODEFOR
SODEFORLake Ma iNdomé
Luke nie River
Kasai RiverLake Tum ba
Lake Télé -Lake Tumba 
Landsca pe
Salong a-Lukenie -Sankura 
Landscape
Intact Fo rest La ndsc apes L ogging Titles
Sodefor’s logging titles in the DRC


CARVING UP THE CONGO 26
THE LEGAL REVIEW: WILL IT LAUNDER
ILLEGAL TITLES AND LEAVE CORRUPTIONUNCHALLENGED?
The legal review is a crisis point for the World
Bank, the DRC Government and the country’srainforest – the future of more than 20 million
hectares of forest hangs in the balance.
The legal review is a crucial opportunity to
stand up for good governance and the rule of
law. A display of firm governance is urgently
needed by cancelling forest contracts held byloggers who have gained control of the
rainforest illegitimately, or whose operations
support corruption or violate social andenvironmental laws. 
Unfortunately, however, the legal review looks
set to reward corruption rather than tackle it,
due to the weakness of the criteria against
which it will assess the legitimacy of titles. Thereview will not look at the way titles wereoriginally awarded – eg whether they wereawarded during wartime, or whether bribery
or other c orrupt e xchanges w ereinvolved –
but merely at whether or not companies have
complied with the t erms of the c ontract
agreed with the Minis tryof Envir onment .New
logging titles agreed with the Ministry of
Environment after May 2002 ought to fail the
legal review as they violate both themoratorium
12 5and the Forestry Code. 
The r eview will assess legality in terms of
compliance with a few very basic elements,12 6
the most important being the ‘legal validity of
the title’ (ie that it was obtained in accordance
with the correct procedures), ‘full payment of
forest area fees since 2003’ (ie since the end
of the w ar) and ‘ complying with boundaries as
defined by the contract and the topographical
map att ached t osaid c ontract’.12 7On v arious
occasions in 2006, Greenpeace has soughtclarification of the actual scope of the review
from the appoint ed Independent Obser ver
128
team overseeing the process (staffed by the
World Resources Institute (WRI) and Agreco).
They responded as follows:
sPayment of taxes: Article 118 of the
Forestry Code stipulates that ‘Any
suspension of payment [of t axes] shall
constitute ... a cause of forfeiture and result
in the c ancellation of the f orestcontract.’129
Greenpeace suspects that retrospective
payment will be deemed acceptable. In otherwords, legality will be bought retrospectively.The DRC Government has already been lax in
enforcing the area tax. In 2004, for instance,
according to a World Bank-led forestry sector
review, 45% of area tax on logging titles was
unpaid.
130ADRCMinis tryof Finance 2005 list
of titles that had not paid tax in 2003-2004
shows that of the contracts up for conversion
that w eresigned prior t othe mor atorium, only
about 40 did not appear on the list of
defaulters during this period.131As of March
2007, the definitive listing of tax payments
2003-05 has still not been published. In thefourth report on its activities, the Independent
Obser ver complains of significant
discr epancies be tween document ation made
available for review.
132
sCompliance with boundaries: The
Independent Observer agrees with
Greenpeace that the ‘presence of infraction
reports is an inadequate means of verifying


CARVING UP THE CONGO
title holder’s respect of boundaries in the
DRC’. In a letter to Greenpeace in November2006, the Independent Observer admitted:
‘It is a weakness in the process that we are
concerned about, but we do not have afeasible alternative to offer.’
133
This admission effectively rules out one of the
criteria of the legal review, and potentially
legitimises gross tax avoidance in cases where
loggers have been logging larger areas offorest than that for which they have paid the
relevant taxes. 
sValidity of title: According to the
Independent Observer, the correct
applic ation process will have to have been
observed (ie obtaining a Prospecting
Authorisation and then a Letter of Intent
before receiving a Guarantee of Supply) andthe title holder must have a functioningprocessing plant.
134 
Thus the r eview seems unlik ely tobe ef fective
even on its own narrow terms. There is also a
ques tion mark ov er what will happen if and
when titles in violation of the mor atorium ar e
actually cancelled: title holders are likely to use
their right of appeal to play for time and
continue logging.135Logging and the
establishment of logging infrastructure arealready under w ay in many of the titles
allocated in breach of the moratorium,
amounting to de facto land use decisions infavour of industrial logging which will be
extremely challenging to reverse.
In October 2006, a coalition of NGOs including
Greenpe ace contacted the World Bank to raise
further concerns about the shortcomings and
risksof the legal r eview .
136These included:
sfailure to undertake participatory land use
planning (z oning) prior t othe c omple tion of
the legal review process
sthe absence of a guarantee that social
conflicts within existing logging title areaswill be fully assessed and every effort made
toresolv ethem prior to the completion of
the legal r eview pr ocess(see social chapter)
Similar c oncerns hav ebeen e xpressed by the
Independent Observer.
137Greenpeace fears that the legal review is not
going to seize the opportunity to contribute topoverty alleviation and environmental
protection by reining in the worst excesses of
the logging companies.
THE WORLD BANK LEAVES THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF MEASURES TO
MITIGATE SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACTS LARGELY TO THE INDUSTRY ITSELF 
Under the Forestry Code (see below) logging
companies who keep their forest holdings have
four years from the conclusion of the legal
review to prepare forest management plans inwhich major outstanding social and
environmental issues should, in theory, be
resolved (during which time they can keep
logging with virtual impunity).
138Deferring
resolution of outstanding social and
environmental conflicts to the development ofthe forest management plan leaves loggingcompanies free to resolve these issuesthemselves in whatever way they see fit
rather than obliging c ompanies t odeal with
these issues properly and in advance of the
conversion pr ocess. 
In Greenpeace’s view, this arrangement is
overly favourable to the companies and
unlikely to foster environmental and socialresponsibility, particularly in view of somecompanies ’dismis siveattitude t oforest
management plans (see below). A sthe
Independent Observer admits, it ‘creates apresumption that because the titles have
already been awarded for industrial forestry
this land is indeed suitable for this purpose.
Also the conversion process will not benefit
from any social and envir onmental safeguards
attached to the zoning process.’
139The legal
review pr ocessas it stands will in fact amount
to de facto land use planning in the absence of
key evidence as to the suitability of the land
for indus trial f orestryand the thr eats to social
and environmental interests. This is not an
acceptable position. Instead, the resolution of
such issues and any conflicts arising should 
be a clear criterion of progress through thelegal review.  
27
©Greenpeace/Davison


ITBSEESFORESTMANAGEMENT
PLANSASAPAPEREXERCISE
‘TO PLEASE THE WORLD BANK’
The requirement of the Forestry Code that
each logging company draw up a managementplan for every concession it holds is vieweddismis sively by some logging c ompanies, 
this is unsurprising giv en the country’s lack 
of enforcement capacity. 
The Lebanese company Industrie de
Transformation de Bois (ITB) is operating
adjacent to the Lake Télé-Lake Tumba Swamp
Forest landscape,
140the mos textensive block
of swamp and seasonally inundated forest in
Afric a.The landsc ape is impor tant for the
conservation of bonobo and other threatened
species. The CBFP has identified this area as
keyfor biodiv ersityconser vation planning in
the Congo Basin.
ITB is already logging in the area, and it appears
that the company considers the preparation ofaforest management plan for its titles to be a
bureaucratic formality. In the presence of
Greenpe aceinvestigators, ITB’s chief forester
(chef de chantier) in Bikoro admitted: ‘The
people who ar epreparing r egulations f or
management plans have no idea of the realityon the gr ound … W earegoing to present a
management plan t oplease the W orld Bank .’
141
The company has built a logyard and wharf
near Bikoro in a bay at the edge of LakeTumba. (The company’s logs are stored therebeforetheyareshipped t oKinshasa, where
theyare either processed in its sawmill or go
on for export to Europe.) However, this baywas well known to be an important breeding
ground for various fish populations. Since fish
stocks in the lake are already threatened by
overfishing, the loss of this area will create
further pr essure. With local people relying on
fish for 90% of their protein,
14 2this has the
potential f or serious social as w ell as
environmental consequences, which could
have been avoided. Even in the absence of
proper land use planning ,local consult ation 
and the development of a properly constituted
and enforced management plan prior to the
commencement of logging would have helped
ensure that the resources upon which the local population depended were protected.
Timber fr om ITB is impor ted into European
countries including Belgium, France, Italy and
Portugal. Int erholc o(Danz er’s trading branch)
is a client of ITB.
143©Greenpeac e/Reynaers
‘The other reforms we
intended to undertake weredelayed and had to bepostponed, particularly theimplement ation o fthe
Program to Secure Forestry
Revenue, the transfer of 40%of the area tax receipts tolocal governments, thepreparation and adoption ofregulations implementing theForestry Code (awarding of
concessions, exploitation and
development ,and c ombating
illegal operations), and the
submission to Parliament ofthe dr aftLaw on the
Conservation of Nature.’
14 4
DRC Government


CARVING UP THE CONGO
 29
Congo Ri verCFT
SODEF ORITB
ITB
SCIBOISLEYDA 
LEYDA CFT
SODEF ORMbandaka
Bikoro
Lake Tumba
Lake Ma iNdomé
Intact Fo restLandscap es La ke Té lé-LakeTumb aLandsc ape Logg ing Titles
Logging titles near the Lake Télé–Lake Tumba Landscape

CARVING UP THE CONGO 30
UNIMPLEMENTED AND UNENFORCED, 
THE 2002 FORESTRY CODE WILL NOT STOPRAINFOREST PLUNDER OR CONTRIBUTE 
TO POVERTY ALLEVIATION
Central to the World Bank’s reform strategy
for the DRC is the Forestry Code which it
imposed on the DRC Government. One of the
Bank’s key objectives has been to get industrial
logging to contribute to poverty alleviation
through the generation of state revenue.
Accordingly, the Code includes provision forthe redistribution of 40% of forest area tax
revenues to regional and local government
(25% to provinces and 15% to territoires –article 122). It also makes compulsory the
direct negotiation between logging companies
and c ommunities adjacent to their operations
of ‘social responsibility contracts’ (cahiers des
charges) (article 89); and introduces a
requirement for a forest management plan(articles 71, 99, 1 00), covering among otherthings the protection of biodiversity inproduction areas. It also calls for ultimate
designation of at le ast15% of the 
country’s total surface area as classified 
(ie pr otected) forest. 
Five years on, some of the key reforms set out
in the Forestry Code remain unimplemented
(for example land use planning see pp58–63).Of those aspects that have come into effect,the new f orestrytax regime has yet to deliver
any mone ywhatsoever for local social
projects, and measures designed to ensurethat communities benefit from logging 
(eg community consultation and social
responsibility contracts) have been
implemented in a derisory manner or not at all. The Forestry Code is heavily based on the
reforms the World Bank imposed on Cameroonin the mid-1990s. As the example of
Cameroon shows, industrial logging and the
wealth it creates do not improve the quality oflife of ordinary people when operating within a
corrupt political context. All of the signs for
the DRC are equally ominous.  
Thanks to the failure to implement and/or
enforce its key social and environmentalprovisions, the Forestry Code promises to do
more to hand control of the country’s forests
to the industrial logging industry, than topromote those forests as a source of
sustainable livelihood for the majority of the
DRC’s people or as an area requiring
preservation for reasons of biodiversity or
climate protection. Genuine development and
environmental protection are likely to be thecasualties, not the beneficiaries of ‘reform’.


©Greenpeace/DavisonCARVING UP THE CONGO
 31