# Archivo original: carving-up-the-congo-part-3.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:41:04 -03 2025

CARVING UP THE CONGO 32
CON IN THE CONGO – 
THE MORAL BANKRUPTCY OFTHE WORLD BANK’S
INDUS TRIAL L OGGING M ODEL


CARVING UP THE CONGO
INDUSTRIAL LOGGING IS
SUSTAINING CORRUPTION IN THE DRC
In an environment of endemic corruption,
logging companies inevitably operate beyondthe rule of law. In the DRC, the logging
industry continues to feed the networks of
corruption that are obstacles to genuine
development. Through support for an
extractive industry-based model of
development, donor countries and agenciessuch as the World Bank are effectively
undermining their own rhetoric on establishing
good governance and alleviating poverty.
In 2003 the Extractive Industries Review (EIR),
commissioned by the World Bank,
acknowledged the significant economic, social
and environmental risks of extractive
industries. It recommended that the WorldBank shape and sequence its interventionsaccording to the quality of governance in thehost country. Governance criteria can include,
amongs tother things :the qualit yof the rule of
law; the risk of conflict; human rights
protection; recognition of and willingness to
protectthe rights of indigenous peoples ;
capacity to mitigate and manage the impacts
of extractive industries; and, government
capacity and willingness to publish and managerevenues transparently and ensure effectiverevenue sharing.
145
Clearly the DRC has governance problems: the
Government’s institutional capacity and its
ability to manage revenues, including those
generated by industrial logging, remain weak.
Control over natural resources has been at the
heartof nearly a decade of war in the DRC and
serious questions have been raised about the
role of f oreign c ompanies in the extraction and
export of the country’s resources.146Instability
plagued the transitional government and
violent c onflic tcontinues in par ts of the
country.14 7Corruption as a strategy for
survival among low- and middle-ranking law
enforcement civil servants (eg the acceptance
of bribes and lack of enforcement ofregulations) fuels and is fuelled by the high-
level corruption practised by the country’s
politic al elit ewhose pow er is based on pr ofit
from natural resources such as forests.
14 8‘It is not accidental that no
efforts have been made to
construct the fundamentals
of a regime to combatcorruption and illicit financeschemes in the DRC. TheDRC’s history is one of rulersaspiring to hold and retain amonopoly o fpower.Salaries
of DRC officials have, in
practice, been regularly and
heavily supplement ed by
revenues from bribery.’
14 9
Report for USAID, 2003
33
©Greenpeace/Reynaers


CARVING UP THE CONGO 34
Such v ested interests also have the power to
sink attempts to improve governance and
increase transparency in the extractive
industries, as shown by the World Bank’sattempted reforms to the DRC miningsector.
151
Atthe lev el of the f orestitself ,the rule of law
is almost absent. According to the World Bank,
the DR C‘has no tproduced a single new
professional f orester in the last ten years’.152
Local forestry officials are poorly and
irregularly paid, and often have no information
about current forest laws and policies (in somecases even being unaware of the existence ofthe F orestryCode), and no transport or basic
equipment such as GPS with which t odo their
work. In any case they often lack key technicalskills such as forest management planning,
geographical mapping and the creation of
forest inventories.
153
Asthe EIR c oncludes, and Greenpeace research
and investigations of industrial logging in
CentralAfric aconfirm, natural resource
extractive industries have no record of
contributing to poverty reduction or genuine
development ,and ther eis little hope that the y
will do so in future. These industries both feed
off and fuel the whole spectrum of corruption,
from pragmatic bribery of forestry officers to
collusion with politicians and senior officials inorder to gain control of forest holdings (for
example, in br each of the moratorium).
Meanwhile, unc onstrained by the rule of law,
logging goes ahead heedless of the social and
envir onment al consequenc es. HOW DO TAX BREAKS FOR
TRANS-M’S RAINFOREST PLUNDERSUPPORT POVERTY ALLEVIATION?
Logging in one of the most corrupt countries
in the world could become one way of earningaquick buck. Those choosing to operate in the
DRC may be there precisely because of the
lack of accountability for the money they make
or the method of making it. How will the legal
review deal with such companies?
Trans-M Bois is a subsidiary of the Congo
Futur group, itself a subsidiary of the Beirut-
based Tajideen group.
15 4Congo Futur’s
presence in the DRC appears to date from
1997.155It has rapidly become one of the
country’s leading importers of foodstuffs156
as well as major transporters.157
One of the companies managed by the Tajideen
family has a history of allegations of moneylaundering. In May 2003, following a four-month international investigation by Belgium’s
Economic Crimes Unit ,judicial polic eraided the
Antwerp offices of Soafrimex, managed by
Kassim T ajideen, ar rested several of its officials
and fr ozeits bank ac counts.
158The c ompany
was accused of ‘large-scale tax fraud, money
laundering and trade in diamonds of doubtful
origin, to the value of tens of millions ofeuros’.
15 9In December 2003, Belgian
authorities inf ormed the C ongolese embas sy
in Brus sels that investigations undertaken in
the DRC had shown that the companysystematically undervalued its imports,
shipping and insurance costs and that it filed
false customs declarations.
160
Trans-M Bois is now becoming a major timber
producer in the DRC. The company appears to
havebenefit ed fr om w eak governance: since
the moratorium came into force, it has gained
titles covering 746,000 hectares. The Ministry
ofEnvir onment ’s24May 2003 published
register of logging permits does not indicate
either the permit numbers of these titles or
when they were awarded.161However, none of
Tran-M titles appear on the Ministry ofEnvironment’s unpublished June 2002
compendium.
16 2
Trans-M has received preferential financial
treatment .In July 2 004, along with the Italian-
owned Parcafrique, it was awarded special tax
and customs exemptions (for a minimum of©Greenpeace/Reynaers
‘Donor shavetreated
corruption as a technical
problem and emphasised dat a
management s ystems,
training programs and laws.
They have shied away fromthe more political aspects,such as strengtheningparliament ,courts and anti-
corruption and auditing
bodies. They finance morethan half the national budgetand should do more to presscharges against corruptionsuspects, … and holdmultinational c orpor ations
accountable for violating
national and int ernational
norms. A complete overhaul
of the approach to goodgovernanc eis needed. ’
150
International Crisis Group,
2006


CARVING UP THE CONGO
three years) by the Congolese National
Investment Promotion Agency.163The stated
aim of Trans-M’s exemption was to aid
purchase of forestry equipment for Trans-M’s
Befale logging title in the CBFP Maringa-Lopori-Wamba landscape in Equateur Province. 
164
Timber from Trans-M is imported into
European countries, including Belgium, France
and Germany.165Danzer (through its trading
branch Interholco) has been a Europeanimporter of Trans-M timber.
166Among the
timber Trans-M supplies to Europe is
afrormosia, commonly used in furniture andflooring – afrormosia is listed under Appendix
II of the Convention on International Trade in
Endanger ed Species (CITES) (see p53).
ITB GETS ITS LOGGING 
TITLES THANKS TO FRIENDS 
IN HIGH PLACES 
The World Bank has promoted the value of its
reform s trategy – including the moratorium
and new F orestryCode. These measures,
however, rest in files in Kinshasa with no on-
the-ground reality. In the absence of on-the-
ground institutional capacity, the continuationof legal abuses seems inevitable.
In the lis tof logging titles presented for legal
review, there are two titles belonging to theLebanese company Industrie de Transformation
de Bois (ITB)
16 7which fall on the border of the
CBFP Lake Tumba landscape area of Equateur
Province, covering together some 294,000
hectares. These two titles appear to have been
obtained in breach of the moratorium. ITB did
haveatitle16 8in Equateur P rovince before the
moratorium entered into force, but the two
titles that are now up for legal review are
located in a dif ferent ar eaand cover a larger
area of forest.
Both in Kinshasa and in the small logging town
of Bikoro near Lake Tumba, Greenpeacebecame aware of rumours that a former high-
ranking f orestry official facilitated ITB’s gaining
control of these f orest holdings. When
Greenpeace spoke to the chief forester (chef
de chantier) f or ITB at Bik oro,he openly
admitted that it was ‘thanks to’ this official
that ITB had come to Bikoro.
169Because the maps of pre- and post-
moratorium titles are not publicly available, it isimpossible for Greenpeace to make a definite
assessment of which logging titles are in
violation of the moratorium. Purely based onthe current list of 156 logging titles now up for
legal review, however, all titles in Bikoro date
from after the moratorium, and thus are
apparently in violation of both the moratorium
and the Forestry Code. This includes logging
titles held by ITB, the Congolese companyLEDYA,
170the Portuguese-managed company
Sodefor171and the French-controlled
Scibois,17 2which is logging in an area with
significant primary forests and of great
importance for bonobo conservation.173
In October 2006, Greenpeace also spoke to
two government officials in charge of rural
development and environment and forestry atBikoro. They confirmed that local authoritieshave very little capacity – they have onebuilding for all the different government
services and no modern of ficeequipment .
They have no car or a motorcycle to visit the
logging oper ations in the field (t ocheck
boundaries of annual allow ed cut-block s,
minimum tree diameters, etc). Moreover,
agents are very poorly paid and have not
received sufficient training to enable them todetect forest crime or enforce forest law. Theyhaveno GPS or mapping sof tware(nor the
expertise to operate such equipment), and lack
the know-how to estimate timber volumes onoutgoing log barges.
174Forestry officials also
lack clear knowledge of the Forestry Code or
the moratorium.
ITB’schief f orester at Bikoro confirmed that
officials rely on the information that the
logging c ompanies hand ov er tothem and ar e
incapable of conducting an effective
independent inspection: 
‘When the forestry official visits our logging
site … he comes to our office asking us to
provide him with the figures on declared
production volumes. They are not capable ofverifying these things themselves … they don’t
know how t omeasure, they don’t know how
toidentif ywood species, r eally they don’t
know where to start. The inspections here
makemelaugh; these people r eally need
training.’
175©Greenpeace/Davison
35


CARVING UP THE CONGO 36
That forestry officials are reduced to
conducting such a paperwork exercise on apost-moratorium title shows just how far the
DRC is from enforcing the rule of law in 
its forests. 
Timber from ITB is imported into European
countries including Belgium, France, Italy and
Portugal. Interholco (Danzer’s trading branch)
is a client of ITB.
NST ‘ENJOYS THE PROTECTION
OF TOP POLITICAL AUTHORITIES’FROMLAW ENFORCEMENT
Even when the DRC’s rank-and-file forest
officials have the will to control the logging
industry, high level political interference canblock the establishment of the rule of law, asthe case of Sodefor shows.
Sodef or is subsidiar yof the NS Tgroup,which
overall holds many millions of hectares of
rainforest (see pp82–85). In May–June 2006
and Januar y2007, Gr eenpeace visited a
number of communities in Bandundu Province
close to logging sites operated by Sodefor and
talked to local people and officials. On morethan one occasion forestry officials allegedthat the c ompany w as ‘pr otected’ by the
authorities. F or example, north-east of
Bandundu, officials complained of their totallack of control over Sodefor: 
‘We have had orders from the authorities not
to carry out inspections … They enjoy
protection at the highest level.’
176
Other loc al authorities t old Gr eenpe ace a
similar story: ‘Sodefor is protected in Kinshasa,
and we lack resources. We do nonetheless
manage t ocarryout inspec tions and pr oduc e
reports, but Kinshasa just marks them not to
be followed up.’177Aforestry official in
Bandundu also felt that Sodefor had links with
the upper echelons in Kinshasa and was ‘totallyprotected’.
17 8
The f orestryservice in Bandundu has no
vehicles, leaving the staff dependent on the
logging c ompanies f or transpor t.Moreover,
almost all personnel are based in towns rather
than at logging sites. Forestry staff haveadmitted to Greenpeace that because they are
so poorly and irregularly paid they aredependent on logging companies.
181The result
is that, according to these forestry officials,
Sodefor declares a much lower timberproduction volume than it actually logs.
Officials could not prove this, however, since
the company refuses to grant officials access
to relevant logging documentation in the
course of an inspection.
Timber from Sodefor is imported into
European countries including Belgium, France,
Germany, Italy and Portugal.
1 82 
Has NST been rewarded 
for its wartime contribution?
Soforma (part of the NST group) is one
example of a company with alleged wartime
logging titles. According to Conflict timber, areport commissioned by the US Governmentaid agency USAID:
‘During the las tRwandan-Ugandan inv asion of
the DRC, the Kabila Government requested
that logging c ompanies cut timber f or export
in reserveforests in Bas Congo Province [and]
split the proceeds 50/50 with the DRC
Government. The Government’s share
reportedly went to help finance the war effort…Since 1999 – in the middle of the civil war –
…concessions w ere[awarded] in three forest
reserve areas (Ezini, Lukfwe and another)
where logging normally was not permitted …Two logging companies carried out these
operations: MALBA and SOFORMA … Our
source believed that after the 50/50 split all
other taxes and levies that normally apply …
weresuspended for wood harvested in this
operation … Wartime logging in those three
concessions should hav eproduced … a total
value of $1 7-36 million.’
183‘As for the legality of the
forest concessions granted toyour company by myministry, I can but confirm it.In closing, I ask you toproceed with your company’snew investments programmewithout giving in to panic,because the protection of theGovernment of Transition isafforded to you.’
17 9
Anselme Enerunga, Minister
for the Environment of theDRC, letter to Sodefor, 20 December 2004 
‘Likethe Minis ter,Iconfirm
the legality of all the forest
concessions granted to you
and ask y ou toproceed with
new investment planned in
this field in order tocontribute once again to thereduction of poverty in ourcountr y.’
180
Aboulaye Y erodia Ndombasi,
Vice President of the DRC,letter to Sodefor, 26 January 2005


CARVING UP THE CONGO
WILL POLITICALLY ‘PROTECTED’
OPERATIONS PASS THE LEGALREVIEW?
Equateur Province was heavily affected by the
many years of war in the DRC – particularly
the ‘oc cupation ’between 1998 and 2003. In
this period, the region was part of the
occupied z one of the DR C,completely cut off
from Kinshasa and the region was under the
rebel control of Jean-Pierre Bemba’s
Mouvement de Libér ation du C ongo (ML C).
The MLC is repeatedly accused of having
engaged in large-scale killing of civilians,
systematic rape and extensive looting asrecently as March 2003.
18 4Former MLC
members w ereactive in Equateur in July
2004, when the UNSC denounc ed
‘unauthorised internal movement of weapons’
by the gr oup within the pr ovinc e.185
Throughout the conflict, the MLC financeditself by controlling the trafficking of
diamonds to buyers across the Oubangui
river in the Central African Republic.18 6
Timber also appears to have been of strategic
value to the MLC’s fighting capacity.18 7
In May 2004, a ministerial decree1 88 awarded
the L ebanese-owned C ompagnie F orestière du
Bassin du Congo (CFBC) the right to prospect
in a 750,000 hectare area in the heart of
MLC-controlled nor thern E quateur P rovince.
The company has been repeatedly linked with
Jean-Pierre Bemba and represents a clear case
of the ongoing politicised nature of logging in
the DRC. CFBC was allegedly set up with the‘blessing’ of Jean-Pierre Bemba,
18 9and is
consider ed ‘unt ouchable’,190its managers
accused of ‘ systematically plundering’ the
Congolese forest.191
37
©Kim Gjer stad

CARVING UP THE CONGO 38
The 2004 decree granting CFBC prospecting
rights stipulates that logging ‘under anypretext’ is ‘strictly forbidden’ throughout the
prospecting period,
19 3although cutting
reportedly began in the autumn of 2004.194
In March and October 2005, the company was
granted two lettres d’intention near Libenge,
totalling 358,000 hectares.19 5The post-May
2002 signing of these logging contracts to
CFBC suggests another violation of the
moratorium and breach of the Forestry Code. 
Aclear governance issue is tax avoidance by
not declaring exports. One consequence of thelack of capacity in the forestry service and
corruption in the DRC is that timber smuggling
is rife: according to the International Crisis
Group there are indications that actual timber
export levels are as much as seven times
higher than official figures.
19 6It seems highly
unlikely that export tax is paid on timberexported from the DRC where the timber hasnot been recorded in the official figures. 
CFBC is accused of exporting timber through
the C entralAfric an Republic to Cameroon.
197
According t oareport of investigations by the
Congolese human rights Les Voix des Sans-
Voix (VSV), this has been carried out under
escort from Bemba’s former personal guard, adetachment of the Division de protection
présidentielle (DPP), without inspec tion at
border checkpoints.
198
Within three months of CFBC’s arrival in
Libenge, protests by local people were met
with intimidation and arrests by local
authorities.19 9In April 2006, angry residents of
Libenge att empt ed to attack the house of the
CFBC managing director after the child of a
company employee w as killed in a tr affic
accident involving a CFBC log truck.200The
manager’s house was allegedly protected by
DPP guar ds.201
According to the report on the investigations
of VSV, several of the protestors arrested and
imprisoned sustained ‘inhuman’ treatment injail, including beatings and deprivation of
food. The of ficial ‘ inquiry commission’
dispat ched t oLibenge af ter the incident
appears to have been a retaliatory mission:
polic eand milit aryrepor tedly committed
‘reprisals’ and ‘extortion’. VSV indicates that
provincial authorities had previously
attempted to suspend CFBC operations, butthat the MLC ordered their continuation.
202
As illustrated above, CFBC’s titles, totalling
more than 350,000 hectares, awarded after
the moratorium203seem to enjoy political
protection. They are a real test case for the
legal review. The outcome of the legal review
will provide a reality check as to whether the
World Bank’s strategy for reform is overcoming
corruption and bringing the rule of law to the
governance of the DRC’s natural resources.
Timber from CFBC is imported into European
countries including France, Italy and Portugal.204
THE WORLD BANK GROUP
AND GERMAN GOVERNMENTFUND OLAM’S ILLEGALLOGGING OPERATIONS
Over three and half years after the
moratorium w as put in plac e, thr ee titles
totalling over 300,000 hectares were granted
toanewcomer to the DRC timber industry:
the multinational tr ading c ompany Olam
International Ltd.205
Olam’s activities include logging, timber trade
and wood processing. It is expanding itsglobal int erests int ocountries known for
conflict timber and other issues related to the
illegal timber trade. It has had tradinginterests in Burma,
206acountry accused of
gross human rights abuses. In terms of
respect for governance, in June 2005, Olam
Gabon was reported to owe nearly 7 million
FCFA($14,000) in forestry back taxes.207
More recently in Ghana, Olam has also been
involved in lar ge-sc ale fraudulent
underdeclaration of its timber exports and
timber from illegal sources that was sold to
Olam by its suppliers. The los sin financial
revenue to the state of Ghana is estimated tobe several million dollars.
208
In November 2003, the World Bank’s private-
sector investment branch, the International
Financ eCorporation (IFC), invested $15 million
in Olam t ohelp it e xpand its global
operations.209The IFC estimated that about
5% of this inv estment ‘w ould benefit Olam ’s
worldwide timber operations’ of which an
unspecified amount ‘will be expected to
finance sawmilling in Africa’.210
©Greenpeace/Daniels
‘[In the DRC] the looting that
was pr eviously c onducted by
the armies themselv es has
been replaced with organized
systems of embezzlement,tax fraud, extortion, the useof stock options as kickbacksand div ersion o fState funds
conducted by groups that
closely resemble criminalorganizations … The mostimportant element ineffectively halting the illegalexploitation of resources inthe Democr atic R epublic of
the Congo relates to the
politic al will o fthose who
support, protect and benefit
from the networks.’
192
UN Securit yPanel, 2 002


CARVING UP THE CONGO
In June 2004 the IFC approved a further $50
million partial guarantee to Olam, as part of a$150 million package to help Olam in part
‘increase trading volumes from Africa’.
211This
loan was a ‘Category C’ loan – ie environmentaland social risks were not judged to be
significant because Olam ‘promotes sustainable
forest management practices and its operations
are considered fully consistent with the
requirements of the November 2002 World
Bank Forests Policy.’ 
212
In 2005, the German public development bank
DEG (a subsidiary of KfW Bankengruppear)approved a ¤15 million loan to Olam to expand
‘warehouse, processing and transport
capacities’.
213
Olam has now become an important player in
the DRC timber industry and is heavily involvedin DRC’s timber trade via various contracts withthird-party suppliers and partnerships in whichOlam buys logs from third parties (eg buying
Afrormosia logs ne ar Kisangani).
214Olam also facilitates logging operations in
areas where it is not the title holder. In Yuki,Bandundu Province, for example, Olam is
logging as an effective subcontractor for the
Office National des Transports (ONATRA), thelargely dysfunctional national transport
authority. Although Article 95 of the Forestry
Code expressly forbids subcontracting, there
are many legal loopholes: for instance, one
company can ‘rent’ equipment and labour
from another.
Local authorities seem to have no knowledge
of a 2004 subcontracting agreement, and theyhave no knowledge of how much timber the
company is logging. According to local people,
many log r afts have been seen lacking the
distinguishing markings that they are supposed
to carry.
215
Timber from the DRC traded by OLAM is
imported into European countries includingBelgium, France, Germany and Portugal.
216
©Greenpeace/Daniels
39


CARVING UP THE CONGO 40
LOGGINGIN REBEL-HELD
TERRITORY – PAYING THE‘ADMINISTRATION’
The World Bank’s strategy to bring the logging
sector under control fails to call into questionthe operations of the largest players in the DRC.
Yet it is these same companies who have been
operating within the DRC system of corruption
for years and who have profited from holding
their titles under a very relaxed tax regime.
Even if the legal review of logging titles isrigorously conducted, established companies
who are not obviously implicated in moratorium
violations may remain largely unscrutinised.
The Danzer Group is among the top five
logging and timber tr ading operators in Central
Africa. Recent Greenpeace investigations have
exposed the Group’s involvement in forest
crimes including trading in illegal timber;bribery; suspected forgery of documents; anddealing with timber companies and individualswho have been blacklisted by UN Security
Council f or inv olvement in illicit arms
trafficking activities in Liberia.
21 7For instance,
one of Danz er Gr oup’s trading partners, Guus
von Kouwenhov en, a Dut ch citizen, was
arrested in The Netherlands in March 2005 and
is now serving an eight-year prison sentence
for violating a UN arms embargo.218
Danz er subsidiar ySiforcois the second largest
logging c ompany in DRC in terms of forest
under its control (1.9 million hectares).Siforco’s power and money make the company
effectively a state within a state in an area of
several thousand square kilometres in Equateur
and Orientale Provinces.
219In the towns of
Bumba, But aand Ak eti, people are dependent
on the company to maintain the transport
network and w ater and electricity
infrastructure.220
AsGreenpe aceresearch shows, the company’s
operations in the DRC are proving just as
ethically questionable as Danzer’s operations
elsewhere in Central Africa. 
Siforco has been active in the DRC since
1972.221According to a report on Siforco, the
compan made payments t othe ML Crebel-
controlled administration in Equateur during
the r ecent w ar,222and also mak es regular
payments to forestry authorities.223Siforco’s operations were disrupted by war, but
in Nov ember 2 002, it resumed logging
operations in its 523,340 hectare K8226forest
zone ne ar Bumba – while the ar eawas still
under control of the MLC (a rebel movement
controlled by warlord-turned-politician Jean-
PierreBemba – see pages 82–85). 
Olof von Gagern, Head of Danzer’s African
operations, claims that the company ‘made
neither direct payments to the MLC norprovided the rebel army with logistical support
or aid of any kind. A tno time has ther ebeen
any c ontactbetween SIFORCO and MLC
troops.’
227However, the timing of Siforco’s
resumption of oper ations in K8, and the f act
that it was paying ‘administrative’ taxes in MLC
rebel-controlled territory,228implicate Siforco‘There is simply no way to
conduct business in the DRC without some form of bribery.’
224
Report for USAID, 2003
‘It is ques tionable whether 
alegitimate industry can 
even exist in the DRC wherecorruption is rampant andaccountability minimal.’
225
International Security
Information Service, 2002


CARVING UP THE CONGO
in the conflict timber trade. In a recent
interview in the German forestry magazine
Econo, the Head of Siforco admits that the
company had t onego tiatewith the MLC upon
its return in 2002.229
Atthe time that Sif orcowas resuming logging
and paying money to a MLC rebel-controlled
administration, it was known that the MLC was
committing crimes against humanity in the
Central African Republic and elsewhere in theDRC, and using child soldiers.
231MLC soldiers
werelater convicted for the mass rape of at
least119women and children.232
Aconfidential r epor ton the c ompany glos ses
over the ethical problems with such payments:
‘logging companies have little choice but tosubmit to a taxation system which is unofficial,
totally unregulated, and highly prejudicial to
both the competitiveness and the
transparency of the companies themselves’.233
The report goes on to describe some of the
ways Siforco maintains this ‘highly prejudicial’
system. As elsewhere in the DRC, institutional
capacity is grossly inadequate. Monitoring and
inspection staff are under-equipped and
poorly paid by the authorities.234In order to
maintain ‘some semblance of operational
administration’, officials are paid directly by
Siforco according to a formal scale when theycome to inspect its operations ranging from
¤50 for the highest grades (provincial
envir onment coordinator) to ¤5 for the lowest
(police officer). The report admits that the
ambiguity of this collusion between the
logging industry and law enforcementauthorities calls into question the very conceptof legality.
235
This s tateof af fairs illus trates per fectly how in
the chaos of the country’s grossly under-
resour ced forestry environment, lack of
capacit ycan shade int ocorruption, aided and
abetted by the logging industry.
As with NST, Siforco has significant influence
beyond the rainforest it controls,236via all sort
of par tnerships (including subc ontracting in all
but name).
Timber from Siforco is imported into European
countries including Belgium, Denmark, France,
the Netherlands and the UK. It is also exported
to China.237
41
©Greenpeace/Reynaers
‘Haag r eaches M aluku. The
heart is beating. The rebel
government is in the drivingseat.The employ ees o fthe
plant are cheering. With 
Haag comes hope. The rebelsnegotiate with Haag: Progress continues.’ 
230
Econo Magazine, interview
with He ad of Sif orco, 2006


CARVING UP THE CONGO 42
The stated aim of the World Bank’s strategy
for reform of the logging sec tor is to help
alleviate poverty. The Forestry Code which it
persuaded the DRC Government to adopt
makes pr ovisions f or taxes collec ted from
logging operations to be redistributed back
from national to local level, to provide money
for regional development. It also formalises a
system whereby logging companies negotiatedirect compensation with local communities
for ac cess to their forest, and requires
companies t odevelop f orest management
plans, one aspect of which is to ensure that
communities r etain rights t oforest resources
and services. However, given the context of corruption that
typifies the DR C,thereis little realistic hope
that the industrial logging model of
development will improve people’s quality of
life. In f act,as Gr eenpe aceresearch and
investigations show, money from taxation
rarely materialises, the direct development
offered to local communities by logging
companies is a cruel deception, and industriallogging degrades the essential forest resources
on which the v astmajorit yof the DRC’s people
depend – while c ommunities who challenge
logging companies over these issues may well
faceaviolent r esponse. In this w ay,the people
of the DRC are left poorer as logging
companies plunder their forests.©Greenpeace/Reynaers
INDUS TRIAL L OGGING-LED POVERTY ALLEVIATION IS A CHARADE ‘Any discus sion of forests and
forestry in the DRC should
haveas its primar yfocus the
fact that the vast majority of
people in the DRC depend onwild plants and animals f or
their health, for their energy,
for their medicines, for theirfood and in many cases fortheir cash income.’
238
David Kaimowitz, Chairman,
CIFOR ,2004


CARVING UP THE CONGO
TIPPING THE SCALES: THE COST OF
INDUSTRIAL LOGGING FAR OUTWEIGHS ITSCONTRIBUTIONS TO DEVELOPMENT
The people of the DRC are some of the
poorest in the world. According to the UnitedNations Development Programme (UNDP),
nearly 90% of the population lives on less
than$1 a day.
239Today the economy of the
DRC is largely based on subsistence activities,
which account for 80% of the economy.240
Of the approximately 62.5 million people241
in the DRC, about 40 million242are
dependent on the country’s forests – not for
money gained from the international loggingtrade, but for daily survival: food, medicine,
energy, building materials and the value of
non-timber f orest products. 
The DRC has Heavily Indebted Poor Country
status: its burden of debt remains huge andthe cost of servicing this debt (a third of itowed to multilateral institutions such as theWorld Bank and IMF)
243will account for up to
40% of public r evenues in 2 007,244leaving
little to be spent on the provision of basic
services or the r estoration of desperately
needed infr astructureafter the devastation of
the war. 
As for guarantees of a sustainable environment
(one of the UN Millennium DevelopmentGoals), ac cording t othe UNDP the absenc eof
rational exploitation of natural resources and
the associated economic changes have had aclearly negative impact.
245
Even if industrial logging were to be conducted
in a lawful, transparent and sustainable
manner ,the v alue of the goods the forest
provides to the wider population would still far
outw eigh that of the logging indus try.For
2006, the industry’s contribution to state
revenues was estimated to be $1 0.6 million 
on an as sumed 5 00,000m3timber har vest.246
Forestry revenues are contributing just 0.7%
of GNP.247
The international community has been
presenting highly optimistic estimates of
potential futur elogging revenues to the DRC
Government .Such optimism is bo th danger ous
and misleading as it encourages the misguided
belief that logging will c ontribut eto
development.A2005 report presenting the proposed World
Bank-managed Trustfund248on good
governance in the DRC forestry sector
suggests that the sector has the potential to
reach harvest levels of 5 million m3,and be
worth $1 00 million a year to the State.249
However, the area of rainforest that would
need to be opened up to achieve such levels,
and the related environmental damage, would
be massive. Further, more recent World Bank
reports concede that production levels areunlikely to reach more than 20% of that figure
over the next decade.
250
In contrast, the value of the forest and forest
products such as food, medicine and building
materials to the people of the DRC is largely
unquantifiable. The equivalent economic value
of these non-timber forest products is
estimated at more than $2 billion a year.251
Moreover, scientists have confirmed that
many of the medicinal plants found in theforests have significant therapeutic value.
252
Yet the continued availability of these goods is
jeopar dised by indus trial logging ,which both
degr ades the f orestthat pr ovides them and
impedes forest people’s access to them, while
offering little in return beyond promises of
local development projects that are fulfilled atbest in part and often not at all. For forestdwellers, indeed, the ar rival of the loggers may
herald not just lost resources but new burdens
of social conflict, prostitution and disease.
The conclusion, inevitably, is that the industry’s
overall effect on the country’s social well-
being will continue to be negative.
253‘I recently returned to a
village where I worked as ayoung forester. When I left25 years ago, it was with thepromise that logging wouldbring a future of social andeconomic development.Timber was the only resourcethese villages had to ignitedevelopment. And today,commercial timber is gone.The same families are there.They were poor 25 years agoand they are poor today. Buttoday, they have less forestand less hope. They feelcheat ed by the government,
the private sector, the local
chiefs and by me. They feellet down. And I believe that inmany ways they are right. Weare all responsible for lettingthem down.’
254
Giuseppe T opa, Afric aforest
specialist, the World Bank,
2002
43
©Greenpeace/Davison


CARVING UP THE CONGO 44
LOGGING AT LAKE TUMBA 
IS DESTROYING FOREST COMMUNITY RESOURCES
The Lake Télé-Lake Tumba Swamp Forest
landscape is a priority landscape identified bythe CBFP for conservation and sustainable
management. Covering 12.6 million hectares
(or about four times the size of Belgium) and
straddling the border between the DRC and
the Republic of the Congo, it is the most
extensive block of swamp and seasonallyinundated forest in Africa. The rainforests to
the west of Lake Tumba are important for the
conservation of bonobo. Other threatenedspecies that occur in this landscape are forest
elephant, hippopotamus, red-tailed monkey
(Cercopithecus ascanius), red colobus monkey
(Piliocolobus badius) and slender-snouted
crocodile (Crocodylus cataphractus).
Additionally, fish biodiversity and endemismare high, although as yet poorly researched.
255
Local communities in this landscape rely on fish
for 90% of their pr otein c onsumption and
overfishing has been identified together with
bushme at hunting as the tw omajor thr eats to
the landsc ape.256How ever,the e xpanding
logging industry looks set to become a major
additional threat. 
The Lake Tumba region is home not only to
Bantu agricultur alists but also t onumer ous
Twa pygmy (semi hunter-gatherer)
communities. The logging operations alreadyactive and planned often overlap to a large
degree with the forest on which these
communities depend; consequently, the
forest-dwellers may be forced to go further
intolessdisturbed areas to meet their needs.
Once companies establish themselves in the
region – building r oads, nego tiating social
responsibility contracts, bringing in workers –
it will be very difficult to turn back the clock.
The Lebanese logging company ITB has been
actively logging in the area since mid-2005,
and several other companies may start up
operations soon (Sodefor is alreadyprospecting in the area). 
In conversation with Gr eenpe ace, ITB’s chief
forester claimed that the company is making a
positiv econtribution t othe c ommunities of
Bikoro, near Lake Tumba – it contracts some
140 local workers plus 20–30 workers on adaily basis (journaliers) for its nearby loggingoperations (it is said that on average six people
depend on the salary of one worker in a
logging company). The company pays the
school f ees f or its workers’ children and claims
to contribute some 250,000 CFR per month
(about $47 5) tothe hospit al in Bik oro for
treatment of its workers. ITB’s chief forester
also stressed the fact that thanks to ITB’s
logging r oad it is now much e asier f or people
to transport their agricultural products 
to market.
257
However, in terms of sustainable development
for the local communities, ITB’s contribution is
minimal, and jobs ar elikely todisappear once
the ar eais commer cially logged out, as has
happened elsewhere. 
In exchange for a few gifts to local Bantu
community leaders (part of the social
responsibility contract practice explained on
©Kim Gjerstad


CARVING UP THE CONGO
page 48), ITB has gained access to large
volumes of wengé (Millettia laurentii) timber
worth hundreds of thousands of dollars. 
Assoon as ITB abandons the ar ea, there will
be no need for it to maintain the road to
facilit atelogging ac cess. Without
maintenance, the logging road will rapidly
deteriorate. The housing conditions of the
company ’sworkers ar eappalling. Har dly any
other local development can be attributed to
the company. 
In conversation with Greenpeace, ITB’s chief
forester claimed that since ITB arrived in
Bikoromoreproducts (such as sugar and toilet
paper) hav ebecome av ailable on the loc al
market, brought in on ITB barges coming from
Kinshasa.258On the o ther hand, loc al people
told Greenpeace that with the growing
economic activity and overexploitation ofnatural resources, prices of many productshave rapidly increased. Fish has become much
more expensive; the price of a goat has
doubled. Several people also indicate that
prostitution is on the rise in Bikoro due to the
logging money.
259
In 2006, local Bantu communities told a
Greenpeace field team that ITB has destroyed
their f armland with bulldo zers t oclear the ar ea
for logging roads. Near the village of Ibenga,
local people showed fresh evidence of crops
(manioc, banana trees, cacao) allegedly
destroyed by ITB’s activities. Some farmerscomplained that while the damage to their
crops has been v eryextensive, the company
has of fered very little compensation. When
villagers complained to ITB about the
inadequac yof the c ompensation of fered, the
company’s representative told them to choose
between accepting the offer and getting
nothing at all.
260‘Despite a forestry
moratorium in place since2002, which was extendedby pr esidential decr ee in
October 2005, the State 
has admitt ed that logging 
has continued, and that
concessions have beengranted on indigenous
peoples’ lands and territories
without prior consultation or consent and with disregardfor their internationallyguaranteed rights.’
261
ForestPeoples Programme 
etal.
45
©Greenpeace/Reynaers


CARVING UP THE CONGO 46
FURTHER SOCIAL EXCLUSION FOR 
HUNTER-GATHERER COMMUNITIES
The experience of the Twa pygmies of the Lake
Tumba area has been one of further social
exclusion as w ell as the los sof vit al forest
resources. For instance, elders in the Twa camp
of Nk wete told Greenpeace that they were
barely consult ed by ITB in adv anceof logging.
Instead, ITB negotiated with an individual Bantu
(a former chief) from a nearby village who
claimed to be the traditional owner of the forest.
263 
After the Twa complained that the forest was
theirs, the company made a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the Nkwete community, to which
the local chief felt he had no option but to
agree. 
In an AFP ar ticle about nego tiations between
pygmy communities and loggers in the Lake
Tumba ar ea, entitled ‘P ygmies ready to hand
over their forests for soap’, a Twa elder is
reported as admitting: 
‘We will take whatever we are being given. …
Soap and salt means a lot to us.’
264
The Twa live in the heart of an area of high
conservation importance, but they are
increasingly sur rounded by loggers (including
ITB, whose logging c ontracts were signed after
the moratorium, see pages 82–83). The forest
is of critic al impor tancetotheir cultur eand
daily subsistence. When Greenpeace visited
the area, many Twa complained that ITB was
cutting down trees of great importance to thecommunity, to build bridges along its logging
roads.265These trees, of the species essia
(Petersianthus macrocarpus), are used for
bridge-building by logging companies in the
area. However, they are frequented bycaterpillars that offer a critical source of
protein to local communities, and their loss due
tologging operations is a frequent source of
complaint in the DRC.
Timber from ITB is imported into European
countries including Belgium, France, Italy and
Portugal. Interholco (Danzer’s trading branch)
is a client of ITB.
266
TREE OF LIFE: INDIGENOUS USES FOR THE
SAPELE TREE
For forest-dwelling communities, the sapele
tree Entandrophragma cylindricum represents
an important resource for food and medicineand as a construction material.
Large sapele trees are an important host tree
for a pr otein-rich species of c aterpillar ,
Imbrasia (Nudaurelia) oyemensis. In the DRC,
several other tree species are also important
hosttrees f or other c aterpillar species. During
the caterpillar season, when game is difficult to
hunt and next year’s crops are not yet ripe,
caterpillars account for around three-quartersof the protein eaten by pygmies in thenorthern R epublic of the C ongo.
267
In addition, the caterpillars provide an
important source of income. Collecting
caterpillars can provide a higher annual income
per hectare than growing crops.268The UN
Food and Agriculture Organisation estimates
that the c onsumption of c aterpillars in the DRC
is about 13,500 tonnes per year. With an
average mark etprice of $0.60/kg, the total
market value of caterpillars is therefore
estimated to be more than $8 million 
per ye ar.269
Sapele bark also has important medicinal
properties. It is commonly used for the
treatment of headaches associated withmalaria and of swollen and painful eye
infections, and also t orelieve exhausted and
painful f eet.
270
Thank stoits strength, buoy ancyand water
resistance, sapele is considered the best wood
for pirogues (dug-out canoes). It also makes
an ideal central roof support.271©Greenpeace/Reynaers
‘Women have no voice.
Pygmies have no voice. In theforest areas of the DRC,pygmy communities —widely considered as being‘backward’ — are numericallysignific ant.Although some
progress has been made at
the disc ourse lev el, this has
had practically no impact on
the realities of women andindigenous peoples. Theseexclusions are serioushandicaps to the Congo’sbroader development needs.…Logging companies
reinforce these forms ofexclusion. ’
262
Theodor T refon, 2 006


CARVING UP THE CONGO
TAXING CREDIBILITY: THE
REVENUE FROM LOGGING WILLNOT GO FAR … FROM KINSHASA
Central to the World Bank’s strategy for
development via reform of the forestry sectoris the redistribution of tax revenues back from
national to local level, backed up by an
increased level of area tax. This is supposed to
bring funding to enable the state to provide
social infr astructure.  
The t ax revenue r edistribution is at best a
limited measure, however. In 2007 the area tax
is $0.50/hectare (in the case of new
allocations f ollowing the legal r eview ,the lev el
of area tax to be paid will be determined by
the offer of the highest bidder). Assuming that
1 0 million hectares of forest is under
concession after the legal review and that taxcollection from these concessions is 1 00%
effective, the measure will still only net total
revenue of $5 million annually ,of which 4 0%
($2 million) is to be redistributed to provinces
and t erritories t oensur ethe pr ovision of basic
community infrastructure in a country about
the size of Western Europe. In reality, of course, even less money is likely
to be available, since the process threatens tobe undermined by c orruption, as has happened
in neighbouring C ameroon. To date in the DRC,
systems of distribution or control to ensurethat this money is actually devolved have
simply not been set up at provincial or
territorial levels. According to the World Bank,
area fees were not transferred in 2003-
2006.
27 4
Given the e xperienc eof the impac ts of poor
institutional capacity and corruption in
Cameroon, it is hard to imagine how the World
Bank c an hav ebeen so naïv eas toallow such a
situation to arise again. In any event, it is clear
that local communities have not benefited at
all, as yet.‘Information in our possession
gives an account of thecurrent s tateof play
regarding the assignment of
forest area royalties resultingfrom logging in OrientaleProvince … This completelyincomprehensible situationnot only violates the relevantprovisions o fthe Forestry
Code, but also by its nature
depriv es Orient ale P rovince of
necessary resources for
reconstruction after the yearsofwar and des truction.’
272
Théo Baruti Amisi Ikumaiyete,
Governor of OrientaleProvince, 2005
It is clear that access to the
documents allowing pr oper
verific ation o fthe s tate of
affairs of tax payment ...is
difficult if no timpos sible.273
WRI-Agreco (Independent
Observer for DRC forestryreform), 2007
47
©Greenpeace/Davison


CARVING UP THE CONGO 48
‘Social responsibility contracts’ – 
the charity of loggers is a poor
substitute for genuine development
In the DR C,as elsewhere in Central Africa,
logging companies frequently negotiate local
agreements (so-c alled social r esponsibilit y
contracts) with customary landowners and
communities as a means of securing their
cooper ation. The W orld Bank – r ecognising
that forest-dwelling communities will see little
benefit from fiscal reform and tax
redistribution – has pushed for the adoption of
the Forestry Code through which this processof direct negotiation of services is to be
formalised, and f or new agr eements to be
brokered with c ommunities by companies
passing the legal review.
275However, this
approach of fers a poor subs tituteboth for
genuine development, and for the policy of
community consultation and prior, informedconsent that is supposed to precede land usedecisions.Typically, the company will first negotiate
access to the forest with the customary
landowners in return for a small quantity of
gifts or pr ovision of services to the
community. Before logging begins, the
company then nego tiates the social
responsibility contract (cahier des charges).
Such agreements, which currently have no
legal basis, t ypically inv olvepromises by the
companies to provide goods and equipment
and to construct or renovate facilities such as
schools, clinics and wells. They have long
served as a substitute for proper development,allowing government to wash its hands of the
well-being of f orest-dwelling communities. A
forestrysector review for the World Bank
concedes this point:
‘In well functioning States, the State …
provides social services throughout the
country. In the DRC context, the cahier des©Greenpeace/Davison
‘The loggers buy social peace
by nego tiating benefits in
kind with the local elites
(official and tr aditional
authorities) and local
communities. This relation hasoften been depic ted as “w ood
for beer and a football
pitch”.’
276
Confidential report on Siforco,
2006


CARVING UP THE CONGO
charges makes up for the State’s inability to
provide such services in remote areas.’278
Companies often fail to meet their
commitments in the social responsibility
contracts. Infrastructure such as roads and
houses built for their own use is allowed to fall
into disrepair as soon as they have logged out
aparticular area, so that the forest-dwellers
receive little or no lasting materialcompensation for the plunder of their
traditional territory.
Moreover, recent research conducted on
behalf of the Bank
279has highlighted the
inequit able nature both of the agreements and
of the process of negotiation by which they
are reached (see for example the Sodefor case
study on pp54–56 below). State authoritiesoften act on behalf of the logging companiesin the consultation process to ensure theagreements are signed or to stifle protest.
280
Certainly, the social responsibility contract
canno tbe described as deliv ering genuine
povertyalleviation or ev en adequat eservice
provision, although, as the World Bank-led
forestry sector review acknowledges, it is
often the only benefit that forest communitiesreceive from industrial logging.
Nevertheless, although the Bank regards the
redistribution of the forest area tax toprovinces and territories as the chief means of
driving the DRC’s development, the Forestry
Code,
281drawn up according to the Bank’s
recommendations, formalises the practice of
nego tiating social r esponsibility contracts
(Article 89).
Until now there has been no standard
procedure or template for the negotiation of
social r esponsibilit ycontracts, a deficienc ythat
the Forestry Code sets out to remedy. New
social responsibility contracts will need to be
negotiated for logging titles that pass the legal
review.282However, it is hard to see how
standardising this procedure through the
Forestry Code will overcome the intrinsic faults
of the pr ocess. Nego tiations between
landowners and a logging company can deeply
divide c ommunities, with landowners
sometimes granting access to the forest inreturn for little beyond purely personal gifts forthemselves, rather than negotiating
investments that benefit the entire community
(see Trans-M case study on pages 50–53); or
signing away the villagers’ right to protest whencompanies damage crops or fail to abide by
their agreements. In many villages, most people
are not even aware of the agreements that
have been made between the loggers and the
traditional landowners. Similarly, when both
Bantu and pygmy communities claim rightsover the same forest area (see ITB Lake Tumba
case study on pages 44–46), the hunter-
gatherer pygmies, who are most dependentupon the forest, may be sidelined.
Even when a social responsibility contract is
negotiated on behalf of the full community,
the negotiations never happen on an equal
basis (‘pas libre, pas transparent, paséquitable’
283): the local traditional landowners
and the wider community lack any ownershipof the process, since they are unfamiliar with
forestrylaw and of ten do no thaveatrue
sense of the economic value of their forest.
Thus villagers ar ealwaysin the weak position:
the f actthat loc al gov ernment civil ser vants
and/or police are sometimes present during
such negotiations (and typically take the side
of the logging company) hampers a fairnegotiating process (see Trans-M case studyon page 48). Villagers f eel pow erles stodefend
themselv es against the interests of a logging
company working hand-in-glove with thestate. They fear intimidation and arrest if they
react (see Sodefor and Sicobois case studies
on pages 50–53). Unsurprisingly, they often
feel it is better to get something than nothing
at all.
Oncesocial r esponsibilit ycontracts are
signed, the communities concerned have little
or no leverage to ensure compliance, and
thereis cur rently no legal mechanism f or
conflict resolution. Even when contracts are
respected, the paternalistic terms in which
they are framed do little to empower
communities or promote genuinedevelopment – as a report into Siforco’s
oper ations obser ves: ‘The contribution of
forestryexploitation to local development
remains confined within the sterile bounds 
of a r elation of ne ar total dependenc e.’
284
49
‘The participatory
management appr oach that
is fashionable in some donor
and NGO cir cles has little
currency in the ruthless world
of industrial logging.Moreover,the fisc al revenues
that should accrue to them
remain more imaginary thenreal. These populations haveno reliable mediators &insufficient experience inparticipat orystrategies.’
277
Theodor T refon, 2 006


CARVING UP THE CONGO 50
TRANS-M’S DEALS ARE A ‘SWINDLE’
Trans-M’s illegal logging is
causing conflict in Lomako
Greenpeace has obtained a copy of a hand-
written a social responsibility contract that
Trans-M signed with the local community
leaders of Lomako on 8 February 2005.285
The communities live beside the newly
established (2006) Lomako National Park, 
in key bonobo habitat within the CBFP
Maringa-L opori-W amba landsc ape. Trans-M
holds a title for the area obtained after the
moratorium (see pages 50–53).
The contract was negotiated in the presence
of many government representatives, including
the adviser to the governor and the regional
administrator. The contract commits Trans-Mto improve and maintain the local road, and to
build he alth c entres and three schools. In terms
of mor eimmediat ecompensation t othe
community, Trans-M promised to deliver 20
50kgsacksof sugar ,200bags of salt, and
equipment including 200 machetes, 50 axes,
1 00 hoes, 1 00 files and 200 spades. In July2005, just six months after the contract was
signed, c oncerned members of the
community, organised under the name of the
Association of Natives of Lomako (Associationdes Ressortissants de Lomako – ARELO)
handed over a memorandum
286to the
Governor of Equateur Province in which they
expressed their anger and frustration at the
‘illegal logging ac tivities carried out by Trans-
M’.287The memorandum was addressed to a
broad audienc e, including the T rans-M
management in Kinshasa, President Kabila and
the Environment Minister.
In the memorandum, ARELO claims that Trans-
M’s logging contract was signed in violation of
the moratorium, and also that ‘the logging title
Trans-M has obtained is located in a zonewhere the creation of a future protected area
is being widely discus sed.’ It c omplains that ‘no
proper land use planning w as done … t aking
into account the socio-economic realities of
the loc al communities ’and that ‘the people
were not properly consulted before this
logging title was handed out’.
288It also regrets‘Villagers within 40 kilometres
ofthecityof Kisangani are
rising up against the logging
companies exploiting theirforests. According to villageleaders, their people are notbenefiting from theseindustrial activities. Not asingle humanit arian or social
action has been taken by
these logger s.Villages are
without schools, health
centres, navigable roads andother adequat einfrastructure.
In short, in the majority of
cases, social responsibilitycontracts have not beenrespected … At present, themost visible, the most active Icancite include Trans-M Bois,
asubsidiar yof Congo
Futur.’
289
Radio Okapi,Kisangani
(April 2006)
©Greenpeace/Davison


CARVING UP THE CONGO
the overlap of interests ‘between the head of
the provincial administration and thecompany’.
290
ARELO cites a number of shortcomings in
Trans-M’s handling of the social responsibility
contract process:291
sthe lack of proper consultation of the people
of Lomako
sthe poor content of the social responsibility
contract listing the obligations of the logging
company
saquestionable commitment to genuine
development as a result of the contract
having been negotiated by Trans-M in the
absence of any clear, informed
representation of community interests
sthe fact that several village representatives
refused to be part of this swindle (‘tricherie’)
–which included ‘f orgeryand o ther def ects
…evident in some of the signatures attached
tothe document at the 8 F ebruar y2005
meeting,at which people w ereforced 
to sign’292
The memorandum concludes by protesting
against the arrogant and disrespectful way thenego tiating pr ocesswas conducted, against
the int erests of the Lomako communities.
293
ARELO calls for the ‘immediate and
unconditional suspension of Trans-M’s/Congo
Futur’s activities in this future protected area
because they do not meet the needs of the
local community’.294
The social conflicts arising from Trans-M’s
poor c ontribution t olocal dev elopment in the
Lomako area continue, two years on. 
Trans-M w orkers c omplain of appalling
working conditions. Many workers have voiced
concern that they have no proper contract;
workers camps are unsanitary; the work can
be quite unsafe, and there have been a numberof fatal accidents for which relatives have not
received proper compensation. Those who
havechallenged T rans-M about the situation
(village chiefs, local authorities, the local
forestrydepar tment) hav ecomplained about
intimidation.
295Trans-M is destroying community
forest resources in Kisangani
Greenpeace has obtained a copy of another
social responsibility contract297which Trans-
Mnegotiated in February 2005. This one is
with the community of Alibuku village, near
Kisangani in Orientale Province, impacted by
the G A033/05 logging title.298The
agreement includes commitments to build a
school and a clinic ,toprovide tr ansport for
villagers to Kisangani if there is room in the
logging trucks, and to provide free wood to
use f or coffins. 
But implementation of these promises has
been disappointing. Apart from the
construction of a school, few of the promisesmade to the community have materialised. 
The c ompany is the c ause of c onsiderable
tension in the ar eaand risk sdamaging local
livelihoods.
299More than a year after the
contractwas ob tained by Greenpeace, a field
mission from the NGOs Bank Information
Center and Environmental Defense visited the
village and drew the following conclusions:‘Trans-M w as imposed on 
the c ommunity … The head 
of the Department for theEnvironment simply informedthe community that theywere going to log theforest.’
296
Alibuk ucommunity leader
51
©Greenpeace/Reynaers


CARVING UP THE CONGO 52
‘The conditions under which cahiers des
charges are negotiated often do not enablecommunities to adequately express and defendtheir rights. In the c ase of T rans-M, the
company held one meeting with the
customary landowners (les ayants droits) andthe village chief (chef du village) to announce
that it would start working in the community.
The company then returned for a second
meeting, with the Government’s advisor, and
demanded that the c ommunit ydraft its
priorities and demands for the cahier des
charges and sign the document that same day
(February 2005). After more than a year, noneof the commitments made by the company in
the c ahier des char ges … has been fulfilled. The
villagers complained: “We asked them to
provide us with enough wood for our coffins
and they even refused that.”’
301
As the BIC/ED report also emphasises, the
existence of a social responsibility contract
does no tobviatethe need f or direct
compensation for the losses communities
experienc eas a r esult of f orestdestruction
from industrial logging. These losses can
include, amongst others, a decline in the
supply of or access to non-timber forestproducts on which communities depend,
including mushrooms, caterpillars and forestanimals that are hunted. 
Local communities that depend on the forest
currently being logged by Trans-M havecomplained that the company is cutting down
sapele trees (see p 46). Communities rely on
these trees for caterpillars, an important
source of protein and cash in an area that
otherwise suffers from malnutrition. Further,
Trans-M’s logging operations overlap with, 
and thr eatentodamage, areas used by
communities for small-scale agriculture.
302
On 1 9Februar y2005, Trans-M also obtained
an agreement from several neighbouring
communities.303The negotiations over this
created considerable conflict; younger people
felt that elders had failed to look after thelong-term interests of the community. The
deal also cr eated tensions between
communities, with some cus tomar y
landowners refusing to sign the social
responsibilit ycontractbecause they felt the
content was weak and that their needs were
not adequately taken into account.
©Greenpeace/Reynaers
‘The Bank ’sactions in the DR C
indus trial timber sector are
subject to some criticism. …[T]here are serious ethicalconsiderations because thereis little doubt that localpopulations will be victimisedby indus trialised logging. ’
300
Theodor Trefon, 2006

CARVING UP THE CONGO
Soon after, Trans-M began rapidly expanding
its logging operations at its GA 033/55 title,the contract for which was signed after the
moratorium. Local radio reported that by
December 2005 more then 300 afrormosia(Pericopsis elata) logs were being stored in
Kisangani awaiting shipment to Kinshasa.
304
Afrormosia is a CITES Appendix II listed species,
which means that it is at risk of extinction
from unregulated trade and therefore subjectto regulation. If there is good reason to
question the legality of the timber, importing
EU countries have the duty under CITESregulations to insist on clear evidence of
legality before issuing an import licence. 
Further, local authorities have complained that
Trans-M is not following the regulations in
terms of log storage and fails to respect localtax obligations. However, Trans-M has deniedthe charges made by the provincial coordinatorfor the Ministry of Environment and claims
that ev erything w as ar ranged in Kinshasa.
305
Asthe pr oblems ar ound Trans-M operations in
Lomak oand Kisangani demons trate, social
responsibility contracts do not ensure that
communities benefit from logging operations
or that forest resources are sustained.
Timber fr om T rans- M is impor ted into
European countries including Belgium, France
and Germany.306
EUROPEAN LAWS BANNING 
ILLEGAL AFRORMOSIA 
–WHERE’S THE ENFORCEMENT?
With an e xpor tmarket price of around
$850/m3for sawn timber,307afrormosia or
Afric an teak (P ericopsis elata) ranks among the
most valued tropical timber species.
Afrormosia is a CITES Appendix II species,
meaning that the species is subjec ttotrade
regulation because it is recognised that
unregulated trade puts the species at risk 
of extinction.
The DRC has the world’s largest remaining
stocksof afrormosia, largely confined to the
provinc es of E quateur and Orientale.308Around
Kisangani, this threatened species is the main
commer cial timber tr ee.309Since the end of the war, the DRC has
substantially increased its exports ofafrormosia. In 2005/06, it was the world’s
largest exporter, with the vast majority of the
timber being exported to China, Taiwan and sixEuropean destinations: Italy, France, Belgium,
Germany, Portugal and Switzerland. Other
destinations include Japan and the USA.
310
In theory, DRC government authorities are
only allowed to grant a CITES Appendix IIexport permit for afrormosia (whether logs,
sawn timber or veneer sheets) if two criteria
are met: 
311
sthe Institut des Jardins Zoologiques et
Botaniques du Congo (the DRC CITES
Scientific Authority) has advised that ‘such
export will not be detrimental to the survival
of that species’
sthe Institut Congolais pour la Conservation
de la Nature (ICCN) (the DRC CITES
Management A uthorit y) is ‘ satisfied that the
specimen was not obtained in contravention
of the laws of that S tatefor the protection
of fauna and flor a? (eg no tin violation of
the moratorium and compliant with the DRC
Forestry Code)
Additionally, countries within the European
Union may only is sue an impor tpermit f or
afrormosia if such imports ‘would not have a
harmful effect on the conservation status ofthe species or the territory occupied by the
relevant population of the species.’
312
Using its additional power to enforce CITES
regulations, the E uropean Union suspended
imports of afrormosia from Cameroon and the
Republic of C ongo bec ause of c oncerns about
the sustainability of the trade. Both sanctions
were subsequently lifted.313
Given the level of corruption within the DRC,
the extent of forest allocated in violation of
the 2002 moratorium and the Forestry Code,
the lack of institutional capacity to eitheridentify breaches of the law or enforce
regulations, and the cle ar inc entive for
companies t ocut the mos tvaluable species
within the current legal vacuum, it is clear that
it will be v eryhardtoprovethe legality of
afrormosia from the DRC under the CITES
regulations.©Greenpeace
53


CARVING UP THE CONGO 54
SODEFOR DEALS WITH 
EMPTY WORDS
Sodefor (see page 23) has its operations
headquarters in Nioki in Bandundu Province.
The town is an example of modern industrial
logging ’sinability to bring prosperity to the
regions in which it operates. 
The example of Sodefor is all the more striking
in that the company’s pre-war predecessor,
the s tate-owned F orescom (run by Belgian,
then Canadian management) appears to have
been relatively beneficial. Sodefor (Société de
Développement Forestier known to local
inhabitants as ‘Société de DestructionForestière’) is now part of the giant
Liecht enstein-based NST group (see
pp82–85), which dir ectly controls some 
4.7 million hectares of logging titles in four
DRCprovinc es.
314Sodefor is by far the dominant logging
company in Bandundu, with a sawmill base at
Nioki, the only logging town in Bandundu
Province. Greenpeace visited the area in
May–June 2006 and January 2007, and was
told that loc al people have repeatedly
expressed their outrage at Sodefor’s
exploit ativeattitude. 
For example, in an open letter to the Minister
of Envir onment ,people fr om Nioki, who had
formed a pressure group under the name of
‘SOS Nioki’, complained about the company’s
disappointing social record: 
‘The forests of Mai-Ndombé are exploited for
the self-int erested profit of Sodefor and its sister
company Sof orma … This e xploit ation generates
ahuge turnover … and makes a dismal contrast
with the ec onomic and social c onditions of the
populace of Mai-Ndombé district … where there
is no sign of any recompense for the wealth
extracted from its land.
©Greenpeac e/Davison


CARVING UP THE CONGO
In contradiction of its full name, which
promises development, Sodefor has never
given a moment’s consideration to any
development project in this area.’315
It was indeed evident at the time of
Greenpe ace’s visit that little of the wealth
Sodefor has extracted has returned to the
area. Sodefor’s main contribution to Nioki
seems t obe the maint enanc eof the t own’s
hospital which provides health care to its
inhabitants. The roads at Nioki, well maintained
before Sodefor bought out the logging
operation, are now in a state of disrepair. Theelectricity supply to most of the town has
been cut of f.Outside Nioki, mos tschools in
the ar eawher eSodef or operates lack benches,
and most health centres lack basic medical
equipment .Sawn timber is har dtoobtain in
the area – there is not a single timber yard in
the region where final processing is carried outto meet local demand. Sodefor has a
processing plant at Nioki, but according to local
people all the timber it processes is sold
elsewhere.
316
Beyond the town, villages close to sites where
Sodef or has ended its logging ar enow par tly
abandoned, their inhabitants setting up in
shanty-towns along the river, the sole
remaining me ans of c ommunic ation. A s
elsewhere in the DRC, game and fish are
becoming rare in the area and, as there is little
agriculture, the population subsists largely on a
diet of manioc.
Greenpe acefound similar deprivation and lack
of inv estment in basic infr astructure in other
nearby settlements where Sodefor is active.31 7
When Sodefor ‘negotiates’ social responsibility
55
Sankur aRiverLuken ie RiverSalong aRiver Bokun gu
Oshwe
IlebaDeke seITBSODEF ORSODEF OR
SODEF ORSODEFORSODEF OR
SODEFORSODEF OR
Intact Fo restLandscap es Salon ga-Lu kenie-Sankura Lands cape Logg ing Titles
Logging titles near the Salonga-Lukenie-Sankura Landscape

CARVING UP THE CONGO 56
agreements with villages, the company always
uses essentially the same standard contract:local stakeholders, uninformed of their rights,
are told to ‘take it or leave it’.
319Sodefor then
obtains an official signature to ‘legalise’ theagreement.
320Typically, in return for access to
avillage forest the company will sign an
agreement involving direct gifts in kind to the
customary landowners (often to a value of less
than $1 00).321In return, Sodefor insists that
the landowners must sign away theircommunity’s right to protest in any way
against the company’s activities. They are also
expected to assume responsibility for thesmooth functioning of the company’s logging
operation – in other words, take responsibility
for preventing obstruction or interference. 
SODEFOR’S CONTRACTS OF SHAME
‘Mr [xxx] undertakes to avert or prevent any
kind of disturbance (barricades, uprising of thepopulation) of Sodefor’s forest exploitation. He is in addition responsible for the smooth
functioning of ac tivities at the logging 
site, without however interfering in 
working me thods.’
322
Sodef or cahier de char ge
Greenpeace has obtained copies of several of
Sodefor’s social responsibility agreements,detailing the ‘gifts’ the community receives inexchange f or es sentially signing aw ay its right
toprotest:
21 March 2004, Ikole Mete: two sacks of salt,
18 bars of soap, four packets of coffee, 24
bottles of beer and two bags of sugar.
18March 2005, Bonji: one sack of salt, nine
bars of soap, two packets of coffee, 12 bottles
of beer ,1bag of sugar .
1November 2005, Nkoba & Manya: two sacks
of salt ,18bars of soap ,four pack ets of c offee,
24 bottles of beer and two bags of sugar.
1November 2005, Eyongo & Elona: two sacks
of salt, 18 bars of soap, four packets of coffee,24 bottles of beer and two bags of sugar.Beyond its gifts to the local customary
landowners (‘ayants droits’), Sodefor typicallysigns social responsibility agreements
promising to undertake development projects
for the benefit of the wider community. Butthese rarely materialise, and villagers are
powerless to enforce the agreements. Madjoko
villagers receive a tiny percentage of the value
of the wood felled by the company, but have
to rely on the ‘totally unverified’ data which it
provides.
323
Providing employment for local people would
be one benefit that the logging industry couldbring to forest communities. Yet, in Madjoko
and elsewhere, it was made clear to
Greenpeace that Sodefor provides few jobs for
local people. Additionally, some of those who
are taken on tend to be kept for unreasonably
long times as ‘trainees’ with no job securityand no rights to the bonuses received by thenon-local workers on full contracts, receivingthe national minimum wage (335 CFR per day
–about US$0.7 0) for a 1 0-hour day .Those
who are employed live in appalling
conditions.
324Atvarious logging sit es, an
investigation int othe implement ation of social
responsibility contracts notes that the level of
malnutrition and hunger, is striking.325Even
the operations manager admitted that ‘lack offood at Madjoko is a reality’. 
Protests by local people at Sodefor’s failure to
abide by its commitments in socialresponsibility contracts have met with violent
intervention from the police and military. In
2005, 23 people were arrested in the villages
of Bobila and Mbelo in Equateur Province for
blocking the r oad t oprevent the passage of
logging equipment, after Sodefor failed to
respec tasocial r esponsibilit yagreement.
326
In February 2006, soldiers and police returned
to Mbelo, making violent arrests and stealing
personal ef fects af ter villagers again block ed
the road.327
Timber from Sodefor is imported into
European countries, including Belgium, France,Germany and Portugal.
328©Greenpeace/Davison
‘Forest l aws must be
reformed to recognize theneeds of the fore st-
dependent poor. Otherwise,their enforcement is theworst form of violation ofequity and justice.’
318
Gerhard Dieterle, World Bank
Forests Advisor, 2006


CARVING UP THE CONGO
THE LAW WORKS HAND-IN-HAND
WITH SICOBOIS
Sicobois is a Belgian-owned company with
three logging titles in Equateur Province,
covering nearly 400,000 hectares.329These
contracts have been signed after the
moratorium. Although Sicobois had logging
titles in Lissala before May 2002, Greenpeace
has reason to believe that old forest areas
titles were exchanged for new ones.330
However, in the absence of publicly available
company-specific pre- and post-moratorium
maps, it is impossible to make a fully informed
independent judgement.
Areport by a Congolese NGO331states that
Sicobois often consults with local communities
regarding authorisation for forestry
prospecting, and it has negotiated and signed a
number of agreements. However, in mostcases these consultations and agreementshave not led to harmonious relations. 
One agr eement w as concluded be tween
Sicobois and three community groups
(Bolongo-Bosua, M onduga and Bobala) on 1 6
Januar y2004.
332The c ompany agr eed t o
supply the three communities with a quantity
of various tools and materials, and also to build
adispensary and a school, renovate another
school, and supply benches for these and twoother e xisting schools.
On 3 October 2005, an ongoing conflict around
forest exploitation between the community of
Bolongo-Bosuwa and Sicobois seriously
escalated, with the company categorically
refusing the community’s request to negotiate
anew agr eement t olog its forests. According
to an article in La Voix du Paysan newspaper,
the Belgian Ambas sador of fered to negotiate
but this was rejected by Sicobois. The
community decided to block the roads to the
logging sit es and deny the c ompany ’svehicles
entrance to ‘their’ forests.
333
This article goes on to state that Sicobois did
not respond to the community’s invitation tonegotiate a peaceful solution. However, three
officials, including a polic eofficer, left Lisala for
the ‘conflic tzone’ the same day. On their
arrival they arrested the chief of the
communit yand f our of his c ouncillors. All of
them were taken to prison and detained for six
days. Another councillor went up to Lisala thesame day to inform the coordinator of a localNGO about the situation. When he returned
that evening to tell the community what had
become of the ar rested men, he c ame acr ossa
car full of Sicobois workers who were on their
way toremove the blockades to the logging
site. He w as forced into the car and that night
they took him all the way back to Lisala to
have him put in prison as well (simply because
he had come back to the community to tell thepeople what had happened to their chief andcouncillors). The pr osecut or who subsequently
examined the case concluded that the chief of
the community should never have beenintimidated in this manner.
334
Nor was this an isolated incident. In the
neighbouring community of Mondunga, a
roadblock w as set up by the local population in
order to insist that the logging company
respec tits commitments. A saresult of this
blockade, the president of the local
community’s committee on forest
management ,Professor W ale, w as reportedly
arrested in Lisala and spent two weeks in
prison.335The evidence suggests that when
faced with protests at its conduct, Sicobois
prefers to leave it to the police to intimidatecommunities rather than talk through the
difficulties – perhaps bec ause nego tiation
would f orcethe company to admit that it fails
to abide by its local agreements.
Sicobois exports its timber to Europe, Danzer
is a major client of the company.
336
57


CARVING UP THE CONGO 58
The World Bank’s strategy for reform of the
forestry sector in the DRC includes as a goal
protection of the rainforest’s local and globalenvironmental values, including its contribution
to climate stability.
337However, without a
forest land use planning process which
prioritises large-scale conservation, the
measures the World Bank has pushed through
–amoratorium on the allocation of new forest
titles, a legal review of existing titles, and a
new Forestry Code – will not stop industrial
logging moving into valuable intact rainforest.This will result in de facto land use decisions in
favour of the loggers rather than the forest-
dwelling communities, the DRC’s unique
biodiversity or the global environment.
The rainforest of the DRC is critical to the
health of the global environment. Its massivestores of carbon help keep the global climatestable. It plays a significant role in regulating
one of the w orld’slargestriver basins. It is also
aunique reservoir of biodiversity.
338Once lost,
the forest, its wildlife and the vital environmental
services it pr ovides c anno tbe replaced. 
The CBFP has to date identified several large
forest landscapes within the DRC that areimportant for conservation and requiresustainable management .Moreover, as shown
by the c ase of the Lomami forest (see
pp64–67), there are also other vast tracts of intact forest landscape not included in the
CBFP’s priority conservation areas, that
nevertheless have huge value for forest
communities and biodiversity, and whose
large-sc ale protection would contribute to the
forest’s continued provision of global
envir onment al ser vices such as climate
stability. But destructive logging operations are
set to go ahead both within the CBFP priority
landsc apes (in spit eof the CBFP’ s
recommendations to aim for sustainable forest
management) and in other important areas,
curtailing the options for protection and
responsible forest management.
Asthe W orld Bank itself r ecognises: ‘There is a
serious risk that ec onomic dev elopment
initiatives will be accepted by the Government
without adequat econsider ation being giv en to
their environmental impact, or to alternative
options such as biodiversity conservation andcommunity based management.’
339Many logging companies whose operations
threaten important forest landscapes have
rushed to obtain logging titles in advance ofany land use planning process (eg Trans-M
case study on pages 50–53). It is clear that in
this context there is an urgent need for full and
extensive land use planning prior to the
expansion of industrial logging: social and
environmental values need to be recognisedand protected so that critical areas of
rainforest are placed off limits to commercial
logging or other extractive industries. Strategicland use planning provides an essential
framework for long-term management of any
forest. It has been shown to be effective at
resolving existing disputes and avoiding future
conflicts between the interests of indigenous
peoples, logging companies, biodiversity andthe environment at the local, national andinternational scales. 
In practice, how ever,justthe opposit e
approach is being taken: existing titles,
provided the ysatisf ythe narrow criteria of the
legal r eview ,stand t obeconfirmed as new-
style forestry concessions irrespective of their
potential impacts on forest-dwellers, wildlife
or climate, pre-empting any attempt at arational land use planning exercise withirreversible decisions in f avour of the logging
indus try.
Meanwhile, the protection of the rainforest’s
social and environmental values will be largely
abandoned to the good offices of the logging
industry itself through the forest management
plans it is r equir ed to develop, four years down
the line. Rather than insisting first on land use
planning being the absolut epriorit y,donors ar e
aiding and abetting this free-for-all by giving
companies development money to complete
these management plans, which being
mandatory are critical to their expansion intonew areas of intact forest – and to their
profitability (see case study, page 45).‘With the largest share of the
Congo Basin and 50% ofAfrica’s moist tropical forests,the occurrence of 12ecoregions on DRC’s territoryand a unique level of naturalhabitats and species diversityand endemism, the DRC isrecognised as one of theworld’s most importantcountries for environmentalprotection.’
340
World Bank, 2006
‘Independent o ftheir species
richness and their level of
endemism, the forests of theCongo Basin represent one ofthe last regions in the worldwith vast areas ofinterconnected tropicalrainforestwher ethe biologic al
processes can still proceed
without dis turbanc e. It is f or
example one o fthe r are
places in the world where an
animal the size of the forestelephant can still play anatural role in shaping itsecosystem, like an “engineer”
transforming the landscape,
influencing speciesdistribution and maintainingthe functioning of naturalecological systems. Inaddition, simply by virtue ofits siz e, the f orest of the
Congo Basin constitutes a
carbon r eserveof global
importance for the regulation
of the principal greenhousegas, c arbon dio xide. F inally ,
this forest also has a role in
regulating the regional andlocal climate. In particular itensures the hydrologicalcycle, since more than 50%ofthe pr ecipit ation that falls
on the C ongo Basin c omes
from local evaporation and
evapotranspir ation. ’
341 
Congo Basin Forest
Partnership, 2006
INDUSTRIAL LOGGING OPENS UP INTACT RAINFORESTS,
PRECLUDING PROPER LAND USE PLANNING


©Greenpeace/Davison


CARVING UP THE CONGO 60
The DR C’sresurgent logging industry is already
fragmenting lar ge ar eas of r ainforest, opening
them up to poachers, agriculture and
settlement as it creams off the most valuable
species. Poachers take advantage of thelogging roads to travel deep into previouslyinaccessible f orest. According to the CBFP, the
location of logging titles is a prime indicator of
where roads will be built, and roads are in turnaprime indicator of where degradation of the
rainforests will occur in the future.
343Logging
company workers often facilitate the trade by
transporting bushmeat in company vehicles or
on log bar ges.344In this w ay,even where the
forest cover remains largely intact, industrial
logging c an le ad tothe ne ar eradication of
endangered animal species from a region. In
the words of Conservation International, ‘This
type of unc ontrolled bushme at trade has
become the most immediate threat to the
future of wildlife in the Central African
wilderness in the next five to fifteen years.’345LARGE INTACT RAINFORESTS –
DRC FORESTS ARE CRUCIAL FOR GLOBAL BIODIVERSITYCONSERVATION
The forests of the DRC are of global
significance for biodiversity conservation – 
in fact, the country ranks as the fifth most
diverse country on earth for both plant and
animal species,346in large part because of the
size and variety of forest habitats.347The DRC
is home to a wider variety of species ofanimals then any other nation in Africa and
only South Africa rivals the DRC in number of
plant species.
348
The DRC’s vast tracts of unbroken forest
shelt er spectacular mammals such as elephant
(Loxodonta africana), gorilla (Gorilla gorilla)
and buffalo (Syncerus caffer). These large
mammals play a critical role in shaping theforests. Like landscape gardeners, they createpathways, plant, prune, and open clearings.
349
All four Afric an gr eat apes liv ein the DR C’s
forests: in addition to the western gorilla, we
find the e astern gorilla (Gorilla beringei), the
chimpanz ee (P an tr oglody tes) and the pygmy
chimpanzee or bonobo (Pan paniscus), the
human race’s closest relative, which lives
nowhere in the world except the rainforestssouth of the Congo River.
350
Other w onderful creatures that live only in the
DRC include the magnificent and elusiveCongo peacock (Afropavo congensis);
351the
rare aquatic genet (Osbornictis piscivora), a
curious fish-eating carnivore;352the shy okapi
(Okapia johnstoni), a unique animal somewhere
between a giraffe and a zebra; and a number
of monkey species including the Salonga or
dryas monk ey(Cercopithecus dryas),353and
the golden-bellied mangabey (Cercocebuschrysogaster).
354‘The Democratic Republic of
Congo is by far the mostbiologically rich country inAfrica … Its size and widerange o fhabitats make it one
of the world’s most important
centres ofbiodiv ersity.
342
Wildlife Conservation Society
(WCS) 
©Greenpeac e/Davison


CARVING UP THE CONGO
NO LAND USE PLANNING IS
A ROAD TO RUIN – LOGGINGIN THE MARINGA-LOPORI-WAMBALANDSCAPE 
In September 2003, the World Bank set out to
support pilot forest zoning work in the
Maringa-Lopori-Wamba landscape (one of the
CBFP’s key conservation landscapes) as part of
a$4 million emergency aid loan. However, it
then dropped the project because of lack 
ofconsultation.355
It is unclear if and how the World Bank will re-
engage in zoning activities. In response to ajoint letter from Greenpeace, Bank Information
Center, Environmental Defense and the
Rainf orest Foundation, in November 2006 the
World Bank wrote in November 2006 that: ‘A
participatory zoning activity might be part of
future projects financed or administered by theBank, as long as there is unambiguous supportfor it within the Congolese civil society, andprovided national technical institutions
demons tratecommitment t oexercise due
diligence in handling such a complex task.’
356
Within the M aringa-L opori-W amba landsc ape,
Siforco (part of the Danzer group) is by far the
largest logging title holder (see pages 82-85). 
Siforco started logging in the area in 1977.357
In June 2 004, the c ompany r eturned 1.2
million hec tares of forest to the State, around
half of it within the Maringa-Lopori-WambaLandscape. Yet, only forests which had already
been logged or which were otherwise
unsuitable for industrial exploitation were
handed back. 
358Further, this relieved Siforco
of paying imminent incr eases in annual forest
tax on the area returned.359 
Siforco currently holds two adjacent dormant
logging areas in the landscape, known as K2
and K7. These c over 725,0 00hectares of
rainforest within the boundaries of the
landscape,360north of the Lomako national
park and in bonobo habitat. The company
intends to open several of these areas as soonas it finalises its management plans for the
areas and has the nec essary infrastructure in
place.
361Opening up these v asttracts of
rainforest with thousands of kilometres of
logging tr ails and r oads will c ause no tonly
direct habitat destruction and disturbance of
wildlife, but will also further open up the forestto poachers, jeopardising the future of some of
its most endangered species. Roads alsodegrade the forest, contributing to climate
change through emission of greenhouse gases.
The potential consequences of this expansion
of logging operations are recognised in a
report on Siforco’s activities, which
acknowledges that the forest authorities
responsible for wildlife management in the
region are utterly incapable of exerting thenecessary control to protect wildlife from the
impacts of logging.
362Instead, independent
conservation groups are left to try to managethe problem created by industrial logging as
best they can, employing only a handful of
rangers to cover an area of some 720,000
hectares!
363Clearly such a level of
enforcement is totally inadequate to control
poaching. It is doubtful that any practicallyconceivable level of enforcement will be ableto control poaching once the area has beenopened up because of the vast area affected.
Onceopen, Sif orco’sholdings ar elikely toend
up as ‘empty forest’, devoid of large animals
likeother ar eas which logging has opened up
topoaching and o ther f orms of e xploit ation. 
Near Befale, south of the Lomako reserve in
core bonobo habitat is another big actor,Trans-M. According to CBFP, Trans-M’s250,000hectare logging title
364(see page
50–53) was obtained in breach of the
moratorium365and therefore the Forestry
Code. While there are many indications that
Trans-M is involved in illegal activities, the
forestry authorities in Equateur have no proper
control or monitoring of the volume of timber
the c ompany logs.366Asareport by the CBFP
notes in relation to logging in this area: ‘When
those r esponsible f or gov ernanc eand
conservation are absent, those involved in
logging the forest are given a free rein for
lawles sexploit ation.’367‘The construction of logging
roads greatly increases accessto remote areas of forest butunless use of these roads iscontrolled during and afterlogging, they significantlyincrease unsanctionedextractive activities such aselephant poaching,commercialization of thebushmeat trade, andexploitation of minerals, all ofwhich have severeenvironmental impacts. Thedevastating effects ofunregulated hunting havebeen w ell documented in
Central Africa, where many
logged forests remain filledwith trees but are empty ofwildlife—the “silent forest”syndrome. Logging roads alsoserve as conduits forimmigr ation and f orest-
clearing for agriculture.’
368
Wildlif eConser vation Society,
2004
‘Without a forest land use
planning process that will leadto a protected permanentforest estate, the Congoleseforest by 2050 will only be avague reminder of what theyoncewere.’
369
World Bank, 2005
61


CARVING UP THE CONGO 62
The c oordinator of forestry for Equateur
Province at Mbandaka told Greenpeace in
October 2006370that although he has had
reports that there are problems with Trans-M,hedoes not have the resources to investigate
the matter. The local forestry authority atBefale – even more poorly resourced than its
provincial he ad of fice–is largely cut of ffrom
the supervision of the provincial coordinator,
although he is ‘ aware’ that the branch has
problems, such as low w ages, no tr anspor tand
no proper equipment, which makes it
extremely dependent on the good will of
companies such as Trans-M.
Represent atives of the Minis try of
Development are also present in Befale,
but they too are without capacity, skills 
or equipment.
In the absence of strategic zoning, in a context
ofcorruption and weak institutional capacity,
de facto land use planning is rapidly taking
place through the expansion of destructive
logging pr actices. This happens ev en in areas
already identified by the international
community as priority areas for conservation
and r esponsible management .WILL DONORS’ SUBSIDIES
SUPPORT THE ROAD-TO-RUINPOLICY?
In the absence of land use planning and
governance, the emphasis of the World Bank’sstrategy to drive development for the people
of the DRC has shifted from attempts to
control the resurgence of the logging
industry’s operations (eg through the
moratorium and legal review) to attempts to
control its social and environmental impactsthrough the development of forest
management plans. 
In February 2007, international donors
attending a conference on the DRC were asked
tohelp logging companies with the cost of
doing business in Central Africa. The head of
the Interafrican Forest Industries Association
(IFIA)
371–which represents some 300
companies in the Ivory Coast, Ghana,Cameroon, Gabon, the Central AfricanRepublic, the Republic of the Congo, the DRC
and Angola – ask ed for ¤7 5million t o
subsidise the cost of developing forest
management plans.
372
Despite the complete lack of institutional
capacity in the DRC, the French and German
Governments accordingly intend to providepublic money to support the preparation offorestmanagement plans f or the DR C
oper ations of Danzer’s Siforco (see pages
82–85). The German development bank KfWis looking to support development of a forest
management plan for titles within Siforco’s K8
holding.
373The French development
corporation Agence Française de
Développement ( AFD) is considering financial
support for development of a forest
management plan f or titles within Sif orco’s K9
holding.274Logging may start in 2007 in these
areas. It is highly questionable whether an
international c ompany ,with an annual turnov er
of over ¤400 million,375should benefit from
foreign aid assistance in a country where
people are still dying from starvation, and
where corruption and institutional incapacityare major hurdles to progress. 
Siforcois cur rently the largest timber producer
in the DRC, producing some 90,000m
3of
timber in 2 005–morethan 2 0% of the entir e
industrial timber production for that year.376‘As USAID has long
recognized, donors encounterextreme difficulty and littlesuccess in trying to useforeign assistance (grants and loans) to impose newbehavioural norms in politicalsystems based on the “rule of men” rather than the “rule of law”.’ 
377
ARD report for USAID, 2003
©Mauthe/Greenpeace


CARVING UP THE CONGO
Its current logging operations take no account
of sustainability parameters: timber production
is dictated in response to industrial demand of
Danz er’s sawmills.378
Siforco’s logging activities are currently within
the most productive intact forest areas within
its titles, which hold the highest densities of
valuable har dwood. T itles hav ebeen logged
solely with a view to efficient extraction of key
species.379In 2005, just three species –
sapele, iroko (Milicia excelsa) and sipo
(Entandrophragma utile) – made up 63% ofthe total volume logged.
380This practice of
high gr ading inevit ably le ads to a need to move
on rapidly t onew ar eas of intact forest.381
Given the desper ateshortage of ins titutional
capacity in the DRC’s forestry service,combined with the absence of a land use
planning process, this at best a highly
questionable use of taxpayers’ money. 
French and German government funding for
Siforcotomeet statutory commitments would
give the company a competitive advantage,
and facilitate the expansion of industrial
logging oper ations int ointactforest
landscapes. This would contribute to
undermining the future potential of the DRC 
to protect its biodiversity and its continued
provision of global climate services.
Timber fr om Sif orco is imported into European
countries including Belgium, Denmark, F rance,
The Netherlands and the UK. It is also imported
intoChina.382
63
SOFORMASIFORC OK8
SIFORC OK9CFT
SIFORC OK2
SIFORC OK7SEDAF
SEDAF
TRAN S-M
FORAB OLATRANS-MTRANS-M
SODEF OR
SEDAFFORABO LASOFORMASODEFOR
CFTSIFORC OK9
SOFORMASICOBO ISSIFORC OK8
SIFORC OK9
Befa leDjolaCong oRiver
Lopo ri RiverMarin ga River
Intact Fo restLandscap es M aringa-Lo pori-Wamb aLandscape Logging Titles
Logging titles near the Maringa–Lopori–Wamba Landscape

CARVING UP THE CONGO 64
TIME FOR LARGE-SCALE
RAINFOREST CONSERVATIONBEFORE THE CRISIS: LOOMING THREATS FOR THE LOMAMI FOREST
BEYOND PAPER PARKS AND
EMPTY FORESTS
Although theoretically there are 60 protected
areas in the DRC (including seven national
parks), covering 18.5 million hectares or 8% of
the country,383many of these areas are
protected only on paper.384All five Natural
World Heritage Sites (four of them also national
parks) are listed by UNESCO as ‘World heritagein danger’,
385despite the dedication of ICCN
staff who continued management activities
throughout the war with financial support from
UNESCO and international NGOs. Two-thirds of
the parks have been all but emptied of large
mammals.386As elsewhere in the world, the
historic approach to biodiversity protectionbased on islands of protected habitat has notbeen enough to safeguard the country’s wildlife
agains tpressurefrom a gr owing population,
387
poaching and other threats which industrial
logging look ssettoexacerbate, both directly
by the damage it c auses, and indir ectly as a
result of the roads and other infrastructure it
brings into the forest.
The World Bank acknowledges that the
existing pr otected areas are inadequate:
‘The current network of protected areas with
only 7 national parks and 57 nature and
hunting reserves is insufficient to conserve the
uniqueness of biodiversity in the DRC;
additional protected areas need to be created
toachiev ethe mandate of conserving
representative ecosystems found in the DRC,
preserving endemic species, pr otecting intact
fauna assemblages, maintaining a viable long
term population of unique fauna and flora
species and finally pr eserving the func tionalit y
of key ecosystem services for the benefit of
economic development and human welfare.’388
Accordingly, the Forestry Code sets a target 
of at least 15% of the national territory – 
ie 35million hec tares – to be protected, an
increase of 1 6.5 million hec tares over the
present figure.389From the point of view of
biodiv ersityprotection, this is an ambitious 
and necessary goal. In April 2006, Greenpeace field investigators
visited the Lomami forest (strictly known asthe Lomami-Tshuapa-Lualaba forest block,
from the three rivers that form the main
geographic features in this vast block oflowland rainforest). Our own observations 
and interviews with local hunter-gatherer
pygmy communities confirmed that the area 
is still rich in wildlife – indeed it is the only
place where all three of the DRC’s endemic
‘flagship species’ occur together: the okapi, the bonobo and the Congo peacock.
Greenpeace also saw evidence of forest
elephants, leopards (Panthera pardus), forestbuffalos, a number of other primates, crowned
eagles (Stephanoaetus coronatus) and an
abundanc eof hornbills (Bucerotidae).
The Lomami area is probably the largest area
of unprotected intact lowland rainforest in theDRC or even in the entire Congo region,covering over 1.2 million hectares.
390The
region supports hunter-gatherer communities,
who depend on hunting ,fishing ,and some
small-scale slash-and-burn agriculture. Partly
as a r esult of its sheer siz e, which allows spac e
for lar ge mammals t orange, c oupled with low
population pressure, the Lomami forest is a
vital area for biodiversity conservation. 
The Lomami forest has been proposed as a
protected area by the Congolese Institute for
Natur eConservation (ICCN) and the World
Bank is considering funding this.391No logging
titles have been allocated within the heart of
the area as yet, but there are some which abut
it, many of them with contracts signed after
the moratorium. Contracts include Safbois’ GA
034/04 and GA 091/03 at Isangi near the
mouth of the Lomami river, Olam’s GA 048/05
westofthe L omami f orest block near Ubundu,
and Sodefor’s GA 018/03 near Ubundu (see
map page 65).392
There is a real danger of future forestry
expansion in the area, since the rivers are
mainly navigable, making the forests highly
accessible. For example, Safbois’ intention tobuild a sawmill in the area could lead to
pressurefor expansion into the Lomami forest
oncethe e xisting titles in the vicinit yare
logged out.
393‘In Central Africa, with the
exception of the DemocraticRepublic of Congo, almost allland outside national parkshas been either zoned forlogging or alr eady is sued as
logging concessions.’
394
Conser vation
International,2 006
‘Failure from the international
communit ytoat leas tshare
the c ost of managing parks
may discourage the DRCfrom keeping these areasexempt from extractiveindustries.’
395
World Bank, 2006
©Greenpeace/Davison


CARVING UP THE CONGO
 65
Loma mi R iver
Congo Ri ver
(Lua laba)Tshu apaRiverSOFORMA SODEFOR
CFTSAFBOIS
OLAM
(IND ICATIVE)Kisan gani
OpalaUbunduIsan gi
Kindu
Intact Fo rest La ndsc apes L ogg ing Tit les
SAFBOIS IS LURKING AT THE
MOUTH OF THE LOMAMI
Safbois is part of the US-owned Blattner
group.396According t oarepor tfor USAID, the
company resumed operations in the DRC
during 2002, while conflict was still
widespread, and ‘a SAFBOIS barge was
reportedly among the first to move back upthe Congo River since the outbreak of the civil
war in 1 998. It c arried supplies for loggers in
Bumba and w as scheduled t oreturn with over
7,000 tons of hardwoods.’
397
Since 2004, Safbois' main logging operation
has been located near Isangi in OrientaleProvince. The company was also active nearBolobo in Bandundu P rovinc euntil June 2 005,
at which point it ceased operations, leaving no
sustainable infrastructure behind.
398
AGreenpeace mission in October 2005 to the
company's operations in Isangi at the mouth of
the Lomami river found serious conflict with
local communities. Many of the peopleGreenpeace spoke to complained that Safbois
had no timplement ed its social r esponsibility
contract,signed 15 September 2004, which
included promises to build a school. They also
claimed that Safbois had s tarted pr ospec ting
for trees even before it had negotiated with
the villagers. They expressed their anger at the
company's refusal to compensate villagers for
Logging titles near
Tshuapa-Lomami-Lualaba Landscape

CARVING UP THE CONGO 66
damage it had caused. Safbois logging
infrastructure developments has destroyedagricultural fields and fruit trees used by local
people, and the demolition of a local market
place to create timber port.
399
Isangi locals employed by Safbois testified to
the unhealthy housing conditions and lack of
clean sanitation on site, as well as the high
number of employees without permanent
contracts.400Due to the malnutrition in the
area, aid organisations are developing food
projects in the area.401
There have been several protests by villagers
against Safbois' operation in Isangi.402These
havebeen prompted by Safbois' failure to
deliver the assets agreed in the social
responsibility contract;403the perceived
collusion between the company, their ownchiefs and the local authorities, including theprovincial governor;
404and confusion about
the boundaries of Safbois’ logging
Blattner Gr oup - 
SAFBOIS Belgium/USA 2 334,700 2 334,700 1 + 1? 2
CFBC 2 358,000 2 358,000
Congo Futur - 
TRANS-M Lebanon 3 746,000 3 746,000 2+ 1
Danz er Gr oup - 
SIFORCO Germany 9 1,927,726 6 1,182,240 9   3   8
ITB SPRL Lebanon 4 665,9 04 3 518,904 1 + 2?
LEDYA SPRL 2 373,000 2 373,000 1   1
NordSudTimber 
(CFT, Forabola, 
Sodef or & Sof orma) Portugal 37 4,662,902 36 4,505,902 26 + 1? 14   14 
OLAM CONGO India-Singapore 3 305,700 3 305,700 3? 1   1
SICOBOIS Belgium 3 394,750   3   394,750   3? 3? 3? 
TOTAL 65 9,768,682   60   8,71 9,1 96Holder C apital Titles in 
legal review
(total & hectares)Titles 
Granted 
after May 2002
moratorium
(total & hectares)Titles 
located in 
Intact Forest
LandscapesTitles 
Threatening 
Identified
Conservation
LandscapesTitles 
located 
in CITES 
Afrormosia
LandscapeCHECKLIS TOF KE YGOVERNANCE, SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS OF INDUSTRIAL LOGGING COMPANIES

CARVING UP THE CONGO
operation.405As a result of these protests, the
regional administrator detained five of thedemonstrators.
406
The social unrest related to Safbois’s poor
social record in Isangi continues. In an open
letter to Safbois dated 5 March 2007, four
elected parliamentarians (députés provincaux
elus à Isangi) called for the suspension of
Safbois’s activities until the company has
fulfilled its promises and until new negotiationshave taken place.
407 
Greenpeace investigations show that Safbois
logs significant quantities of the CITES
Appendix II listed species afrormosia (see box
on page 53).408
Safbois exports timber (including afrormosia)
to Europe and Asia.409
Even without such expansion, the presence of
logging areas adjacent to the Lomami forest is
likely toexacerbat ethe alr eady serious
problem of poaching for bushmeat and ivory,
both by incr easing immediate local demand for
meat and by opening up the sur rounding ar ea
with logging roads and increasing river traffic,
thus facilitating the transport of ivory and of
bushmeat for commercial sale. 
In the f aceof these thr eats, ther eis a clear and
urgent need to proceed with formal protection
of the whole Lomami forest area, before theallocation of new logging concessions can begin
to chip away at it, destroying its integrity and
leaving only disjointed ‘leftovers’ to be
designated for conservation. Such designation
should be based on biodiv ersitystudies and
fully take into account the needs of local
forest-dw elling communities – and it must
exclude industrial extractive industries. This
approach must be backed up with adequate
monit oring and enf orcement t oprevent illegal
logging and poaching. This will require a
substantial financial commitment from
international donors. 
In Lomami the DRC still has a unique
oppor tunit ytoprotect a substantial block of
lowland r ainforestthat will not only help secure
the future of some of the region’s most
impor tant wildlif ebut will also c ontinue t o
provide an important buffer against further
acceleration of climate change. Thisopportunity must not be allowed to slip away.REMAINING INTACT –
CONSERVING DRC RAINFORESTSIS A CLIMATE IMPERATIVE
Forests are vital in regulating the climate –
locally, regionally and globally. The DRC’sintact rainforests act as a regulator of rainfall
for the region. Moreover they act as a brake
onfurther acceleration of climate change by
serving as a vast carbon reserve. While the
stakes are incalculably high in terms of
biodiversity within the DRC, there is alsoclearly an urgent need to protect its 
tropical forests in order to maintain their
carbon stocks.
410
Forests store half of the earth’s terrestrial
carbon stock,411morethan any other
ecosystem.412The amount of carbon stored in
the world’s forests is 45 times the amount
emitted every year through burning of fossilfuels and the production of cement.
413With
its immense areas of intact rainforests, theDRC holds 8% of that part of the earth’s
carbon which is s tored in living f orests.
414This
is more than any other country in Africa, and is
estimat ed tohave the fourth highest national
storeof forest carbon in the world.415
Carbon emissions from deforestation
When forests are completely cleared – for
instance, to make way for agricultureplant ations or gr azing – up t ohalf the c arbon
theyheld may be emitted into the
atmosphere.
416Even selective logging, as
generally practised in the DRC and elsewhere
in Central Africa, can have a serious carbon
impact, as explained below. Although the
amount of carbon held in African forests varies
with the t ype of f orest, the biomass of
lowland rainforest – the type of forest most at
risk fr om def orestation in DRC – is estimated
to hold 180 tonnes of carbon per hectare.417
Lowland tropical rainforests store more living
carbon per hec tarethan o ther f orest types.418
Deforestation causes these stores of carbon 
to be emitted into the atmosphere as carbon
dioxide (CO2)where they contribute to climate
change. On an annual basis, global emissions
from tr opical deforestation alone contribute
between 1 0% and 25% of t otal human-induced
CO2emissions to the atmosphere,419roughly
equal t othat pr oduc ed by the global tr anspor t
sector.420For the DRC, cumulative carbon
emissions from deforestation from 1950-2000
were over 50 times those from burning 
fossil fuels.421‘Deforestation of Amazonia
and Central Africa severelyreduces rainfall in the lowerUS Midwest during the springand summer seasons and inthe upper US Midwest duringthe winter and spring,respectively, when water iscrucial for agriculturalproductivity in theseregions.’
422
Roni Avissar and David Werth,
2005
67


CARVING UP THE CONGO 68
Carbon missions from fragmentation 
and degradation
It is not only the direct effects of deforestationthat causes losses of forest carbon to theatmosphere: indirect effects are alsoimportant. At present, the global figures usedby the Intergovernmental Panel on ClimateChange (IPCC), as well as those used in the UK
Government’s recently published Stern ReviewReport on the economics of climate change,exclude emissions resulting from thefragmentation of vast areas of intact forestsinto smaller areas
423–for example by logging
roads. Trees on the edges of such fragmentsare vulnerable to drought, wind and fire,
424all
of which can result in death and the release ofstored carbon. In addition, many trees are
inadvertently damaged, even during selectivelogging. Similarly, only a small fraction of cutwood ends up stored in houses or other long-lasting structures which store carbon; themajority of carbon is lost to the atmospherethough the decay or burning of waste.
425
These ef fects combined c an be highly
important, and are estimated as being just asimpor tant in t erms of carbon emissions as the
directimpac ts, if no tmoreso.
426If left to proceed unhindered, forest regrowthwould eventually (over centuries, rather thandecades) recapture the carbon lost throughfragmentation and degradation. In themeantime, however, this carbon is in theatmosphere, contributing to climate change. Inany case, agriculture, rather than forestregrowth, tends to follow degradation in many
cases, and since crops unlike forests do notaccumulate large amounts of carbon and storeit for long periods, so most of the carbonemitted through deforestation, fragmentationand degradation will be permanently lost intothe atmosphere.
Using satellite data, Greenpeace has
conservatively predicted the overall carbon
emissions from a 1 70,000-hectare area loggedby Siforco between 1981and 1998, extractingsome 900,000m
3of commercial logs (see box
below).427The company cleared over 4,000
hectares of lowland rainforest to create a massnetwork of feeder logging roads and logstorage f acilities. The po tential emis sions fr om
forest fragmentation as a result of thisinfrastructure were nearly 2.5 times greater
than, and in addition t o,those cr eated by
actually extracting the commercial logs. The
©Kim Gjerstad


CARVING UP THE CONGO
total emissions were 5,183,827 CO2.Given
that nearly forty million hectares of intactrainforests are currently allocated to industrial
logging across Central Africa,
428(another ten
million is in already fragmented areas),429this
study suggests a significant impact when
scaled up across the whole region.
Estimates of the social cost of carbon
emissions can vary considerably. The 2006
Stern Review Report does not arrive at a firmfigure, but on the basis of what the review
panel describes as preliminary work, it
estimates that if we aim for the recommendedtarget of no more than 550 parts per million of
CO2in the atmosphere, the social cost of
carbon emissions would start in the region of
$25-30/tonne of CO2,increasing in time as
the concentration of greenhouse gases
increases and, with it, the effect of addingeach further tonne. The figure of about $25per tonne is already higher than some otherestimates, as the latest scientific evidence
warns us that global w arming will be gr eater
than was previously thought.
430
Forests areimpor tant for climate not only in
terms of carbon emissions, but also in terms of
rainfall. The effect of deforestation on rainfall isparticularly marked in Africa since 75–95 % of
the rainfall in the Congo Basin derives fromwater recycling.
431Logging of large
concessions can thus affect rainfall in
surrounding forest areas.432On the global
scale, a strong link has been found between
rainfall in the Congo Basin and circulation
patterns over the North Atlantic during the
northern hemisphere’s winter and spring (ie
deep convection which drives atmospheric
circulation that affect rainfall).433The Congo
Basin represents the third largest region of
deep convection on earth, after the Western
Pacific and Amazonia. However, there is lessknown about climate processes in the Congo
than in the other regions.
434Therefore, it is
quitepossible that deforestation in the DRC
could affect rainfall, not only locally, but also
on the other side of the globe in ways that are
not yet understood or predictable.
As already discussed, there is a fundamental
conflict of interest between the industrial
logging model of dev elopment suppor ted by
the World Bank and the preservation of intact
forestareas. While the World Bank
acknowledges that f orests store half of the
earth’s terrestrial carbon stock, and that forest
management in Africa and elsewhere has an
important part to play in mitigating climatechange,
435it has no formal requirement to
takeclimat efactors into account in its
development projects.436
The DRC is currently number 21 on the global
list of CO2-emitting countries, almost
exclusively as a result of land use change and
timber extraction. The country produces more
greenhouse gas emis sions than Belgium,
Finland, Greece, Ireland, Spain, Switzerland or
The Ne therlands.437 
Roads are a fundamental indicator in predicting
wher edeforestation will oc cur in the futur e.
Given that logging companies open up new
logging trails and roads, increasing access to
the forest, the location of logging concessions
are of a prime importance for deforestationmodelling.
438
One such s tudy which pr edicted future forest
loss in Central Africa suggests that the DRC
riskslosing mor ethan 4 0% of its f orest, with
the area north of the Congo river and around
infrastructure such as roads and the river
transport network being entirely cleared by‘Forests store nearly half of
the globe’s terrestrial carbon.The atmosphere is heating upwith unknown and potentiallyterrible consequences. That iswhat independent scientificpanels are telling us. Wecannot ignore this warning.But the world also needs toacknowledge more concretelythe significant role Africanforest management anddevelopment can play inmitigating climate change.We have not done that yet either politically or financially .’
439
Odin Knudsen, World Bank
Senior Adviser, 2003
69


CARVING UP THE CONGO 70
2050. It is estimated that this will release a
total of between 31.1 and 34.4 billion tonnesof CO2
440 roughly equivalent to the UK’s CO2
emissions over the last sixty years.441
Given the pivotal role of the forest in terms of
climate change, it is deeply worrying that to
date no concrete steps have been taken to stop
degradation of the DRC’s forests through
logging and so help prevent this climate impact.
While there are provisions in the ForestryCode
442allowing for forests to be set aside to
generate state revenue from the environmental
services they provide, in the absence ofinternational political will to drive forward
comprehensive land use planning, these
provisions have not yet been acted upon.
Furthermore, to date natural forests (as distinct
from carbon sequestration from newplantations) have not been taken into accountby existing market mechanisms that rewardstorage of forest carbon for its contribution tolimiting climate change. For the moment, the
globally significant carbon storage serviceprovided by the DRC’s rainforests does not
bring the country any economic return, and
although the international community, includingthe World Bank, pays lip service to this global
good, its programmes do not actively promote
protection of the rainforest from deforestation
or degradation. There is thus an ominous gap
between the acknowledged importance of this
key environmental service to the globalcommunity and the focus of economic
assistance to the DRC. 
If the DRC is to realise a future of genuine
development to the benefit of its people and
the envir onment, global climate protection,
rather than the short-term presence of
rapacious extractive industries which leave
little but destruction in their wake, shouldsurely be the channel through which therainforest is mobilised to bring overseasinvestment to the country. ‘Curbing deforestation is a
highly cost-effective way ofreducing greenhouse gasemissions and has thepotential to offer significantreductions fairly quickly.’
443
Stern Review, 2006


CARVING UP THE CONGO
THE COST TO THE CLIMATE OF
LOGGING AND LOGGING ROADSIN THE CONGO RAINFOREST
Between 1981 and 1998, 1 70,000 hectares of
lowland rainforest was logged in the Siforco’s
K7 forest holding in Equateur Province.444
The logged area has since been returned to 
the DRC State.445
Within the returned area of K7, logging roads
are estimated to cover a total length of 740
kilometres with an average width of 50
metres, including verges. This correlates withSiforco’s planned logging roads for its K8 forest
holding, which are between 50m and 
60m wide.
446
Studies from the Amazonia have shown that
fragmentation edge effects cause an averageof approximately 1 0% of the biomass lost
447
in the outermost 1 00m of forest block – some
areas lost up to 36%.448In addition, it has
been es timat ed for the R epublic of the C ongo ,
adjacent to the DRC, that 0.46 tonnes of
carbon ar eemitt ed per cubic metre of timber
extracted.449On the basis of these figures, Greenpeace has
sought to quantify the contribution to
atmospheric carbon of industrial logging in the
returned 1 70,000 hectare area of K7 duringthe period specified above. In our calculations,
we have assumed that principal roads would
create fragmentation effects on a similar scale
to those in Amazonia affecting both sides of
the logging road; that incidental tree damage
would occur at the same rate as estimated forthe neighbouring Republic of the Congo; and
that, while both above- and below-ground
tree biomass would be lost as a result oflogging and subsequent decay, soil carbon
would not be affected. 
We were unfortunately unable to incorporate a
detailed estimate of the total carbon impact
resulting from the company’s use of fuel in itslogging and processing operations, and intransportation of timber to the port of export.However, according to a study by the
Interafrican ForestIndus tries A ssociation (IFIA )
atypical logging company with a sawmill and
kiln dr yer uses about 5 00,000 litres of petrol
each month f or logging and tr anspor t.
450This
would produce carbon emissions of nearly
3,800 tonnes per year.451
71
Counting the c arbon c ostof Siforco’s K7 forest holding
1.Logging infrastructure impact on carbon stock
Area cleared for logging roads and a log stockpile area (hectares)4524080
Average carbon densities of for lowland rainforest (tonnes C/hectare)453180
SUBTOTAL Carbon impact of logging infrastructure (tonnes C) 4080 x 180 = 734,400
2. Forest fragmentation impact on carbon stock
Forest edge created by logging roads (hectares)45414,800
Estimat ed biomass lost by fragmentation (%)45510%
Biomass loss (equivalent hectares) 14,800 x 1 0% = 1,480
SUBTOTAL Carbon impact of forest fragmentation (tonnes C) 1480 x 180 = 266,400
3. Timber extraction impact on carbon stock
Volume of timber extracted (m3)456900,000
Carbon r eleased by v egetation damaged and lef tto 
decompose per m3of commercial timber harvested (tonnes C) 4570.46
SUBTOTAL Carbon impact of timber extraction (tonnes C) 0.46 x 900,000 = 414,000
K7 Returned 1 70,000 hectare area TOTAL contribution 
to atmospheric carbon (tonnes C) 1,414,800 
(tonnes CO2) 5,183,827
Given that 5 0million hec tares of rainforests are allocated to industrial logging across Central Africa, this impact from an
area of just 1 70,000 hectares shows that logging fragmentation is a significant additional source of emissions to the
figur es cur rently being r epor ted under IPCC Land Use Change and Forestry category.


CARVING UP THE CONGO 72
Logging roads on 1 70,000 hectares 
formerly part of Siforco’s K7 holding
The logging roads have been digitally enhanced
from Landsat Images 
©Google

CARVING UP THE CONGO
 73
30km