# Archivo original: chemical-contamination.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:06 -03 2025

greenpeace.org 
Creatingatoxic-freefuture 
GREENPE ACE 
RESEARCH 
LABORAT ORIES 
TECHNI CAL NOTE 
10/2008 
AUGUST 2008 Chemical
contamination
ate-wasterecycling 
anddisposalsites
inAccraand 
Korforidua,
Ghana 
Authors:KevinBrigden,
IrynaLabunska,
DavidSantillo&
PaulJohnston 

Formore information contact:
inquiries@greenpeace.org 
Printed on100% recycled
post-consumer waste with
vegetable based inks. 
JN155(2) 
Published inAugust 2008 
byGreenpeace International 
Ottho Heldringstraat 5 
1066 AZAmsterdam 
TheNetherlands 
Tel:+31207182000 
Fax: +31205148151 
ggrreeeennppeeaaccee..oorrggExecutive summary 
The gl obal market fo r electrical and  electronic equipment continues 
to expand, whi le the lifespan of many prod ucts becomes shorter. 
Conseq uently, the waste stream of obso lete electrical and electronic 
products, co mmonly called  “e-waste”, is also vast and growing, with 
estimates of 20 -50 mill ion to nnes per year being generated world- 
wide.  Many  of the prod ucts contain numerous hazardous chemicals 
and materi als, and therefor e the recycl ing and  disposal of e-waste 
poses a thr eat to the environm ent and to human health.  
In some countri es and r egions regulations have been introduced 
with the ai m of r estricting the use of hazardous sub stances in these 
products, and  the management of e-waste at the prod ucts end of life. 
Howev er, no such regulations exist in many of the countries in which 
where prod ucts are manufactured, used and disposed  of. 
Furthermor e, even wher e they ap ply, r egulati ons do not control 
all hazardous chemicals and materials that are used in newly 
manufactured pr oducts, nor fully address the management of e- 
waste.  Ev en in the EU, where some of the mo re stringent regulations 
apply, as much as 75% of gener ated e-waste is unaccounted for. 
There i s evidence that e-waste is transported  inter nationally from 
many  countri es to destinations where inform al recycling and disposal 
take pl ace, often i n small workshops with little or no regulation.  
As a resul t, impacts have already been reported  in m any countries, 
particularly in Asia.  Recently there has been a g rowth in these types 
of acti vities in other regions, particularly in some African countries, 
including Ghana. 
This study , the fi rst to investigate workplace contamination in areas 
in Ghana where e-waste recycling and disposal is carried out, 
focussed on the main centre fo r this typ e of work, at the 
Agbogbl oshie scrap  market in Ghana’s capital, Accr a.  One of the 
numerous si milar, though far  smaller , operations that take place 
throughout Ghana was also investigated, at the location of a scrap dealer in Korfori dua, a smaller city to the north o f Accr a.  At these 
workshops, e- waste i s recycled in a crud e way, p rimarily involving 
manual  disassembly and open bur ning to isolate copper from 
plastics.  Much of the work is carried o ut by chi ldren, commonly 
using onl y rudimentary tools and with no pr otective eq uipment. 
Severe chemi cal contamination was found in ash contaminated 
soil sampl es from op en burning sites at both Agbogbloshie and 
Korfori dua, as wel l as in sediment from a shallow lagoon at the 
Agbogbl oshie site.  Most sam ples contained numerous toxic and 
persistent organi c chemical pollutants, as well as very high levels of 
many  toxic metal s, the majority of which are either known to be used 
in electroni c dev ices, or are likely to be formed dur ing the open- 
burni ng of mater ials used in such devices.  The nature and extent of 
chemi cal contami nation found at these sites in Ghana were similar to 
those prev iously reported  for e-waste open burning sites in China, 
India and R ussia. 

Greenpeace International3At the open burning sites, so me me tals were pr esent at 
concen trations o ver o ne hu ndred times t ypical backgro und levels 
for soils, including lead, a high ly toxic me tal.  High levels of other 
toxic metals, including cadm ium a nd antimo ny, were also p resent. 
Numer ous classes of organic ch emicals were also p resent in one o r 
more of the samp les, includ ing many h alogenated  (chlorinated  or 
brominated) c hemicals.  M any of th e comp ounds ident ified are 
intentio nally used  in electronic devices.  T hese included p hthalates, 
widely used as plasticisers in flexible plastics such as PVC, 
polybrominated diphen yl ethers (P BDEs) and tr iphenyl phosphate 
(TPP) both used as flame retardants, a nd polychlor inated biphenyls 
(PCBs) , long banned from manufactur e and u se but a p ersistent 
legacy in som e older electrical g oods.  Ot hers com pounds fo und are 
known  to be formed when ha zardous materials in e-wa ste, such as 
PVC, are burned.  Overall, a wid e ran ge of th e chemical co ntaminants 
present in the sam ples are toxic, persistent  in the environ ment and, in 
some  cases, a ble to bioaccu mulate (b uild up in the b ody). 
Two samples were a lso analysed fo r polychlor inated dioxins and 
furans (PCDD/Fs), a c lass of chemical that can  be for med du ring the 
combustion of mater ials present in e- waste.  Soil from  an open 
burning site wa s moderately co ntaminat ed, while sediment  from the 
Agbogbloshie lagoon contained  a very h igh level of these highly toxic, 
highly persistent and  bioac cumu lative chemicals, at a  level just below 
the threshold  defined as being indicative o f serious cont amination for 
sediments in the Nether lands. 
Thou gh this study did no t attempt to quantify dam age caused  to the 
environment or hum an health, the results do  indicate tha t the 
exposure of wor kers a nd bystanders to h azardous c hemicals may be 
substantial.  In ar eas in ot her countr ies where e- waste recycling takes 
place, increased  expo sure to toxic ch emicals has been reported  for 
workers and/or local residents, including for chlor inated dioxins and 
furans (PCDD/Fs), cer tain P BDEs, and  the to xic metal lead. 
This s tudy demonstr ates th e urgent need  for act ion to ad dress the 
problems posed  by the cr ude recycling an d disposal of h azardous 
e-waste in Ghana, a s well as in othe r places in which similar activities 
take place .  In part, this req uires tighter co ntrols on the tran sboundar y 
movement of e-waste , inclu ding wher e obsolete  equipmen t is 
shippe d under the guise of ‘ used  good s’, and also m ore effe ctive 
controls on the ma nner in which  they are r ecycled.  Impacts ari sing from the recycling and disposal of hazardous e- waste 
can, howev er, onl y be fully  addressed by eliminating the use of all 
hazardous chemi cals and materials during manufacture of new 
products comi ng on to  the market and eventually  enter ing the waste 
stream themsel ves.   Where legislati on currently exists to regulate the 
use o f certai n haz ardous substances in electrical and electronic 
equipment, such as the RoHS Di rective in the EU, the scope needs to 
be extended to cover all hazardous substances and m aterials used in 
their manufacture.  Notable examples not currently regulated by 
RoHS include P VC and phthalates (plasticisers widely used in flexible 
forms o f this plastic).  Furthermore, similar reg ulation is required in 
countr ies that currently have no strict controls.  
Until such r egulations ar e in fo rce, the producers of electrical and 
electroni c equi pment must:- 
•lead the way  by voluntarily phasing out all hazardous chemicals 
and materi als from their products 
•take r esponsibility for  the enti re life cycle of their pro ducts, which 
includes resp onsibility at the pro ducts’ end of life, such as through 
effecti ve take back and r ecycling schemes that ar e offered free of 
charge and gl obally 
•take the necessar y step s to individualise their financial responsibility 
and inter nalize thei r own pr oducts end-of-life costs and 
•enco urage the i ntroduction, in all countries, of adequately stringent 
regulation for both the manufacture of electrical and electronic 
equipment and the end of life waste management. 
The ul timatel y goal must be to ensure that the quantities of e-waste 
generated are mi nimized and that those e-wastes which do arise are 
recycled and di sposed of in the best achievable manner to minimize 
impacts on human health and the environment.  This can be achieved 
in part through the design of pr oducts with greater life-spans, that are 
safer and easi er to repair, upgr ade and recycle, and which, as far as 
possi ble, avoid the use of hazardous chemicals. 
©GREENPEACE / XXX 

4Greenpeace InternationalIntroduction 
The manufacture of ele ctrical and  electronic e quipment is a major 
and fast growin g glo bal sector.  As a consequen ce, the wa ste stream 
of obsolete electrical a nd electronic p roduct s, commo nly called  “e- 
waste”, is also vast an d growing , with estimate s of 20- 50 million 
tonnes per yea r being generated wo rld-wide (UNEP 20 05).  The 
recyclin g and disposa l of e-wa ste poses significant problem s, 
largely because many o f the products con tain numer ous hazardo us 
chemica ls and mate rials (inc luding he avy metals such as lead  and 
cadmiu m, and organic  compounds o f chlorine an d bro mine) which 
can pose  a threat to the e nvironment  and to  human h ealth.  Imp acts 
resultin g from t he re cycling and dispo sal of e-waste have been 
reported in  many coun tries, p articularly in Asia  (e.g. Brigd en et al .
2005, Wong et al . 2007, Leung  et al 2007 ). 
In some countries and re gions, laws ha ve been intr oduced  to 
regulat e the use of ha zardous sub stances in electr ical and electronic 
equipmen t.  The m ost we ll known o f these is the E U Re striction of 
the use of cer tain Hazardous Su bstances in e lectrical and electro nic 
equipmen t (RoHS) Dir ective (E U 2002 a) which pro hibits the use, 
above strict limits, of the  heavy metals cadm ium, lead, he xavalent 
chromium (VI) and mercury, as well as certain b rominate d flame 
retarda nts (BFR s).  T he RoHS  legislation, ho wever, on ly currently 
addresses a very l imited number of hazardou s chemicals and 
mate rials commo nly used in ele ctronics and , even for  those 
subst ances that a re regulated, n umero us exemption s allow their 
use for s pecific applica tions.  Similar legislation has be en recently 
introduc ed in China and other countries.  The relate d EU Waste 
Electric al and Electro nic Equ ipme nt (WEEE ) Dire ctive requires that 
produc ers set up syste ms and f inance for the collection a nd 
treatment  of electrical and electro nic wastes.  E ven with such 
regulat ion, howe ver, it is estima ted that  only 25% of th e e-waste 
gene rated within the EU is curren tly collected and  treated , with as 
much  as 75% bei ng unac counted  for (Huisman et a l . 200 7).  In the 
US this figure i s aro und 8 0%. In bo th reg ions, some o f the e waste 
that is unaccounted fo r is ex ported to non-OE CD c ountries.  
This practice is illegal from the EU, however, in t he US suc h exports 
are routinely classified by th e US  EPA as legitimate recycling 
(Cobbing 2008). There i s evidence that hazardous e-waste is transpo rted 
internati onally to various destinations where recycling and disposal 
take pl ace, often i n largely unregulated small workshops with little or 
no concern for  potential i mpacts on human health or the environment. 
Recentl y there has been a growth in the recycling and disposal of e- 
waste i n regions beyond those in Asia, in which it has historically 
taken pl ace, parti cularly in some African countries, including Ghana. 
As part of thi s investigation, evidence was obtained that obsolete 
electrical and el ectronic equipment being expor ted to Ghana is 
originating from the E uropean Union and the United States, some 
being transpor ted under the guise of second hand go ods in order to 
overcome restr ictions o n the exporting of hazardous waste from the 
EU. 
E-waste recycling within Ghana 
In Ghana, the mai n centre for the reco very of materials from e-wastes 
is within the A gbogbloshie Scrap Market in Accra, the capital city of 
Ghana.  Thi s is the only place where this type of work is known to be 
taking place on a l arge scale.  There are r eports of numerous similar, 
though far smal ler, op erations at other places throughout Ghana.  
The pri mary  activities at these sites are the manual disassembly of 
obsol ete el ectrical equipment to isolate metals (mainly copper and 
aluminium), and  the open burning o f certain components to isolate 
copper fr om pl astics in which they are encased , particularly from 
plastic coated wi res and cables.  Much of this wor k is carried out by 
children, most usi ng only rudimentary too ls and  with no protective 
equipment.  There ar e anecdotal reports that plastic casings and 
printed circuit board s are separated and collected for sale to traders, 
mainly from A sian countries, who export these m aterials out of 
Ghana, presumabl y for the r ecovery of materials in other countries. 
Accordi ng to recy cling worker s, copper is sold at at 22 US (0.22 USD) 
cents per hal f kilo, and collected plastic is sold at 1 US cent (0,01 
USD) per ki lo.  In some other countries, par ticularly China and India, 
the recy cling of e-waste makes use of a wider r ange of activities 
which includes manual dismantling and open burning, but also 
somewhat mor e technical pr ocesses such as solder recovery, plastic 
shreddi ng, and the use o f acid  leaching.  T hese ty pe of more complex 
processes are no t known to be used in Ghana. 

Greenpeace International5At the Agbogbloshie Market, t he main e lectronic wastes b eing 
processed are obsolete com puters, mo nitors and  televisions.  
These  are manually disman tled at numer ous small worksho ps withi n 
the market.  Certai n materials, mainly plastic co ated wires an d cables, 
are subsequently taken  to sites on the edge o f the mar ket where 
they a re burned to en able the  separa tion of me tals from p lastic 
mater ials.  These wir es and  cable are c ommon ly attached t o 
fragments of other  types of materials, including p rinted circ uit 
boards, which co nsequ ently are also b urned.   Mater ials of no value 
are disposed  of in a larg e are a on the ed ge of t he marke t that is 
also used for the disposal of a  wide ran ge of o ther type s of wastes. 
Scatt ered fires are set  within this ar ea and used to b urn e- wastes. 
Similar burni ng also takes p lace in a seco nd area  appro ximately 
100m from the disposal ar ea; no ot her pr ocessing or disposal of 
wastes is carried out in this second area . 
Two shallow lagoons are situated on the  edge o f the ma rket, close to 
the general disposal area.  The larger lagoo n is situ ated along  one 
side of this area, the small er lagoon is situated on the o pposite side, 
close to areas used for the o pen burn ing of e- waste. 
Within the open burning areas, num erous tem porar y fires are used to 
burn plas tics an d other com bustible materials fro m individ ual batches 
of ma terials.  These small fires are  repeat edly set on th e sites of 
previous fires, leading  to an acc umulation o f ash and partially burned 
mater ials.  Insul ating fo am fr om obsolete  refriger ators, p rimarily 
polyurethane, is the main fuel us ed to susta in the fires, and  this is 
likely to  contribute in itsel f to acute chemical hazar ds and lon ger-term 
contamination at the b urning sites. In addition, ch lorofluoro carbons 
(CFCs) were routinely used as blowing agents for  polyureth ane foam 
until the early 1990’s (UNE P 2003).  Th e burning  of foam  containing 
CFCs can result in releases o f these o zone-de pleting substances into 
the atmosphere. 
The A gbogbloshie market is situa ted on flat groun d alongside the 
Dens u River.  During periods of heavy rainfall much of the site 
becomes flooded and, during these time s, it is likely that sur face 
dusts and soils, along with any chemical contam inant that m ay 
contain, are carried into the adjacent, lower -lying lagoon s and the 
Dens u river which ultimately flows into  the oc ean. 
In additio n to this major site in Accr a itself, smaller e-wa ste recycling 
and d isposal  operations can be fou nd in othe r cities.  For  example, a 
scrap yard in Korforidua,  a smaller city to  the nor th of Accra ,  is 
thought to be typical of these nu merou s small e-waste re cycling 
operations within Ghan a, eng aged  in similar activities to  those at 
Agbogbloshie but on a far sm aller scale.  Sampling program 
In order to expl ore the extent o f contamination of wastes and of 
surroundi ng soi ls and sediments which can arise from the types of 
e-waste recy cling and disposal operations conducted  in Ghana, 
sampl es were col lected from the above mentioned  locations in both 
Accra and  Korfori dua.  Full details of the samples collected are given 
in Tabl e 1. 
Sample no. Type Location 
GH08001 Soil/ash Burning area adjacent to scrap dealer, Korforidua 
GH08002 Soil/ash Burning site (no disposal), Agbogbloshie Market 
GH08003 Soil/ash Burning site (no disposal), Agbogbloshie Market 
GH08004 Soil/ash Burning site within disposal area, 
Agbogbloshie Market 
GH08005 Soil Below broken CRT glass within disposal area, 
Agbogbloshie Market 
GH08006 Sediment Lagoon adjacent to disposal and burning areas, 
Agbogbloshie Market 
Table 1.Description of sam ples collected f rom e-waste open bur ning and d isposal s ites in Accra and 
Korforidua, Ghana, 2 008 
Five sam ples wer e collected from e-waste processing a reas within 
the A gbogbl oshie Market.  Three sam ples of soil/ash were collected 
from areas where open b urning of separated compo nents takes 
place.  Two of these were from sep arate parts of the area used 
exclusively for op en burning, approximately 100m fr om the main 
disposal  area (GH 08002, GH080 03).  The third sample (GH08004) 
was col lected from a burning site within the general waste disposal 
area i n whi ch fir es are more scattered comp ared to the area used 
exclusively for op en burning at the market.  One further sample of soil 
(GH0800 5) was collected from a p art of the main disposal area where 
glass from cathode ray tubes (CRTs), from  both televisions and 
computer moni tors, had  been broken to enable recovery of plastic 
casings and other materials.  Following this crude separation, the 
broken gl ass and other unwanted m aterials ar e simply left at the site. 
In addi tion, a sample of sediment (GH08006 ) was coll ected from the 
smaller of the two lagoons, that which is situated adjacent to the 
open b urning areas. 
At the smal ler workshop in Korforidua, one samp le of soil/ash 
(GH0800 1) was collected from a sm all area ad jacent to  the scrap 
yard that i s regul arly used for the open burning o f components from 
e-wastes, p rimarily plastic coated wires and cables and some 
transformers. 
©GREENPEACE / XXX 

Methodology 
All samples w ere co llected and stor ed in pre -cleaned 100 m l glass 
bottles that had been rinse d thoroughly with nitric acid and  analytical 
grade pentane in order to remove all heavy meta l and org anic 
residues.  Following collection, all samples wer e retur ned to the 
Green peace Researc h Laborato ries in the UK for a nalysis.  
Extractable organic compounds were isolate d from  each samp le and 
identified as far as po ssible using gas c hromat ograp hy and mass 
spectrometry (GC /MS), includ ing the u se of Selective Ion Monitor ing 
(SIM) for ce rtain groups o f organic chem icals.  A wide range o f metals 
and metalloids were  quantified in all samples, based  on their kno wn 
use in electronic devic es & pre vious repo rts of co ntamination at e- 
waste recy cling yar ds (Brigd en et a l . 2005).  Additional in formation on 
sample  prepa ration and analytical pr ocedur es are p resented in 
Appe ndix 1.  Two of the  sam ples co llecte d at Agbo gbloshie, an ash- 
contamina ted soil and a sediment fro m a lago on, were  also analysed 
quan titatively for 2,3,7,8-substitute d polychlorinat ed dibenzo -p- 
dioxins  and fur ans (PCDD/Fs) at  an exter nal la borato ry. Results and discussion 
The resul ts of the metals quantification (Table 2), and the screening 
for org anic chem icals (Tab le 3) for all samples are presented and 
discussed bel ow, along with the quantification of PCDD/Fs in two of 
the sampl es (Tabl e 4). 
Open burning sites 
The sampl es of soil/ash fro m open burning sites generally contained 
high levels of many metals that are known to be present in electronic 
devices, some of which have toxic proper ties.  Numer ous organic 
chemi cal pollutants were also identified.  Again, many of these are 
known to be used in electronic devices, or likely to be formed during the combusti on of m aterials used  in such d evices.  Similarities were 
found between the samp les from the different open burning sites, 
with regard to tho se metals present at high level s and  the range of 
organi c chemi cals present. 
GH08001 GH08002 GH08003 GH08004 GH08005 GH08006 
Soil/ash Soil/ash Soil/ash Soil/ash SoilSediment
Metalmg/kg dw mg/kg dw mg/kg dw mg/kg dw mg/kg dw mg/kg dw 
Antimony 159 286 592 16 8 256 
Arsenic <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 
Barium 270 1190 1260 107 114 400 
Beryllium <0.2 0.6 <0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 
Bismu th <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 
Cadmiu m 3 10 10 <1 <1 6
Chromium 47 45 33 27 34 34 
Cobalt 10 68 129 135 7 19 
Copper 14300 7240 9730 119 85 2260 
Gallium <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 
Germaniu m <30 <30 <30 <30 <30 <30 
Indium <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 
Lead 3530 4160 5510 110 190 1685 
Mangan ese 297 317 272 150 171 183 
Mercury 0.6 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 
Molybdenu m <4 <4 <4 <4 <4 31 
Nickel 9 28 33 14 21 24 
Selen ium <30 <30 <30 <30 <30 <30 
Silver <2 77 <2 <2 2
Tin 123 1290 1175 7 16 220 
Vanadium 27 38 11 23 31 26 
Yttrium 2824 33 9
Zinc 382 6920 1890 0 31300 274 2425 
Table 2. Concentrations of me tals and metalloids (in mg/kg dry wei ght) in samples collect ed from e-waste open burning and disposal sites  in Accra and Ko rforid ua, Ghana, 200 8 

Greenpeace International7Similar profiles of metal cont amination we re found  in two samp les 
from an open burning area within the Agbo gbloshie Mar ket 
(GH08002-03) an d in t he samp le from  the op en burn ing site in 
Korforidua (G H08001).  Many o f the same g roups o f organ ic 
chem icals were also iden tified in each o f these thr ee samples.  These 
data suggest that similar  materials had b een bur ned at these different 
sites.  However , one samp le from a b urning site within the  disposal 
area at the A gbogbloshie Market (GH0 8004 ) contained  only a fraction 
of the  organic chem icals foun d in the other sam ples, and h ad 
gener ally lower levels o f metals, other  than zinc.  This difference may 
be due to the more scatter ed setting  of fires in the disposal area, as 
well the presence  of larg e am ounts o f other type of waste s in this 
area, which c ould lead to the dilution o f contam inants arising from  the 
e-wastes. 
For the two more highly contam inated sam ples from t he 
Agbogbloshie Market  (GH080 02 03), num erous me tals were pr esent 
at concentrations far  exceeding th ose typically seen in 
uncontaminated soils.  Copper, lead,  tin and zinc co ncentra tions were 
over one hundred times t ypical backgroun d levels .  Concentr ations of 
antimony and cadmium in these samp les, while lower, are  still 
indicative of c ontamination of the site, exceed ed typical ba ckground 
soil levels by ar ound  fifty times f or antimo ny and five times fo r 
cadm ium (a metal usually fou nd in the environ mental at o nly very low 
levels).   In addition, barium conc entrat ions in these samp les wer e 
higher  than those fou nd in t he other so il samp les, though  within the 
broad r ange of levels fou nd in uncontaminate d soils (Alloway 19 90, 
Salom ons & Forstn er 1984). 
The s ample from an open-burning site in Korforidua (GH0 8001) had  a 
similar  profile of high m etal co ncentrations.  Copper  and lead 
concen trations we re of similar orders of mag nitude.  L evels o f 
antimony, tin and zinc in t his samp le were lower than tho se found in 
the samples from the Agbogbloshie M arket, b ut all sti ll app roximately 
ten times higher than ge neral background  soil levels (Allo way 1990 , 
Salom ons & Forstn er 1984). The concentrati on profiles (relative concentrations) of metals in these 
sampl es were si milar to those reported  for samples collected from 
electroni c waste open burning sites in China and India (Brigden et al .
2005, W ong et al . 2007 ) and also more recently in Russia (Labunska 
et al. 2008).  A bsolute concentration ranges o f most metals were also 
similar to those reported in these other stud ies, tho ugh levels of 
some, especi ally cadmium, were lower in the samples Ghana. 
All the metal s found at hig h levels have known uses in electronic 
devices and therefore could be expected in e-waste.  F or example, a 
major potenti al source of lead from  e-waste is electr ical solders, 
which until  recentl y have largely been compr ised of a mixture of lead 
and ti n (Gei big & Socolof 2005).  The p resence of elevated levels of 
both these metal s in some samples indicates that leaded solder is a 
major so urce of l ead at these sites.  Unlike lead, exposure to 
inorganic tin does not usually cause toxic effects in humans or 
animals, unl ess ingested  in very large am ounts (ATSDR 2005). 
Another maj or use of lead in materials found in e-waste has been the 
use o f lead compounds as stabilisers in polyvinyl chloride (P VC), a 
chlorinated pl astic widely  used  as a coating on wires and cables. 
Chemicals used  as P VC stab ilisers also include comp ounds of other 
metal s found at hi gh levels in these sam ples, including barium, 
cadmi um and z inc (Matthews 1996).  Comp ounds of antimony have 
also been wi dely used as additives in p olymers, principally in flame 
retard ant formul ations incorpo rated into the materials (Lau et al .
2003).  The hi gh levels of copper ar e likely to be due to  the presence 
of fragments of metallic copper wire. 
The el evated l evels of lead and  cadmium reported here  are of 
particular concern, as both are highly toxic and can build up in the 
body  following repeated exposur es.  The use of both cadmium and 
lead in electr onic devi ces so ld within the EU is now regulated, and 
largel y prohi bited, under the RoHS Directive (EU 2002a), though these 
and other toxi c metals will inev itably persist in comp onents of older 
electrical and  electr onic equipment and will therefore continue to 
enter the waste stream for years, if not decades, to  come. Antimony 
compounds al so have known toxic pro perties, though these 
chemi cals are not regulated by RoHS.  Additional information on the 
uses and to xicity of these metals is given in Box 1. 
©GREENPEACE / XXX 

8Greenpeace InternationalBox 1: Metals 
Lead has m any u ses in electronics p roduct s.  Metallic lead has bee n 
used in electrical solder , common ly as a n alloy with tin.  Lead  oxide is 
used in the glass of cath ode ray tubes (CRTs) (OECD 20 03), and 
lead compounds h ave been  used as sta bilisers in PVC fo rmulatio ns 
(Matthews 1 996).  Concentr ations of lead in the en vironment are 
generally low.  S oils and  freshwat er se diment s typically co ntain less 
than 30 mg/kg (Alloway 1990, Salomons & Forstner  1984 ).  Und er 
landfill conditions lead can leach from CRT g lass (M usson et al .
2000).  Incineration an d burning can also result in r elease of lead to 
the air as in the ash produced (A llsopp et al . 2001).  Releases o f lead 
oxide dust o r lead fumes may also occur  during g lass crushing or 
high temperature processin g, including smelting (OECD 200 3). 
Following r elease to  the environmen t lead has low m obility compar ed 
to most metals. 
Workers involved  in high temp eratu re processes, such as at lead 
smelters, can be significantly exp osed to lead fumes (Schutz et al .
2005).  Workers using lead  based solders m ay also be exp osed to 
lead-bearing dusts an d fum es (A TSDR 20 07).  F ollowing exposur e 
humans can accu mulate lea d, as can ma ny plants and animals 
(Sauve et al . 1997, ATSDR 200 7).  W here so ils and  dusts are 
contaminated with lead, children  can be particularly expo sed throug h 
hand-to-mouth transfer (Malcoe et al .  200 2).  Children living in an 
area in China whe re electr onic wastes a re recycled  and dispo sed of 
have been found to have eleva ted bloo d lead levels com pared to 
children in a neighboring a rea (Huo et al . 2007). 
Lead is highly toxic to huma ns as well as many an imals and plants. 
Lead exposure is cu mulative ; the e ffects of expo sure are  the same 
whet her through  ingestion o r inhalation,  and som e appea r to be 
irreversible (ATSDR 20 07, Bellinge r & Dietrich 1 994, Goyer 199 6).  In 
humans, lead has a wide range of effect s including dama ge to the 
nervous system and blood  system , impacts o n the kidneys and  on 
reproduction.  Of pa rticular concern is the effect of low- level 
exposure on brain developm ent in childre n, which can result in 
intellectual impairment .  It is cu rrently tho ught th at there  may be no 
level of blood-lead that d oes n ot produce a toxic effect,  particularly in 
the developing cen tral ner vous system (AT SDR 200 7, Canfield et al .
2003).  Similar toxic effects ar e seen in a nimals, and lead is also tox ic 
to all aquatic life (WHO 1 989, Sadiq 1992 ). A numb er of regi onal controls exist on the use of lead in electrical 
and electronic equipment.  EU legislatio n restricting the use of certain 
hazardous substances in electrical  and electr onic equipment (RoHS), 
prohi bits the use of lead in new equipment put on the market from 1 
July 2006 (EU  2002a), with a maximum allowable concentration of 
0.1%  lead by weight in homogeneous materials, with certain 
exem ptions.  EU  legislation ad dressing waste electrical and 
electro nic eq uipment (WEEE) specifies that batteries containing 
more than 0.4%  lead by weight must be separated fr om 
wastestr eams and recycled where appropr iate (E U 2002b).  
In addition, the European PVC industry has a voluntary agreement 
to phase o ut lead stabilisers in P VC by 2015 (ENDS 2002). 
Cadmium and i ts compounds are used in a numb er of applications 
within electrical and electronic prod ucts (OECD 2 003).  Cadmium 
metal  is used i n som e contacts, switches and solder joints.  Many 
devices contai n rechar geable nickel- cadmium (Ni-Cd) batteries 
which contai n cadm ium oxide.  Cadmium compounds have also 
been used as stabiliser s within PVC form ulations, including those 
used  as wir e insulation (Matthews 1 996).  Cadmium sulphide has 
been al so used i n cathode ray tubes (CRTs) as a phosphor on the 
interior surface of the screen to produce light (Burstall 1997). 
Cadmium is a r are metal, found naturally in the enviro nment at very 
low co ncentrati ons, typical ly below 2 m g/kg in soils and sediments 
(Alloway  1990 , Salomons & Forstner 1984 ).  When r eleased to 
aquatic env ironm ents cadmium is more mobile than most other 
metal s (ATSDR 1999 ).  Cad mium is hi ghly toxic to p lants, animals 
and humans, hav ing no known biochemical or nutritional function 
(ATSDR 1999 , WHO 19 92).  Exposure can result in bioaccumulation 
of cadmi um in humans. Many animals and plants, including those 
consumed by  humans, can also accumulate cadmium, providing an 
additional route of dietary exposure for humans (E linder & Jarup 
1996, Ol sson et al .  2005). 

Greenpeace International9Cadm ium expo sure can o ccur occupationa lly thr ough inhalation o f 
fumes or dusts c ontaining cadmium and its com pounds, or thro ugh 
environmental exposures, pr imarily diet.  Cad mium is a cumu lative 
toxicant and long-term exposure can r esult in damag e to th e kidneys 
and b one toxicity.  For the gene ral pop ulation and for animals, 
cadm ium exposure through diet primar ily affec ts the kidneys (Elinder 
& Jarup 1996, WHO 1 992).  Re cent studies ha ve demon strated 
kidney  damag e in humans at  lower levels of exp osure tha n previously 
anticipated (Hellstrom et al . 2001).  Ot her health effects from 
cadm ium exposure incl ude disruption t o calcium me chanisms 
causing bone  effect s, as well a s the  developme nt of hype rtension 
(high blo od pressure) and heart disease.  In the short  term, inhalation 
of cadm ium oxide fumes o r dusts c an also affect the respira tory 
system (ATSDR 1999, Elinder & Jarup 199 6, WHO 1992 ). 
Furthermore, cadm ium and its comp ounds ar e known t o be human 
carcinogens, primarily for lung canc er following inhalation (DHSS 
2005). 
There are a number of region al controls on t he use of c admium in 
products.  EU legislation r estrict ing the use of certa in hazardous 
substances i n electrical and electronic equipm ent (RoHS) prohibits 
the use of cadmium in ne w equipme nt put o n the m arket fro m 1 July 
2006 (EU 2002a), with a maximu m allowable con centration  of 0.01 % 
cadm ium by wei ght in homogeneous mater ials.  There a re 
exemptions t o this for the use of c admium in ce rtain plating 
applications.  Under legislation  addr essing  waste electr ical and 
electronic equipment (W EEE),  batteries con taining mor e than 0.0 25% 
cadm ium by wei ght must be separ ated fr om wastestr eams and 
recycled where appropriate (EU 2002 b).  The  use of cad mium in 
products is further addressed under  other EU legislat ion, including 
restrictions on  its use as a c olouring agen t or stab iliser in a wide 
range of products (including  PVC) whe re the c admium co ntent 
exceeds  0.01 %, with so me e xceptions fo r safety rea sons (EU 1991 ). 
Antimony and its com pounds h ave a num ber o f industrial uses.  
For example, an timony c ompounds are used in semicond uctor 
manufac ture (antimony trihydr ide) a nd in flame r etardan t formulations 
in plastics (antimony trioxide),  norm ally in co mbination with 
brominated flame retardants, especially PBDEs (Lau  et 
al .2003),though  there are also  reports of u se in combinat ion with 
phos phorus based flame retardants.  Antimo ny is a lso used in the 
manufac ture of lead a cid starter batter ies (Kent ner et al . 1995) and 
can occur as a component o f electrical solder s.  Alth ough o ccurring 
naturally in soils and sediments,  concen trations ar e comm only 
rather low. Antimony  shows many chemical similarities to  arsenic (A ndrewes 
et al . 2004).  Li ke arsenic, it can undergo  methyl ation as a result of 
microbi ological activity (i.e. to form its trimethyl derivative, often called 
trimethy lstibine), al beit at slo wer rates than for arsenic (Jenkins et al .
2000, P atterson et al . 2003).  It also shows so me simil arities in its 
toxic effects, especially to skin cells (Patterson et al . 2003). 
Howev er, unl ike arsenic, there are relatively few stud ies concerning 
the to xicity and ecotoxicity of antimony and its compounds.  Those 
studies whi ch are available ind icate that the to xicity of antimony 
depends greatl y on its particular for m (i.e. its o xidation state). 
Trivalent anti mony , such as is present in antimony trihydride and 
antimony  trioxide, is the most toxic state whereas its pentavalent 
form i s far l ess toxic (Flynn et al . 2003, Patterson et al . 2003).  
Some organi c anti mony comp ounds (including trimethylstibine) are 
very toxic (Andrewes et al . 2004).  Antimony comp ounds have been 
associ ated wi th dermatitis and irritation of respirato ry tract, as well 
as interferi ng wi th normal function of the immune system (Kim et al .
1999).  A ntimony  trioxide and antimo ny trisulfide have been listed by 
the Internati onal Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) as “possibly 
carcinogeni c to humans”, with inhalation of dusts and vapours the 
critical route of exposure (IARC 1989).  M etabolism of antimony 
compounds i n humans is similarly poorly studied.  Ther e is some 
evidence that i norganic antimony compounds, if ingested, can be 
converted to  organic co mpounds and reduced to  the more toxic 
trivalent forms i n the body (Andrewes et al . 2004).  Antimony 
compounds can b e detected in human urine samples from both 
occupati onally and non-occupationally exposed individuals, with 
levels in b lood and urine correlating with levels in workplace air for 
those occupati onally exposed (Kentner et al . 1995, Krachler and 
Emons 20 01). 
©GREENPEACE / XXX 

10 Greenpeace InternationalThe three  soil/ash samples with high metal levels also con tained 
nume rous classes of organic chemicals, including many halogenated 
(chlorina ted or brominat ed) c hemicals (see Ta ble 3).  Fo r example, all 
three samples co ntained chlorinated  benzenes an d polybro minated 
diphen yl ethers (PBDEs), tho ugh so me only at t race levels.  PBD Es 
have been  widely used as fl ame retard ants in electro nic devices, 
though once  again this use  is now reg ulated within new products 
manu factured or  sold in t he EU as a result o f environme ntal and 
huma n health concerns (EU  2002a).  On e of the samples from the 
Agbogbl oshie Market (GH08 003) also contained  polychlorinated 
biphen yls (PC Bs) and o ther chlorinated  chemicals (chlor inated alkyl 
benzenes and a chlorinate d alkane).  Phthalates were also p resent in 
two of the samples.  T he sample fr om Korfo ridua (GH080 01) 
contained trip henyl  phosphate (T PP), an organo phospha te comp ound 
that has been used a s a flame retardant (IPCS 1991 ).  Other  types of 
compounds were also abun dant in these sam ples, many of which can 
be emitted dur ing the open burning of plastic co ated wires and 
cable s, or oth er plastic containing elect ronic wastes, includ ing 
polycyclic aromat ic hydro carbons (P AHs), alkyl be nzenes, nitrile 
compounds and num erous alkanes/alkenes (Ander sson 200 4, 
Wata nabe et al . 2007).  The one sam ple that ha d far lower  levels of 
meta ls (GH080 04) a lso containe d far fe wer org anic conta minants. 
Just, as for the metals, the  major ity of org anic chemical gr oups 
identified in the sample s from G hana have been pr eviously r eported  in 
sample s from e- waste  open bur ning sites in China, Ind ia and Russia 
(Brigden et al . 2005, La bunska et a l . 2008 ), including chlor inated 
compounds (chlorinated benzen es, PC Bs), b rominated  comp ounds 
(PBDEs),  and phthalates. 
Where present in the soil/a sh sa mples (i.e. GH080 01 & GH08003 ), 
the pht halate e ster DEHP  was t he most a bundant  of all orga nic 
chemica ls isolated.  One of the samples (GH080 01) also co ntained 
three ot her phthal ates c ommonly used as p lasticizers (so fteners) in 
flexible P VC, namely DBP , DiBP  and DiNP.  All phth alates identified 
have known toxic properties, and  two, DEHP and DBP, have been 
classified in  Europe as to xic to r eproduction, d ue to t heir ability to 
interfere with sexual de velopment in mamm als, especially in males 
(Langeza al 2002 ).  Phthala te-plasticized PVC is comm only used for 
the flexible coati ngs of both inte rnal and external wires and  cables 
used for el ectrical and e lectronic devices.  These were  the 
predomina nt materials be ing bu rned at  the time t hat the sam ples 
were collec ted, and it is likely that t hey are larg ely responsible for the 
presence of phth alates in th ese samp les.  In addi tion to the release of chemical additives, including heavy 
metal s and phthal ates, the burning of PVC itself can generate many 
of the or ganic chemicals identified in some of the samples, including 
chlorinated benz enes from m onochlorobenzene through to 
hexachl orobenz ene (Grimes et al . 2006) and , in the case of sample 
GH08003, chl orinated  alkyl benzenes (Andersson 2 004), as well as 
certai n pol ychlorinated biphenyls, or PCBs (Hedman et al . 2005).  
It is also po ssible, however, that the presence of PCBs in sample 
GH08003 co uld have ar isen fr om the disposal of obsolete transformer 
components o r capacitors in which these compounds were formerly 
used as el ectrical insulants and heat transfer fluids (de Voogt & 
Brinkman 1 989), so metimes in conjuncti on with chlor inated 
benz enes, mai nly tri- and tetrachlorobenzenes (Swami et al . 1992, 
de Voog t and B rinkman 1989).  
Chlorinated benz enes and PCBs are groups of co mpounds that, 
once emi tted, wi ll persist (resist breakdown) in the environment 
and can bi oaccumulate (build up in the bod y), esp ecially the PCBs.  
A wide range of toxic effects have been repo rted for chlorinated 
benz enes (parti cularly the more highly chlorinated compounds) and 
for PCBs, in the l atter case even at relativ ely low doses.  PCBs are 
regulated as p ersistent or ganic pollutants, or POPs, under the 2001 
Stockhol m Convention.  For mor e info rmation on these compounds 
see Text B ox 2.  No information co uld be found on the potential 
impacts of the chl orinated alkyl benzenes identified (cis- and trans- 
beta-chl orosty rene), tho ugh these compounds are unlikely to persist 
in the env ironment following release.  In addition to the compounds 
identi fied, the burning of chlorinated plastics such as PVC also 
releases l arge quantities of hydrogen chlor ide, a corrosive gas that 
can be acutel y toxic through inhalation. 
One o f the soi l/ash samples collected (GH0800 3) was also analysed 
quanti tatively for p olychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and furans 
(PCDD/Fs), hi ghly persistent toxic chemical s that can b e produced 
during the comb ustion of chlorinated organic materials, including 
PVC.  Thi s sampl e contained a moder ately high level of PCDD/Fs. 
The resul ts of the PCDD/F analysis of this sample, along with those 
of the l agoon sed iment (GH08 006) are discussed in a separate 
section bel ow. 

Greenpeace International11 
©GREENPEACE / XXX 
GH08001 GH08002 GH08003 GH08004 GH08005 GH08006 
No. of organic compounds iso lated 139 144 184 162 64 158 
No. reliably identified (% o f total) 66 (47%) 54 (38%) 98 (53 %) 30(19%) 16 (25%) 57 (36%) 
CHLORINATED AND BROMINATED CHEM ICALS 
chlorinated benzen es: 
di-penta chlorinated 2 + (8) 6 + (3) 8 + (1) -- 4 +(4) 
hexa chlorinated (1) (1) 1-- (1) 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) -- (7) ---
chlorinated alkyl benzenes --2---
chlorinated alkanes --1---
PBDEs : 
Tri-hepta brominated (9) (8) (9) - (4) (11) 
octa brominated (1) ---- (1) 
OTHER ORGANIC CHEMICALS 
tripheny l phosphate (TPP ) 1-----
phtha late est ers: 
DEHP 1-1-1 1
DBP, DiBP , DiNP 3-----
Nitrogen compound s: 
alkyl & alkyl b enzene nitriles 2-2--1
nitro derivat ives ---2--
oyge nated benzene d erivative s 
phenyl ketones 113- -2
phenol & derivatives 1---- 5
benzoic acid ester ----- 1
Hydrocarbons &  others 
PAHs and derivates 62 15 357
biphenyl and derivatives 138- -3
alkyl benz enes 2 14 18 727
alkane s and alkenes 26 14 22 18 39
steroids & hopanoids 1 2----
Table 3 Organic chemicals ide ntified in samples collected from e-waste op en burn ing and dispos al sites in Accra and Korforidua in Ghana, 20 08.  T he number s represent the numb ers of compo unds r eliably 
identified for each group;  (#)  signifies compounds identified at trace levels using a sel ective  SIM method; ( - ) not detected. 

12 Greenpeace InternationalBox 2: Phthalates 
Phthalates (or, more accur ately, phthalate diesters) are non- 
halogenated chem icals with a  diversity  of uses, domin ated by use 
as plasticizers (or softener s) in p lastics,  especially PVC (e.g. in 
coated wire s and cables and  other flex ible components).  Other 
applications included uses as co mpone nts of inks, adhesives, 
sealants, surface co atings and  personal care products.  Some 
phthalates ar e discret e chem icals, such as the well known  di(2- 
ethylhexyl) phtha late (DEHP), w hile others are comp lex mixtures of 
isomers , such as d iisonon yl phthalate (DINP).  
All uses of phthalates, especially the ma jor use as PVC plasticisers, 
result in large-scal e losses to  the envi ronment (both  indoors  and 
outdoors ) during the lifetim e of products, and again following 
dispos al.  Within the  EU alon e, this amou nts to thousands of tonnes 
per year (CSTEE 2001).  As a result, ph thalates are among the mo st 
ubiquitous man-made chem icals found in the environme nt.  They 
are widely found in the indoor environme nt, including in air and dust 
(Otake et al . 2001, Butte & He inzow 2002,  Fromme  et al . 2004). 
Phtha lates are com monly found in hu man tissues, including in blood 
and, as metabolites, in u rine (Colon et al . 2000, Bloun t et al . 2000, 
Silva et al . 2004).  In h umans an d othe r animals they are relatively 
rapidly metabolised to their monoeste r forms , but these are 
frequen tly more toxic than  the paren t compou nd (Dalga ard et al .
2001).  Substanti al concerns exist with regard to the toxicity of phthalates 
to wildlife and humans.  For example, DEHP, one of the most widely 
used to date, i s a known repro ductive to xin, cap able (in its 
monoester  form  MEHP) of interfering with development of the testes 
in earl y life.  In add ition, ad verse im pacts on female reproductive 
success i n adul t rats and on development of the young have been 
reported fol lowing expo sure to this chemical (Lovekamp-Swan & 
Davis 2003).  B utylbenzy l phthalate (BBP) and dibutyl phthalate 
(DBP) hav e also been r eported to exert repr oductive toxicity (Ema & 
Miyawaki  2002, Mylchreest et al . 2002).  Both DEHP and DBP are 
classified as “toxi c to reproduction” within Euro pe.  Recent research 
has rev ealed a correlation between phthalate exposure during 
pregnancy  and decreased ano -genital ind ex (distance from the anus 
to the geni tals) in male child ren (Swan et al . 2005).  Decreased AGI 
correl ated with concentrations of four  phthalate metabolites, namely 
monoethy l phthal ate (MEP), mono-n- butyl p hthalate (MBP), 
monob enzyl phthalate (MBzP), and monoisobutyl phthalate (MiBP). 
It was al so found that DBP can not only be taken up by crops and 
enter the food chain, but also affects the physiology and the morphol ogy of so me crops during gro wth (Li ao 2006).   Other 
commonl y used phthalates, including the isomeric forms DINP and 
DIDP (diisodecyl phthalate), are o f concern because of observed 
effects on the l iver and kidney, albeit at hi gher doses. 
At present, there are few controls on the m arketing and use of 
phthal ates, despi te their toxicity, the volumes used and their 
propensi ty to leach out of pro ducts throughout their lifetime.  Of the 
control s whi ch do exist, however, prob ably the b est known is the 
EU-wide ban on the use of six phthalates in children’s toys and 
childcare arti cles, first agreed as an emergency measure in 1999 
and fi nally made permanent in 2005 (EC 20 05).  Whil e this 
addresses one i mpor tant exposure route, exposures th rough other 
consumer prod ucts remain unaddressed, including electrical and 
electroni c equi pment. 

Greenpeace International13 
©GREENPEACE / XXX Box 3: Chlorinated compounds 
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) Polychlorinated b iphenyls 
(PCBs) are a group of organic chemicals that  contain 2 09 individual 
compounds (kno wn as co ngeners) with varying pa tterns of chlor ine 
substitution. PCBs h ave be en used in a wide var iety of applications, 
including transfor mer oils, capacitor dielectr ics, hydraulic fluids, 
plasticisers. and  printing inks (ATSDR 200 0).  Use in tra nsformer o ils 
(frequently wit h tri- and tetrachlorobenzenes a s solvents, Swam i et 
al . 1992) and  capa citors ac counted fo r the g reatest to nnages (de 
Voogt & Brinkman 1989).  Production o f PCBs was ba nned in 1977 
when their ab ility to ac cumu late in t he environm ent and to cause 
harmful effects b ecame  apparent (ATSDR 2000 ).  At least one third 
of the PCBs that have be en produced are now estim ated to  have 
entered the en vironmen t (Swe dish E PA 1999 ). The o ther two third s 
remain in old electrical equipment  and in waste dumps, fr om which 
they continue t o leach into the environm ent, including when 
obsolete equipment  is dismantled, recycled and/or  disposed of. 
PCBs can al so be produced during the combustion  of chlorinated 
organic materials, including PVC (Hedm an et al . 200 5, Wikstr om & 
Marklund 2001). 
Once release d to the envir onment fr om whate ver source , PCBs are 
highly persistent.   Furthermore, PCBs that ar e taken up  by 
organisms accu mulate in t hem, for a quatic or ganisms and fish level s 
can reach many t housan ds of times h igher than  levels in 
surrounding water  (ATSDR 2 000, Jones et al . 198 8).  PCBs  can 
also be absor bed through the  skin as well as throu gh ingestion and 
inhalation.  For the g eneral population today, food is und oubtedly 
the primary route of exposu re to PCBs (see  e.g. r eview by Allsop p 
et al . 2000), although dermal exp osure ma y be dom inant amo ngst 
those directly han dling PCBs or PCB-c ontaminate d mater ials (Lees 
et al . 1987). 
PCBs exhibit a wide range of toxic effects in anima ls, includ ing 
immunosupp ressio n, liver  damage, tum our pr omotion , neuro toxici ty, 
behavioural chang es and  dam age t o both  male and female 
reproductive syst ems (S eega l and  Shain 1992,  Safe  1993 , Rice 
1999).  PCBs may also  affect  many en docrine system s (Brouwer et 
al . 1999).  Although  it is difficult to  assess the impact  on animal 
populations in the wild,  not least because th ey are expo sed to 
complex mixture s of che mical contaminants, some immun ological 
and reproducti ve disor ders in ma rine mamm als have nevertheless 
been linked to elevat ed levels of per sistent  organ ochlorines, in 
particular the PCB s (see reviews b y Allsopp et al . 199 9, 20 01a, 
Haave et al . 2003).  In h uman s, the g reatest b ody of r esearch on the 
toxic effects of PCBs has co me from two incidents in Jap an and 
Taiwan where p eople consum ed co oking oil that wa s contaminated 
with PCBs and other organochlorines.  A recen t review of d ata for 
children born to mothers expo sed to PCBs and PCDFs in the 
Taiwan incident notes higher  incide nces of re tarded  growth, d elayed 
cognitive develo pment an d behavioural p roblems th an in children of 
unexposed mothers (Guo  et al . 200 4). In youn g men with prenatal 
exposure there was also significantly increa sed abno rmal 
morphology of sperm.  Studies on the gene ral popu lations of the 
Netherlands and  the Arctic and families of Swedish fishermen 
suggested that even  relatively low levels of expo sure to PCBs can 
result in impa cts on the imm une syst em gro wth reta rdation and 
neurological effects (A llsopp  et al . 199 9, Allsop p et al . 200 1a, 
Weisglas-Kuperus et al . 2004). The contr ol of PCBs is addr essed under many international legal 
instruments rel ating to environm ental p ollution (inter alia, the 
Barcelona, H elsinki, Basel, Bam ako, Rotterdam, OSPAR and 
LRTAP Conventions and the International Joint Commission on the 
Great Lakes). In add ition, PCBs are targeted  for global production 
ban under  the 2001 Stockholm Convention on persistent organic 
pollutants (P OPs), an instrument which also requires proper controls 
on destr uctio n of stockpiles and the handling of wastes. 
Chlorinated Benzenes 
Chlorinated benz enes, or chlor obenzenes, are chlorinated 
derivatives of benz ene, possessing between o ne and six chlorine 
atoms (i .e. mo no- to hexachlorobenzene).  Chlorobenzenes, 
especi ally mono- , di-, tr i- and hexachlorinated forms, have had a 
variety of uses, i ncluding as solvents (e.g. in commercial PCB 
formulations) and  intermediates in the manufacture of other 
chemi cals such as antioxidants, dyes and pigments, 
pharm aceuti cals and ag ricultur al chem icals (Budavari et al . 2000, 
ATSDR 2002).  To day only  mono- and dichlorobenzenes continue 
to be m anufactured in substantial quantiti es.  In ad dition, 
chlorinated benz enes can be em itted during the combustion of the 
chlorinated pl astic PVC (Grimes et al . 200 6).  
Chlorobenz enes are r elatively persistent in the environment and can 
bioaccumul ate in both ter restrial and aquatic systems.  Both acute 
and chro nic effects have been r eported in a wide range of aquatic 
organism s and i n mammals.  Effects of exposure vary depending on 
the chl orobenzene in question, tho ugh common impacts include 
those on the l iver, thyroid and centr al ner vous system  (CNS).  In 
general  term s, toxi city tends to  increase with increasing degree of 
chlorination (W HO 2004).  Fo r tri- and tetrachlorobenzenes, impacts 
on liver, kidney  and thyroid are amo ng the most commonly reported 
in mammal s (Giddings et al . 199 4a, b).  Some evidence for fetal and 
developmental  toxicity has been repo rted for both tetra-  and 
pentachl orobenz enes (Gid dings et al . 199 4c).  Hexachl orobenzene 
(HCB) is toxi c to pl ants, animals and humans. It is listed by the IARC 
as a Group  2B carcinogen, i.e. possible carcinogen to humans, and 
also appear s to be a tumour prom oter. Hexachlorobenzene may 
damag e the dev eloping foetus, liv er, immune system, thyroid, 
kidney s and C NS, with the liver  and nervous system the most 
sensi tive to i ts effects. (Newhook & Meek 199 4, van B irgelen 1998, 
ATSDR 2002).  H CB has been shown to be an end ocrine disruptor 
in laborator y animal studies (Ralph et al . 200 3), and research 
suggests that H CB has dioxin-like toxicity (van Bi rgelen 1998) and 
that i t could therefor e make a substantial contribution to overall 
dioxin-type toxi c effects in humans and wildlife (Pohl et al . 2001). 
Hexachl orobenz ene is the most r egulated chemical among all 
chlorinated benz enes, and is included as one o f twel ve priority 
POPs cov ered by  the 200 1 Stockholm Convention on persistent 
organic p ollutants (POPs).  Pentachlorobenzene is one of the priority 
substances under  the EU W ater Framework Directive (EU 2001). 
Recentl y pentachl orobenzene was pro posed as a candidate for 
inclusion in the U NECE Protocol on POPs (under the LRTAP 
Convention), based on its po tential for  long-range atmospheric 
transpo rt, persi stence (in water, sediment and soil), bioaccumulation 
and (eco)to xicity (van de Plassche et al . 200 2). 

14 Greenpeace InternationalBox 4. Flame retardants 
Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) Polybrom inated 
diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) are  one of se veral classes o f brominated 
compound in widespr ead use as flame r etarda nt additives in plastics 
and fo ams, including plastic  casings of e lectronic eq uipment (OECD 
2003). There are m any d ifferent chemicals (con geners) included  in 
this group, differing in th e num bers a nd positioning of bro mine ato ms 
in the molecules. T hose in c ommo n comm ercial use are  “penta” (i.e . 
a mixture rich in pentabrominated co ngener s), “octa ”, (rich in 
octabrominated cong eners) and “deca” (almost exclu sively the 
decab rominated cong ener). 
PBDEs are envi ronmen tally p ersistent chemicals. Some, especially 
the lower brominated congeners (e.g.  “penta- BDE”), are  also highly 
bioaccumulative. Their manu facture and  use as add itives in plastics 
and other polymer s, in which t hey are not tightly bo und to  the 
polymer matrix, has led to their widesprea d presen ce in the 
environment. PBDEs can  be detect ed in indoo r air and  dusts in the 
workplac e and in the h ome (Santillo et a l . 2003 a & b). T hey also 
occur in almost ever y part of the envir onment, includ ing sediments 
(Allchin & Morris 2002), freshwater  and m arine fish (Asp lund et al .
1999a, b), birds egg s (Hites 2 004) and even whales from t he deep 
ocean s and the Ar ctic (Ikon omou et al . 2002). 
PBDEs have also been reported as common contaminan ts in 
humans, including reports fro m Sweden,  Spain, Finland and  North 
America (Lindstro m et al . 1997, Meneses et al . 1999 , Strandm an et 
al . 1999, She et al . 2000). Concentrations o f lower br ominated 
PBDEs have shown incr easing  levels in both b lood and  breast milk in 
recent decad es, p articularly in r egions in which “ penta”  remains in 
commercial use (Alaee et al . 2003 , Meiron yte et al . 1999 , Thom sen 
et al . 2002).  Workers in elect ronics recycling  facilities in E urope have 
been found to have higher  blood levels o f PBDEs th an other  worker s, 
probably as a r esult of inhalation of conta minated d ust (Sjüd in et al .
2001, Sjüdin et al . 2003). Similarly, elevated levels have bee n 
reported in the blood of worke rs (Qu et al . 2007 ) and loca l residents 
(Bi et al 2007) at an  e-waste r ecycling area  in Chin a.  For  the gener al 
population, expo sure to PBDEs pr obably oc curs thro ugh a 
combination of food contamination a nd direct  exposure to chemicals 
from consumer products and /or contaminat ed dusts (Har rad et al .
2004). Wh ile their acut e toxicity is considered  low, chro nic exposur e 
to certain PBDEs (espec ially in  the wom b) has bee n associated with 
abnormal brain development in animals (Er iksson  et al . 2002 ), with 
possible long-term impacts on  memory, learning and beh aviour 
(Darnerud 2003, Eriksson et al . 2001, 2 002, V iberg et al . 2004). 
There are concer ns th at sim ilar effects m ay be of r elevance in 
humans (Bran chi et al . 2003). PBDEs also exhibit endo crine 
(hormone) d isrupting properties, interacting with both o estrogen and 
thyroid hormone system s either as the p arent co mpoun d or as 
metabolites (M eerts et al . 1998, 200 1, Legler  & Brouwe r 2003 ). 
Effects on the immune system  have also be en repo rted (Birnbaum  & Staskal  2004, D arnerud 2003). Fur thermore, when plastics 
containing PBDEs are bur ned, either in an incinerato r or by open 
burni ng, the potential exists for formation of bro minated 
dioxins/furans (IP CS 1998) or mixed brom ochloro dioxins/furans 
(Süderstrüm & Marklund 20 02), which appear to be of equivalent 
or ev en greater toxicity to chlorinated dioxins (Olsman et al . 2007). 
Because of these environm ental and  human health concerns, 
controls are i ncreasingly being placed on the use of PBDEs (along 
with som e other brominated fame retar dants) in some regions. 
Penta-B DE is included as a “pr iority hazard ous substance” under 
the E U Water Fr amework Directive (EU 2001) and remains under 
consideration for i nclusion as a POP  (persistent organic pollutant) 
under the 2001 gl obal Stockholm Convention (Peltola & Y la- 
Mononen 2001, U NEP 2006a). Both “ penta” and “octa” are now 
banned  from use i n Europe (EU 20 03), and specifically within the 
electro nics secto r the use of all P BDEs, including “deca” , is 
prohi bited under the Restrictions on Hazardous Substances in 
electrical and el ectronic equipm ent Directive (RoHS) (EU 2002a). 
Triphenyl Phosphate (TPP) 
Tripheny l phosphate, one of a number of so -called  triaryl 
phosphates, has l ong been used as flame retardant, p rimarily in 
phenol ic and  phenyl ene o xide-based resins (IPCS 1991).  Other 
applications include use as a plasticiser in photog raphic films and 
as a co mponent of hydraulic fluids and oils.  Loss of TPP to the 
environm ent as a result of leaching  from polymers in which it is 
incor porated has l ong been recog nised.  Car lsson et al . (1997) 
reported the presence of TPP, among  other organophosphorus 
flame r etardants, as a contaminant of indoor air in buildings with 
differ ent uses in S weden (Carlsson et al . 2000).  Furth er 
investigations rev ealed that TPP was present at levels up to 10% 
by wei ght o f the pl astic in the outer  covers of some computer 
moni tors.  C ombustion of polymers containing TPP may also be a 
majo r source to the environment (IPCS 1991). 
TPP is the most acutely toxic to aquatic life of all the triaryl 
phosphates i n common use (IPCS 1991).  It has been reported as 
a contami nant i n hum an blood (Jonsson et al . 2001) and is a 
strong i nhibitor of a key enzyme (monocyte carboxyl esterase) in 
human bl ood cel ls (Amini &  Crescenzi 20 03).  Recent research has 
also indicated an ab ility to inhibit human androg en hormone 
recepti on in vitro (Honkakoski et al . 2004).  Contact de rmatitis 
following exp osure to TPP has been reported b y several authors, 
with som e cases dating back to the 1960s (Carlsson et al . 1997 
and Sanchez  et al . 2003). 

Greenpeace International15 
©GREENPEACE / XXX 
Cathode ray tube (CRT) disman tling site 
In additio n to sam ples from the open bu rning sites, soil from  an area 
in which CRT glass was dispo sed of (GH080 05) con tained some 
metals at levels above t hose t ypically found  in unconta minated soils, 
including copper, lead, ytt rium and zinc, thoug h at levels far lower 
than t hose recorded in some o f the o pen bu rning site samp les.  
This wa s, however,  the only sam ple with a level of yttr ium above 
typical bac kground  soil levels of this met al (Tyler 200 4).  Comp ounds 
of ytt rium have be en used  in CRTs as ‘pho sphor’ c oatings, mater ials 
on the inside sur face o f the glass screen t hat pro duce light when the 
CRT is in oper ation (Bur stall 1997).   While there is lit tle evidence to 
sugg est that yttrium is toxic, t he elevated  level of this metal fur ther 
demonstrates the p otential for chemicals within e-wa ste to beco me 
distributed into the environ ment through  disposal.  Copp er, lead and 
zinc ha ve also been used with CRTs, including the use of lead in 
electrical solder (Geibig & Socolof 2005) a nd within the g lass as lead 
oxide (ICER 2 003), an d the use of zinc compo unds in ‘pho sphor’ 
coatings (Bursta ll 1997).  Under landfill conditions, m etals in cluding 
lead and zinc are ab le to leach in app reciable amo unts from  CRT s 
and o ther electronic devic es (Musson et al . 2006).  E levated soil levels 
of ytt rium, lead and zinc have been p reviously repor ted at CRT 
recycling sites in Ind ia (Brigden et al . 2005). 
This s oil also contained som e of the org anic pollutants iden tified in the 
samples  from  the burning sites, including DEHP an d trace s of PBDEs, 
though fewer compounds o verall were p resent in this samp le.  
The ch emical contam ination at  this location m ay be du e to releases 
from CRT monitors as well a s disper sal of these p ollutants from  other 
more contam inated  sections o f the marke t, part icularly during per iods 
of flooding.   Such d ispersion was also  indicated b y the results fo r the 
sediment samp le from the nea rby lagoon (GH0 8006). Lagoon sediment
The s ample of  sediment (GH08006) collected from a shal low lagoon 
located near to e- waste di sposal  and open burning areas wi thin the 
Agbogbl oshie Market contai ned a v ery similar profile of metal 
concentrations  to those i n the more contaminated soil/ash samples 
described abov e.  The concentrati ons of these metal s were all 
somewhat l ower in the sedi ment than the soil/ash samples , but were 
still significantly higher than l evels typi cally found in the e nvironment. 
Furthermore, the s ediment al so contai ned most classes of organic 
chemi cals that w ere found i n the soil /ash samples, including the 
phthalate D EHP, a wi de range of chl orinated benzenes (s ome at trace 
levels), traces  of PBDEs and numerous hydrocarbons which can be 
generated as  residues of i ncompl ete combustion.  
The s imilarities in the range of chemi cals present in the lagoon sediment 
to thos e found i n the more contami nated burning site samples 
suggests  the mi gration of pol lutants away from the burning sites into 
surface w aters, probabl y as a result of heavy rainfall and flooding. 

16 Greenpeace InternationalPolychlorinated dibenzo-p-diox ins and furans 
(PCDD/Fs)
The combu stion of chlorinated organic m aterials, including PVC 
coated wires, ca n produce polychlorinated  dibenzo- p-dioxins and 
furans (PCDD/Fs) (An dersson 2004, Gullet et al . 2007, Hed man et al .
2005), compound s that are toxic,  highly persistent in th e environment 
and able to bioaccum ulate, and  are also c lassified as hu man 
carcinogens (AT SDR 1998, IARC 1 997).  
As noted above, two o f the samp les collected in the  curren t study 
were subje cted to qua ntitat ive analysis for a r ange o f the mo re toxic 
PCDD/Fs (2,3,7 ,8-substitute d congene rs); ash-co ntaminated  soil 
from the open- burning site at the Agbogbloshie M arket at which the 
wides t range of chlorinated compounds h ad been  identified 
(GH08003),  and sedime nt from  the a djacent shallow lago on 
(GH08006).   Levels o f PCDD/ Fs are c ommon ly reporte d as toxicity 
equivalent value (TEQs, i.e . conc entration  equivalents to t he most 
toxic congener , 2,3,7,8-tetrachlo rodiben zo-p-dioxin , or T CDD)) as 
well as conc entrations b y mass, to take into  accoun t the differ ent 
toxicities of ind ividual c ongen ers.  T he TEQ levels for  the two 
sample s are summ arized in T able 4, with detailed da ta presented  
in Appe ndix 1. 
PCDD/Fs (pg/g TEQ)
Congeners GH08003 GH08006 
2378-PCDDs 10 359 
2378-PCDFs 21 629 
TOTAL 2378-PCDD/Fs 31 988 
Table 4 Levels of 2,3,7,8-subst ituted polychlorin ated dibenzo-p-di oxins and furans (PCDD/ Fs) in 
GH08003 & GH08006, expressed a s toxicity equivalent  value (TEQs) in pg/g. 
The level of PCDD/Fs in the soil/ash (GH0 8003 ) was 31 p g/g TE Q. 
This value is con siderably lower  than so me very high levels that have 
been report ed for soils an d combustion  residues fro m e-waste o pen 
burning sites in China, whe re levels as high as 9265  TEQ p g/g have 
been report ed (Wong  et al . 2007).  Other stud ies have repo rted 
concentrations in e-wa ste comb ustion residues r anging fr om 84- 174 
pg/g TEQ (L eung et al . 2007) up to 675  pg/g  TEQ (Brigd en et al .
2005). Nonethel ess, the TEQ value for sample GH0800 3 does indicate 
moderate co ntami nation of this lo cation with PCDD/Fs.  Although 
background  levels of PCDD/Fs in soils and sediments have not been 
reported  for Ghana, the level  in GH080 03 is higher than soil 
concentrati ons repo rted for unpolluted areas in other countries, which 
are commo nly below 1  pg/g TEQ and rar ely abo ve 10 pg/g TEQ, 
including lightly polluted urban and industrial soils (Zhu et al . 2008). 
A far hi gher P CDD/F level was fo und in the l agoon sediment (988 
pg/g T EQ).U nlike many of the o ther contaminants identified, PCDD/Fs 
are not rel eased as com ponents of the materials being burned, but 
rather are for med as products of incomp lete co mbustion in the 
presence o f sour ces of carbon and chlorine (e.g. PVC), with the 
reaction bei ng catalysed by the presence of m etals such as copper. 
This process can disper se fine ashes co ntaining PCDD/Fs to areas 
surroundi ng burning sites, lead ing to contamination of surface soils 
and dusts.  The far higher  level in the lagoon sediment is perhaps the 
result of the deposition of ashes fo rmed during open-b urning directly 
to the l agoon as well as run-off o f contaminated dusts and soils from 
surroundi ng ar eas, as well as the op en burning sites themselves, 
during times of heavy rain and flooding.  
Though data o n dioxin distribution are not available for Ghana, levels 
of PCDD/Fs in surface sediments from lakes and rivers in other 
countr ies are generally below 20 p g/g TEQ, even in moderately 
polluted l ocations (Lui et al . 2007, El-Kady et al . 2007).  The lagoon 
sediment l evel is very cl ose to the 1000 pg/g  TEQ threshold level 
defined as bei ng indicative of serious contamination for soil and 
sediment i n the N etherlands (NMHSPE 2000), and also the level in soil 
used to assess the need for  clean up  of a site in the United States 
(USEPA 1998). 
The profi le of cong eners (individual PCDD/F compounds) for the two 
sampl es (GH 08003  & GH08006) were very similar.  These were also 
similar to the profi les repor ted for PCDD/ Fs produced during the 
combusti on of P VC coated  wires under open burning conditions 
(Gullet et al . 200 7) and also for combustion residues co llected from e- 
waste open burni ng sites in China (Brigden et al . 2005, Leung et al .
2007).  T hese sim ilarities indicate that the open bur ning of e- wastes 
may be a pri mary  sour ce of PC DD/Fs at this site.  

Greenpeace International17 Conclusions 
This s tudy is the first to investig ate en vironmental co ntamination 
resulting from  the cru de recycli ng of e-waste  in Ghana, an d highlig hts 
the nature of health and environmental con cerns arising fr om these 
activities. 
The r ecovery o f materials  at the recyclin g yards is car ried out with littl e 
regard for the health and safety of the  workers, and with no  regard fo r 
the environment.  These pr actices have resulted  in severe 
contamination of the wo rkplaces with a  range of toxic met als as well 
as persistent and toxic organic cont aminants.  M any of the chemical 
pollutants identified are eithe r intentionally in corpo rated into  electronic 
products, or are kno wn to  be generated  during crude r ecovery 
processes from materials in t he e- wastes, part icularly through the 
widespread practice of open burning c ommon ly em ployed to 
separate meta ls from plastics.  Many o f the chem icals ide ntified  may 
be associated with the  presence o f PVC formulation s within e-waste 
being recycl ed.  This chlorinated  plastic, which g enerally requ ires the 
use of chemical additives,  is wid ely used in coat ed wires and cab les, 
one o f the m ain materials b urned at the sites investigat ed. 
The ex tent of workp lace con tamination found  in Ghana was similar to 
that reported for locations in o ther c ountries wher e manua l 
dismantling a nd open burning  of e-waste is car ried out , thoug h some 
additional activities kno wn to  take p lace at e waste  recycling 
workshops in other countries were not o bserved at  either of the sites 
investigated in Ghana .  Con tamination of th e wider enviro nment 
surrounding e-waste recycling  yards with many of th e same 
chem icals has also been  dem onstrated in other c ountries, including 
within  the homes of r ecycling  workers (Brigden  et al . 2005, Leung  et 
al . 2008). 
The in vestigation in Gha na fo cused  exclusively on  chemical 
contamination in and  around  the workp laces and did not atte mpt to 
quant ify the damage li kely to be caused to huma n health fro m these 
activities.  Nevertheless, th e results do indicate  that the  exposure o f 
workers and bystande rs to haza rdous ch emicals may be sub stantial 
as a result of the h azard ous ch emicals and mater ials contained within 
electrical and electronic equipm ent, an d the cr ude pr ocesses used to 
recycle and dispose o f them .  Increased expo sure to t oxic chemicals 
associated with e-waste recycling  has been demonstr ated in other 
countries, for both workers an d local re sidents.  In an e -waste 
recycling area in China, for exam ple, children  have been  found to 
have significantly higher  levels of th e toxic meta l lead  in their bloo d 
compared to children in a  neigh boring area (Huo et al 2007).  Other 
studies indicate that  people living in ar eas where e  waste recycling 
takes place car ry higher tissue le vels of chlorinated  dioxins and furans 
(Chan  et al . 2007).  Furtherm ore, rec ycling workers m ay commo nly 
carry significantly higher conce ntrations of ce rtain PBDE s in their 
blood compared to the gene ral population (Qu  et al 2007). This study  extends current knowledge on the conseq uences of poor 
management of the large and ever-g rowing waste stream of obsolete 
electrical and  electr onic goods, particularly through crude recycling 
operati ons.  It was conducted against the backd rop of an apparent 
recent i ncrease i n the prevalence of e-waste recycling in countries 
such as Ghana, beyond those countries more co mmonly associated 
with such activ ities, especially China and India.  
The data demonstrate the urg ent need for action to address the 
management of hazardous e-waste, b oth the need for tighter controls 
on the transboundary movement o f such wastes, and also on the 
manner i n whi ch they are recycled.  Furthermore, this study highlights 
the need for the redesign of new electronic go ods to avoid the use of 
hazardous chemi cal components during their m anufacture, not least 
to faci litate safer  and more effective dismantling and component 
separati on at the products end o f life. 
Within Eur ope, the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE ) 
and the rel ated R estrictions on Hazardous Substances (RoHS) 
Directives go  some way towards addressing the pr oblems.  However, 
these l egislation ap ply only within the EU and, even then, cover only a 
fracti on of the haz ardous substances used in electronics 
manufacturi ng.  To offer the necessary pr otection to human health 
and the env ironment, the EU RoHS Dir ective and similar regulations in 
other countri es need to be extended  to cover the far wider range of 
hazardous substances and materials used by this sector, including 
chemi cals speci fically identified in this study, for example phthalates, 
PVC and anti mony.  Unti l such reg ulations ar e in fo rce, the producers 
of electrical and el ectronic equipment need to lead the way by 
voluntari ly phasi ng out all hazardo us chemical s and  materials from 
their products.  These chemicals will, of course, remain as a problem 
for som e time to come as o lder equipment becomes obsolete and 
enters the waste stream, but ultimately it is only thr ough stricter 
control s appl ied at the manufacturing stage that we will stop adding 
to thi s toxi c legacy  of poor design. 
In addi tion to the analytical r esults p resented in this report, evidence 
is avai lable that e-waste fro m other countries, some imported under 
the gui se of ‘used  goods’, pr ovides much of the material being 
recycled wi thin Ghana.  T hese i nclude m aterial s from the EU, from 
where the export of working used  goods is permitted though the 
export of haz ardous e waste to no n-OECD countries is illegal 
(Houben et al . 2008).  Proper co ntrol of this transboundary 
movement, at both the export and  import stages, could, therefore, 
reduce the scal e of e-waste recycling and the resulting impacts.  A 
requirement to  test used goo ds prior to export, in or der to ensure that 
they are not obsol ete devices, would offer greater  protection against 
improper, and i n some cases illegal, shipments.  Decision trees have 
been dev eloped for evaluating whether equipment is obsolete and 
therefore the sui tability of transboundary movement for  re-use, 
includ ing for example within  the Basel Convention (UNEP 2006b). 
©GREENPEACE / XXX 

18 Greenpeace InternationalNationa l guidel ines are currently b eing develope d in Ghana t o regulate 
the importat ion o f used e lectronic good s into the c ountry (Goo d 
Electronics 200 8), but other cont rols are also n eeded.  The 
transboundary shi pment of hazardous waste , including e- waste, from 
within t he EU is already re gulated , with expor t to de veloping countries 
such as Ghana supposedly bein g pro hibited (EU 20 06).  F urthermo re, 
the UN  Basel Convention is a glo bal agre ement th at addr esses the 
international transp ort of hazard ous waste, including e-waste .  The 
Ban A mendmen t of the Ba sel Co nvention which p rohibits the 
shipment  of e- waste a nd other hazard ous waste to  non-OE CD 
countries (including Gha na) from OECD co untries is still awaiting its 
entry into force.  There is clearly an urgent need for  the ra tification of 
the Basel Conventi on Ba n Ame ndmen t, and str icter enfo rcement of all 
laws regul ating the transbo undary movement  of e-wa ste. 
Furthermore there is a  need for g reater  regulation of informa l e-waste 
recyclin g in all countries wh ere it ta kes place, to  improve c onditions 
and to formal ise this sec tor. 
Ultima tely, howe ver, the manufa cturer s of electro nic prod ucts must 
take res ponsibility for the entire life cycle  of their p roduc ts, even 
before it is a global legal require ment.  This includes respo nsibility at 
the produ cts’ end of life, such as throug h take b ack and r ecycling 
schemes  offered free of charge and globally (wherever their pro ducts 
are sold).  To achi eve the  necessary g oals these schem es must be 
highly publicised a nd accessible , of a high  quality, and, where 
necessary, offer adequate financial co mpensation to suppo rt 
collection and rec ycling   in ord er to minimise the tr ansfer of e -waste 
to the informal recycling and disposal secto r. Incre ased levels of 
scrutiny of the take-b ack (co llection) ch ain as well as im provements in 
produc t iden tifiability will he lp to better identify `leaks´ from t he formal 
to informal  chan nels.  Grea ter individualization of a  prod ucers 
respons ibility for its own  brand ed pr oducts will drive effo rts to verify 
the produ cers own ta ke-back ra tes and m ore re adily e nable 
identification of its own pr oducts at t he end o f their lives, thereb y 
offering great er oppo rtunitie s for closer  scrutiny of t he take- back 
chain. Furthermor e, manufacturers have a responsibility to encourage the 
strengtheni ng of existing legislation and, where lacking, the 
development new legislation regulating electrical and electronic 
equipment, i ncluding control of the use o f hazar dous substances 
during thei r manufacture, and  also the financial respo nsibility for end 
of life management of pr oducts, in part through ensuring that funds 
are av ailable to set up and operate the necessar y high quality 
collection and treatment infrastructures. 
The comb ination of imp roved regulation and greater re sponsibility on 
the part of pr oducers can not only enable verification that e-wastes 
are recy cled and disposed  of in the best achievab le manner to 
minimize impacts on human health and the environment, but can also 
provide pro ducers with financi al and o ther incentives that will 
encourage the design o f products with greater life-spans, that are 
safer and easi er to rep air, upgrade and recycle, and which avoid the 
use o f hazardous chemicals during their m anufacture. 

Greenpeace International19 References 
Alaee, M., A rias, P., Sjüdin, A & B ergman, A. ( 2003). An overview of comm ercially used brominated flame 
retardants , their applications, their us e patterns in different countries/regions an d possibly modes  of release. 
Enviro nment Inter national 29 ( 6): 683-689 
Allchin, C . & Mo rris, S. (2002)  The determination and occurrence of three groups of brominated flame 
retardants  (polybrominated diphenyl  ethers, tetrabromobisphenol A and hexabr omocyclododecane) in 
samples  of aquatic origin from the UK. In: Readman, J.;Worsfold, P., eds. Proceedings of ISEAC 32 , 
International Symposium on the Envi ronment and Analytical Chemistry, Plymouth, 17-20 June 20 02: 15 
Alloway, B .J. (1990) Heav y metals  in soils. John Wiley and Sons, Inc. New  York , ISBN 0470215984 
Allsopp, M., E rry, B., S antillo, D. and J ohnston, P. ( 2001) POPs in the Baltic: A review of persistent o rganic 
pollutants ( POPs) in the Baltic Sea. G reenpeace, April 2001. ISBN 9-73361-71- 0 
Allsopp, M., Co stner, P. & J ohnston, P . (2001b) . Incineration and Human Health: State of knowled ge of the 
impacts of waste incinerators on hum an health. Publ. G reenpeace International , Amsterdam, ISBN 90-73 361- 
69-9: 81  pp. 
Allsopp, M., S antillo, D., Johnston, P . and Stringer, R. (1999)  The Tip of the Iceb erg: State of k nowledg e of 
persistent o rganic pollutants in Europe and the Arctic. G reenpeace, August 199 9. ISBN: 90-7336 1-53-2 
Allsopp, M., E rry, B., S tringer, R ., Johnston, P. and Santillo, D. (2000)  Recipe fo r Disaster: A review of 
persistent o rganic pollutants in food. G reenpeace, March 2000. ISBN 90-73361-63-X 
Allsopp, M., E rry, B., S antillo, D. and J ohnston, P. ( 2001a) POPs in the Baltic: A review of persistent organic 
pollutants ( POPs) in the Baltic Sea. G reenpeace, April 2001. ISBN 9-73361-71- 0 
Amini, N. and Crescenz i, C.  (2003)   Feasibility of an on-line restricted access m aterial/liquid 
chromatography/ tandem mas s spectrometry method in the rapid and sensitive  determ ination of 
organopho sphorus triesters  in human bl ood plasma. J ournal of Chromatography B 795(2): 245-256 
Anderss on, P . (2004) Small and large s cale fire experim ents w ith electric cables  under well-ventilated and 
vitiated condi tions. Fire Technology  40: 247-262 
Andrew es, P., KitChendian, K.T. and W allace, K. (2004)  Plasmid DNA dam age caused by stibine and 
trimethylstibine.  Tox icology and A pplied Pharmacology 194: 41-48 
Asplund, L., Athanas iadou, M., S jüdin, A., Bergman, Ö. & Borjeson, H. ( 1999b)  Organohalogen substances in 
muscle, eg g and blood from heal thy B altic salmon ( Salmo salar)  and Baltic salmon that produced off spring 
with the M7 4 syndrome. Ambio 28( 1): 67-76 
Asplund, L., Ho rnung, M., P eterson, R .E,Turesson, K. & Bergman, Ö. (1999a)  Levels of polybrominated 
diphenyl  ether s (PBDEs) in fish from  the Great Lakes and Baltic Sea. Organohalogen Compounds 4 0:351-3 54 
ATSDR (1998) Toxicological profil e for chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (CDDs) , United States Public H ealth 
Service, Ag ency for Toxic Subs tances and Disease Registry, December 1998 
ATSDR (1999) Toxicological P rofile for cadm ium. United States Public Health Service, Agency for  Toxic 
Substances  and D isease R egistry, July 1999 
ATSDR (2000) Toxicological profil e for polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) , United States Public Health Service, 
Agency for Toxic Subs tances and D isease Registry 
ATSDR (2002) Toxicological profil e for hexachlorobenzene, United States Public  Health Service, Agency for 
Toxic Subs tances  and Diseas e Regi stry 
ATSDR (2005) Toxicological profil e for tin, United States Public Health Service, Agency for Toxic Substances 
and D isease R egistry, August 2005 
ATSDR (2007b) Toxicological Profil e for lead. United States Public Health Servic e, Agency for Tox ic 
Substances  and D isease R egistry, A ugust 2007 
Basel  (2005) The Basel Conventi on on t he control of transboundary movement s of hazardous wastes and  their 
dispo sal [www.basel.int] 
Bellinger, D . & Di etrich, K.N. ( 1994) Low-level lead exposure and cognitive functioning in children.  Pediatric 
Annals  23: 6 00-605 
Bi, X., Thomas , G.O., Jones , K.C., Q u, W., Sheng, G ., Martin, F.L. & Fu, J. ( 2007) Exposure of electronics 
dismantl ing workers to poly brominated di phenyl ethers, polychlorinated biphen yls, and organochlorine 
pesticides in south China. Envi ronm ental  Science and Technology 41( 16): 564 7-5653 
Birnbaum, L.S. &  Stas kal, D.F. ( 2004). Brominated flame retardants: cause for concern? Environmental Health 
Perspecti ves 112 (1): 9-17 
Blount, B.C., S ilva, M.J., Caudil l, S.P., Needham, L.L., Pirkle, J.L., Sampson, E .J., Lucier, G.W., Jackson, R.J. 
& Brock, J.W. (2000) Lev els of sev en urinary phthalate metabolites in a human reference population. 
Enviro nmental He alth Perspectiv es 108(10): 979-982 
Blumens tock, M., Zimmermann, R ., Schram m, K.W. & Kettrup, A. ( 2000) Influe nce of com bustion co nditions 
on the P CDD/F-, P CB-, P CBz and PA H-concentrations in the chamber of a w aste incineration pilot plant. 
Chemosphere 4 0: 987-993 
Branchi  I., Capon e F., Allev a E. & Cos ta L.G. ( 2003). Polybrominated Diphenyl e thers: neurobehavioural eff ects 
following dev elopmental ex posure. N euroToxicology 24 (3): 449-462 
Brigden, K., Labuns ka, I., S antillo, D. & Allsopp, M. ( 2005) Recycling of electron ic wastes in China and India: 
workplace and envi ronmental contam ination .Greenpeace Research Laboratorie s Technical Note 09/2005, 
Publ. G reenpeace I nternational, A ugust 2005: 56 pp. (+ 47 pp. appendices) 
Brouwer, A., Longneck er, M .P., Birnbau m, L.S., Cogliano, J., Kostyniak , P., Mo ore, J., Schantz, S. & Winneke, 
G. (1999)  Characterization of potential endocrine-related health effects at low -dose levesl of exposure to 
PCBs.  Envi ron. Health P ersp. 107( Suppl. 4): 639-649 
Budav ari, S., O’Nei l, M., S mith, A ., Heckleman, P. & O benchain, J. [Eds]  (2000 ) The Merck index. 12th Edition, 
on CD_ROM, V ersion 12:3. Merck  & Co., Inc. Burstall, M. (1 997)  Recycling  end-of-life equip ment.  In Ho yle, W. & Kar sa D.R. (E ds) Chemical aspects of 
plastics recycling; C h8, pp41-49.  Publ: T he Roy al Society o f Chemistry , UK. ISB N 0854047123 
Butte, W. &  Heinzow, B. (2002)  Pollutants in hous e dust as  indicator s of indoor co ntam ination.  Reviews in 
Environmental C ontaminatio n and  Toxicology 175: 1-46 
Canfield , R.L., Hend erson, C.R., Co ry-Slechta, D.A., Cox , C., Jusko , T.A., Lanp hear, B.P. (2003) Intellectual 
impairment in child ren with b lood lead concentr ations below 10  mu g  per deciliter. N ew England Journal of 
Medicine 3 48(16): 1517-1526 
Carlsson, H., N ilsson, U., B ecker , G. and ös tman, C. (19 97) Or ganop hosphate es ter flame retardants and 
plasticizer s in the indo or environment: Analytical metho dology and  occurr ence. E nvironmental Science & 
Techno logy 31(10): 2931-2936 
Carlsson, H., N ilsson, U. and  östman, C. (2 000)  Video  display units : an emis sion s ource of the contact 
allergenic flame r etardant tr iphenyl p hosphate in the indoo r environment.  E nvironment al Science and 
Techno logy 34(18): 3885-3889 
Chan, J.K.Y ., Xing , G.H ., Xu, Y., Liang , Y., Chen, L.X ., Wu, S.C., Wo ng, C.K.C., Leung , C.K.M. and Wong, 
M.H. (2007) Body loadings and health risk as sessment o f polychlorinated  dibenz o-p-dioxins and 
dibenzofurans at an intens ive elec tronic waste r ecycling site in china. Env ironmental Sc ience and Technology 
41: 7668-7674 
Cobbing, M. (20 08) Toxic Tech: N ot in o ur backyar d: Uncov ering the hid den flows o f e-waste.  Greenpeace 
International, T he Netherland s.  www.greenp eace.org /raw/co ntent/inter national/p ress/reports/not-in-our- 
backy ard.pdf 
Colon, I., Caro, D., B ourdony, C.J. & Ro sario, O. (20 00) Identificatio n of phthalate es ters in the serum of young 
Puerto Rican g irls with p remature br east dev elopment. E nvironmental Health Pers pectiv es 108(9): 895-900 
CSTEE (2001) EC Scientif ic Committee on To xicity, E cotox icity and the E nvironment, O pinion on the results of 
the R isk Assessment o f: 1,2-Benzenedicarb oxylic acid, di- C8-10-branched  alkyl es ters, C9-rich and di- 
"isononyl" phthalate -  Report version (Human H ealth E ffects): Final rep ort, May  2001. Opinion expressed at the 
27th CST EE plenary meeting , Brussels, 30  October  2001: 7 pp. de B oer, J.,Wes ter, P .G., Klamer, H.J.C., 
Lewis, W.E . & Boon, J.P. (1 998) Do flame r etardants  threaten ocean lif e? Natur e 394  (2 July): 28-29 
Dalgaard, M., N ellemann, C ., Lam, H.R., So rensen, I .K. & Ladef oged, O. (20 01)  The acu te effects of mono(2- 
ethylhexyl)phthalate (ME HP) o n testes of  prepuber tal Wis tar rats.  Toxicology Letter s 122: 69-79 
Darnerud, P.O. (2 003). Toxic effects of  brominated f lame retar dants  in man and  in wild life. Environment 
International 29 (6): 841-853 
de Voogt, P. & B rinkman, U.A.T h. (19 89) Pr oductio n, pro perties  and usag e of polychlorinated biphenyls. In: 
Halogenated  biphenyls, terp henyls, naphthalenes , dibenz odioxines and  related p roducts. Kimbrough, R.D. & 
Jensen, A.A. [E ds] Topics in envir onmental health, Vol.4 . Publ. By  Elsev ier Science Pub lishers B.V.: 3-29 
DHHS (20 05) 11th Rep ort on Carcinog ens. U.S. Depar tment of  Health and  Human Se rvices, US Public Health 
Service, N ational Toxicology Program 
EC (2005)  Dir ective 2005/84/EC of the E uropean Par liament and o f the C ouncil of  14 December 2005 
amend ing for the 2 2nd time C ouncil Dir ective 7 6/769/EEC on the ap proximatio n of the laws, regulations and 
adminis trative provisions of the Member  States  relating to  restrictions o n the marketing  and use of certain 
dang erous substances and  preparations (p hthalates in toy s and child care articles ).  Off icial Journal of the 
European C ommunities  L344, 27.12.2005: 40 -43 http://eur- 
lex.europa.eu/Lex UriSer v/LexUr iServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2 005:344:0040:0043:EN:PDF 
Elinder, C.G. & Jarup , L. (1 996) Cadmium ex posure and  health r isks: r ecent f indings. Am bio 25, 5: 370-373 
El-Kady , A.A., Ab del-Wahhab , M.A., Henkelmann, B., B elal, M.H., Mor si, M.K.S., Gala l, S.M., Schramm, K.W. 
(2007) Polychlo rinated b iphenyl, po lychlor inated  dibenzo-p-dioxin and  polychlorinated  dibenzofuran residues in 
sediments and  fish of the R iver Nile in the Cair o regio n. Chemos phere 6 8(9): 1660-1668 
Ema, M. &  Miyawaki, E . (2002)  Effects on dev elopment o f the r eproductive s ystem in ma le offspring of rats 
given buty l benzyl phthalate dur ing late preg nancy.  Rep roductive To xicolo gy 16: 71-76 
ENDS (20 02) PV C Industry agrees to  phase o ut lead stab ilisers by 2015. The E NDS R eport No. 328, May 
2002, 31-32 
Eriksson, P., V iberg, H., Jako bsson, E., Or n, U., Fredr iksso n, A. (200 2) A br ominated f lame retardant, 2,2 ‘,4,4 
‘,5-pentab romodipheny l ether : Uptake, retentio n, and inductio n of neurobehavio ral altera tions in mice during a 
critical p hase o f neonatal b rain d evelopment.T oxico logical Sciences  67(1): 98- 103 
Eriksson, P.,V iberg, H., Ankar berg, E., Jakob sson, E., örn, U. &  Fredriksson, A. (2 001) Polybrominated 
diphenylether s (PBDE s): a nov el clas s of envir onmental neuro toxicants  in our environment. In: Asplund, L.; 
Bergman, Ö.; d e Wit, C ., et al. eds . Proceedings  of the Seco nd International Wo rkshop on Brominated Flame 
Retar dants , BFR 2001, Stockholm, May 1 4-16 2001: 7 1-73 
EU (1 991) Directiv e 91/338/EEC of 18 June 199 1 amend ing for the 10 th time Directiv e 76/769/EEC on the 
approximation o f the laws , regulatio ns and ad minis trative provisions of the Memb er Sta tes relating to 
restrictio ns on the mar keting  and use o f certain danger ous s ubstances  and pr eparatio ns. Official Journal L 
186, 12/07/1991: 59-63 
EU (2 001) Decis ion No 2455/2001/EC o f the E uropean Parliament and o f the C ouncil o f 20 November 2001 
establishing the lis t of priority substances  in the f ield of water po licy and amend ing Dire ctive 2000/60/EC, 
Official Jo urnal L 2 49, 17/09/2002: 27-30 
EU (2 002a) Directiv e 2002/95/EC of the E uropean Par liament and  of the Co uncil of  27 January 2003 on the 
restrictio n of the us e of certain hazar dous subs tances in electrical and  electronic eq uipment. Official Journal L 
037, 13/02/2003: 19-23 
EU (2 002b) Dir ective 2002/96/EC of the E uropean Parliament and o f the C ouncil of  27 January 2003 on waste 
electr ical and  electr onic eq uipment (WE EE) - Jo int declaratio n of the Euro pean Par liame nt, the Council and the 
Commiss ion relating  to Article 9 . Official Journal L 0 37, 1 3/02/2003: 24 –39 
©GREENPEACE / XXX 

20 Greenpeace InternationalEU (2003) Directive 2003/11/EC of the E uropean Parliament and of the Council of 6 February 2003 amending 
for the 24 th time Council Directi ve 76/ 769/EEC relating to restrictions on the m arketing and use of certain 
danger ous s ubstances  and preparations (pentabromodiphenyl ether, octabrom odiphenyl ether), Official 
Journal L 4 2, 15/02/2003: 45-46 
EU (2006) Directive 1013/2006/ EC of th e European Parliament and of the Coun cil of 14 June 2006  on 
shipments o f was te. Official Journal  L 19 0, 12/07/2006: pp. 01-98 [ http://eur- 
lex.europa.eu/LexU riServ/LexU riServ.do?uri=CELEX:32006R1013:EN:NOT] 
Flynn, H .C., Meha rg, A.A., B owyer, P.K. and Paton, G.I. ( 2003)  Antimony bioav ailability in mine soils. 
Environmental P ollution 124(1) : 93-100 
Fromme H., Lahr z T., P iloty M., G ebhart H., Oddoy A. & Rüden H. ( 2004)  Occurrence of phthalates and musk 
fragrances in i ndoor air and dus t from a partments and kindergartens in Berlin ( Germany). Indoor Air 14 (3): 
188-195 
Geibig, J.R., So colof, M.L. (2005)  Solders in Electronics: A Life-Cycle Assessment. US EPA 744-R-05-00 1. 
Giddi ngs, M., Meek, M.E. & Gom es, R . (1994a)  Trichlorobenzenes: Evaluation of risks to health from 
environment ex posure in C anada. Envi ron. Carcin. Ecotox. Revs. C12 (2): 517-525 
Giddings, M., Meek, M.E. & Gom es, R . (1994b)  Tetrachlorobenzenes: Evaluatio n of risk s to health f rom 
environment ex posure in C anada. Envi ron. Carcin. Ecotox. Revs. C12 (2): 473-481 
Giddings, M., Meek, M.E. & Gom es, R . (1994c)  Pentachlorobenzene: Evaluation of risks to health f rom 
environment ex posure in C anada. Envi ron. Carcin. Ecotox. Revs. C12 (2): 435-441 
Good Electronics ( 2008) EPA  to act on e-waste hazards in G hana, 25 April 2008. 
http://goodelectr onics .org/new s-en/ epa-to-act-on-e-waste-hazards-in-ghana/ 
Goyer, R .A. (1 996) Toxic effects  of m etals. In Casarett & Doull’s Toxicology. The Basic Science of Pois ons, 
Fifth Edi tion, K laassen, C.D. [Ed] . McG raw-Hill Health Professions Division, ISBN 0071054766 
Grimes , S.M., La teef, H., J afari, A .J., M ehta, L. ( 2006) Studies of the effects of c opper, copper(II) oxide and 
copper(II) chloride on the thermal degra dation of poly( vinyl chloride). Polym er Degradation and Stab ility 91(12): 
3274-3280 
Gullett, B.K ., Lina k, W.P.,  Touati, A ., Wass on, S.J., G atica, S., King, C.J. ( 2007) Characterization of air 
emissions and res idual ash from open b urning of electronic wastes du ring sim ulated rudimentary recy cling 
operations.  J ournal of Material C ycles and Waste Management 9( 1): 69–79 
Guo, Y.L., Lambert, G .H., Hs u, C-C . and Hsu, M.M.L. ( 2004) Yucheng: health effects of prenatal exposur e to 
polychl orinated b ipheny ls and dibenz ofurans. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 77: 153-158 
Haave, M., Ro pstad, E., Derocher, A .E., Lie, E., Dahl, E., Wiig, O ., Skarre, J.U. and Jenssen, B.M. (200 3) 
Polychlorinated b ipheny ls and reproduc tive hormones in female polar bears at Svalbard. Environmental Health 
Perspecti ves 111 (4): 431-436 
Harrad, S., Wijesekera, R ., Hunter, S ., Halliwell, C. & Baker R. (2004) . Preliminary assessment of UK human 
dietary and inhalati on expos ure to poly brominated dipehyl ethers. Environm ental Science and Technology 38 
(8): 2345-2350 
Hedman, B., Nas lund, M. N ilsson, C., M arklund, S. ( 2005) Emissions of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins  and 
dibenzofurans an d poly chlorinated bi phenyls from  uncontrolled burning of garden and domestic waste 
(backyard burni ng). Environmental S cience & Technology 39( 22): 8790-8796 
Hellstrom, L., E linder, C.G., Dahl berg, B.,Lu ndberg, M., Jarup, L., Persson, B., & Axelson, O. (2001) 
Cadmium E xposure and End-Stage R enal Disease.  American Journal of Kidney Diseases, 38(5), 1001 1 008 
Hites, R.A. (2 004). Polybromin ated D iphenyl ethers in the environment and in people: A meta-an alysis o f 
concentrati ons. Environment, S cience and Technology 38 (4) : 945-956 
Honkakoski, P ., Palvimo, J.J.,  P enttila, L., Vepsalainen, J. and Auriola, S. ( 2004)  Effects of triaryl p hosphate's 
on mous e and human nuclear receptors .  Biochemical Pharmacology 67( 1): 97-106 
Houben, T., W ielenga, K., Us tailieva E. ( 2008): IMPEL-TFS Enforcement Actions I. Enforcement of EU Waste 
Shipment Regul ation “Learning by doi ng”. Final Report [ww w.vrom.nl/docs/IM PEL-TFS.pdf] 
Huisman, J., Mag alini, F., Kuehr, R ., Maurer, C., O gilvie, S., Poll, J., Delgado, C., Artim, E., Szezak, J., Stevels, 
A. (2007) 2008 Review of Directiv e 2002/96 on Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipm ent (WEEE), Final 
Report, U nited N ations  Univers ity, AEA  Technology, Gaiker, Regional Environmental Centre for Central and 
Easter n Eur ope, Delft Univers ity of Tech nology, for the European Commission, Study No. 
07010401/2006/442493/ETU/G 4, Aug ust 2007. 
Huo, X., Peng , L., Xu, X., Zheng, L., Q iu, B., Q i, Z., Zhang, B., Han, D. & Piao, Z. (2007) Elevated Blo od Lead 
Levels of Children in G uiyu, an Electronic Waste Recycling Town in China. Environmental Health  Perspectives 
115 (7):113-117 
IARC  (Internatio nal Agency for R esearch  on Cancer) , 1989. IARC Monographs programm e on the evaluation 
of carcinogenic ri sks to humans: S ome Organic Solvents, Resin Monomers and Related Com pounds, 
Pigments and Occupational Expos ures in Paint Manufacture and Painting vol. 4 7, pp. 291–306 
IARC  (Internatio nal Agency for R esearch  on Cancer) , 1997. IARC Monographs programm e on the evaluation 
of carcinogenic ri sks to humans: pol ychlorinated-p-dibenzodioxins and polychlorinated furans vol. 69, pp. 
1–631 
ICER (2003) Industry C ouncil for El ectro nic Equipment Recycling (ICER) . New  approach to cathode ray tube 
(CRT)  recycli ng. http://ww w.icer.org.uk/ research.htm 
Ikonomou, M.G ., Rayne, S . & Addison, R.F. (2002)  Exponential increases of the brominated flame retardants, 
polybr ominated di phenyl ethers , in the C anadian Arctic from 1981 to 2000. Environmental Science and 
Technol ogy 3 6(9): 1886-1892 
IPCS  (1991) Tripheny l Phosphate, Env ironmental Health Criteria 111, International Program me on Chemical 
Safety. UNEP /ILO/WHO, I SBN 92 4 15 7111 X IPCS (19 98) Po lybrominated d ibenzo-p-dioxins and dib enzofurans , Environmental Heal th Criteria, No. 205, 
International Pr ogramme o n Chemical Saf ety, UNE P/ILO/WHO, I SBN 92 4 157205 1: 303 pp. 
Jenkins , R.O., Mor ris, T.A., C raig, P.J., Go essler , W., Os tah, N. and  Wills, K.M. (20 00)  Evaluation of cot 
mattress inner  foam as  a po tential s ite for micro bial gener ation of  toxic gas es.  Human a nd Experimental 
Toxicology 19(12): 693-702 
Jones, A., Hed gecott, S.  &  Zabel, T.F.  (1 988) Informatio n related to  proposed "R ed Lis t" substances WRC 
Report PRU 1901-M/2 73pp 
Jonsson, O.B ., Dyr emar k, E. and  Nilsson, U.L. (200 1)  Dev elopment of  a micro porous m embrane liquid-liquid 
extractor  for organophosphate es ters in human b lood plasma: id entificatio n of  tripheny l phosphate and octyl 
diphenyl p hosphate in d onor plasma.  Jo urnal of  Chromatog raphy B 755(1-2): 157-164 
Kentner , M., Leinemann, M., Schaller , K.H., Weltle, D. and  Lehner t, G. (199 5)  Ex ternal a nd internal antimony 
exposure in star ter battery  production.  I nternatio nal Ar chives  of Occup ational and E nvironmental Health 67(2): 
119-123 
Kim, H .A., H eo, Y ., Oh, S.Y ., Lee, K.J. and Lawrence, D.A. (1 999)  Altered  serum cyto kine and 
immuno globulin lev els in the wo rkers  ex posed to antimo ny.  Human and  Experimental Toxicology 18(10): 
607-613 
Krachler , K. and E mons, H . (2001)  Urinary  antimo ny speciatio n by HPLC -ICP-MS.  Jo urnal of Analytical 
Atomic Sp ectrometry 16: 586-590 
Labunska, I., B rigden, K., Santillo , D. & Kiselev , A. (200 8) PB DEs and o ther contamina nts arising from 
production, recy cling and d isposal of electrical and electr onic equip ment in St- Peters burg area, Russia. 
Greenpeace Res earch Lab oratories Technical No te 07/2008, Pub l. Greenp eace Intern ational 
Langezaal, I. (2 002) The clas sificatio n and  labelling o f Carcinog enic, Mutagenic, R eprotoxic and Sensitising 
substances .  Pub l. European C hemicals  Bureau, Jo int Resear ch Centre, I spra, Italy: 1 93 pp. 
[http://ecb .jrc.it/d ocuments/C lassification- 
Labelling/The_C L_process_in_g eneral_and_sub stances_in_Annex _I_with_C MR_and_sensitising_properties.do 
c] 
Lau, J.H ., Wo ng, C.P., Lee, N .C. & R icky Lee, S.W. (20 03) E lectronics  Manuf acturing with Lead-Free, 
Halogen-Free & C onductive-Adhesiv e materials. McGr aw-Hill. ISBN 0071386246 
Lees, P.S.J., C orn, M. &  Breysse, P.N . (1987)  Evidence f or dermal abs orption as the m ajor route of body 
entry during exposure of transformer maintenance and  repairmen to PC Bs.  Am. I nd. Hyg. Assoc. J. 48(3): 
257-264 
Legler, J. & B rouwer, A. (2 003). Are br ominated f lame r etardants end ocrine d isruptors? Environmental 
International 29 (6): 879-885 
Leung, A.O.W., Luks embur g, W.J., Wong, A.S. &  Wong, M.H . (200 7) Spatial d istribution of polybrominated 
diphenyl ether s and polychlorinated  dibenzo-p-dioxins  and dib enzof urans  in soil and  comb usted residue at 
Guiyu, an electr onic was te recycling  site in s outheas t China. Env ironmental Science &  Technology 41(8): 2730- 
2737 
Leung, A.O., Duz goren-Ay din, N.S., Cheung , K.C., Wo ng, A. (2 008) Heav y metals co ncentrations of surface 
dust from e- waste recycling and its human health imp lications in s outheas t China. Env ironmental Science and 
Techno logy 42: 2674-2680 
Liao, Ch-S., Yen, J- H., Wang , Y-Sh. (20 06) Effects o f endocrine d isruptor di-n-butyl phthalate on the growth of 
Bok choy  (Brassica rap a subsp. chinensis). C hemos phere 65 (2006) 1715–1722 
Liu, H.X., Zhang , Q.H ., Wang, Y .W., C ai, Z., Jiang, G. (2 007) Occur rence o f polychlo rinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, 
dibenzofurans and b iphenyls  pollution in s ediments f rom the Haihe Riv er and Dag u Drainage River in Tianjin 
City, China. C hemo sphere 68(9): 1772-1778 
Lindstrom, G., v an Bavel, B., Har dell, L. & Liljegr en, G. (199 7) Identificatio n of the flame retardants 
polybrominated  dipheny l ether s in adip ose tis sue from p atients with non- Hodgkin’s ly mphoma in Sweden. 
Oncology Reports 4(5): 999-1000 
Lovekamp- Swan T . & Dav is B.J. (20 03) Mechanis ms of  phthalate es ter tox icity in the f emale reproductive 
system. E nvironmental H ealth Persp ectives 1 11 (2): 139-145 
Malcoe, L.H ., Lynch, R .A., Keg ler, M.C . & Skaggs , V.J. (20 02) Lead  sources, b ehaviors, and socioeconomic 
factors in relatio n to blood lead  of nativ e American and white child ren: A co mmunity -based assessment of a 
former mining ar ea. Environmental Health Pers pectives  110 (Supplement 2 ): 221-231 
Matthews , G. (1 996)  PVC:  production, p roperties and us es.  Publ: T he Institute o f Materials, London. ISBN: 
0901716596 
Meerts, I.A.T.M., Letcher , R.J., H oving, S., Mar sh, G., B ergman, Ö., Lemmen, J.G., v an der Burg, B. & 
Brouwer , A. (2 001) In vitro estrogenicity  of polybrominated dip henyl ethers , hydroxylated PBDEs and 
polybrominated  bisphenol A compo unds. E nvironmental H ealth Per spectives  109(4): 399-407 
Meerts, I.A.T.M., Mar sh, G., v an Leeuwen- Bol, I., Luijks, E.A.C ., Jako bsson, E., Ber gman, Ö. & Brouwer, A. 
(1998)  Interactio n of polybrominat ed dipheny l ether metabo lites (PBDE -OH) with human  transthyretin in vitro. 
Organohalogen Compounds 37: 309-312 
Meironyte, D., N oren, K. &  Bergman, Ö. (1 999) Analysis  of polybrominated dip henyl ethe rs in Swedish human 
milk. A time- related tr end study, 197 2-1997. Journal o f Toxico logy and Env ironmental H ealth - Part A 58(6): 
329-341 
Meneses, M., Wingf ors, H., Schuhmacher, M., Do mingo, J.L., Lind strom, G. &  von Bav el, B. (1999) 
Polybrominated d iphenyl ether s detected  in human ad ipose tiss ue from Spain. Chemo sphere 39(13): 2271- 
2278 
Musson, S.E ., Jang , Y.C., Towns end, T.G. &  Chung, I.H . (2000) Char acterizatio n of lead leachability from 
catho de ray tubes us ing the tox icity character istic leaching pr ocedure.  Envir onmental Science & Technology 
34(20): 4376-4381 

Greenpeace International21 Mylchreest, E ., Sar, M.,Wallace, D.G . & Foster, P.M.D. (2002) Fetal testosterone insufficiency and ab normal 
proliferatio n of Leydig cells and gonocy tes in rats exposed to di(n-butyl)  phthala te. Reproductive Toxicology 
16: 19-2 8 
Newhook, R. & Meek , M.E. (1994) H exachlorobenzene: Evaluation of risks to h ealth from Environmental 
Exposure in Cana da. Environ. C arcin. E cotox. Revs. C12(2) : 345-360 
NMHSPE (2000) Circular on target val ues and intervention values for soil remed iation. The Netherland s Ministry 
of Housi ng, S patial  Planning and the Envi ronment, Amsterdam. Available at 
http://internatio nal.vrom.nl/Docs /internati onaal/annexS_ I2000.pdf 
OECD (2003) Technical guidance for the en vironm entally sound mana gement of specific waste streams: us ed 
and scrap pers onal computers.  O rganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OE CD) Working 
Group o n Was te Prev ention and R ecycl ing.  ENV/EPOC/WGWPR(2001) 3/FINAL. 
Olsm an, H ., Eng wall, M., Kammann, U., Kl empt, M., Otte, J., van Bavel, B., Hollert, H. (2007) Relative 
differences i n aryl  hydrocarbon receptor–mediated response for 18 polybromin ated and m ixed halogenated 
dibenzo-p-dio xins and -furans i n cell l ines fr om four different species. Environm ental Toxicology & Chemistry 
26(11), 244 8-2454 
Olsson, I.M., E riksson, J ., öborn, I ., Skerfvin g, S., & Oskarsson, A. (2005)  Cadmium in Food Productio n 
Systems : A Health R isk for Sens itive Population Groups.  Ambio, 34(4) : 344-35 1 
Otake,T., Yo shinaga, J. & Yanagis awa, Y. (2001)  Analysis of organic esters of p lasticizer in indoor air by GC- 
MS and GC-FP D. Env ironmental  Science and Technology 35( 15): 3099-3102 
Patters on, T .J., N go, M., Aronov , P.A., Reznikova, T.V., Green, P.G . and Rice, R.H. ( 2003)  Biological activity 
of inorg anic ars enic and antimony  reflec ts oxidation state in cultured hum an ker atinocytes.  Chemical 
Resear ch in T oxicology 16(12) : 1624-1631 
Peltola, J. & Yla-M ononen, L. (2001)  Pentabromodiphenyl ether as a global PO P.  TemaNord 200 1:579, 
Nordic Counci l of Ministers, C openhage n, ISBN 92-893-0690-4: 78 p p. 
Pohl, H.R., McClure, P .R., Fay, M., H oller, J. and DE Rosa, C.T. (2001)  Public h ealth assessment of 
hexachlo robenz ene 43 (4-7): 903-908 
Qu, W., Bi , X., Sh eng, G., Lu, S ., Fu, J ., Yuan, J. & Li, L. (2007) Exposure to polybrominated diphenyl ethers 
among workers at an electronic w aste dismantling region in Guangdong, China . Environm ent Inter national. 
33(8): 1021-1028 
Ralph, J.L., Or gebin-Crist, M-C., Larey re, J-J. and Nelson, C.C. ( 2003)  Disrupti on of androgen regulatio n in the 
prostate by  the environmental contam inant hexachlorobenzene. Environm ental Health Perspectives 111 (4): 
461-466 
Rice, D.C . (1999) Behavioral impai rment produced by low-level postnatal PCB exposure in m onkey s. 
Enviro nmental Re search S ection A  80: S113-S121 
Sadiq, M. (1 992) Toxic metal chem istry in marine environments. Marcel Dek ker Inc., New York, Basel, Hong 
Kong. ISBN 0 824786475 
Safe, S .H. (1 993)  Polychlorinated biphenyls.  IN: Kroschwitz, J.I. & How e-Grant, (Eds).  The Kirk -Othmer 
Encyclopedi a of Chemical Technology , Fourth Edition .Publ.  Wiley-Interscience , N.Y.  Volum e 6: 127-13 9 
Salomo ns, W . & Forstner, U. (1984)  Metals in the hydrocycle. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, N ew York, 
Tokyo, ISBN 3 540127550 
Sanchez, C ., Ericsson, M., C arlsson, H . and Colmsjo, A.  ( 2003) Determ ination of organophosphate es ters in 
air sampl es by dynamic s onicati on-as sisted solvent extraction coupled on-line w ith large-volume injection g as 
chromatography uti lizing a programm ed-temperature vaporizer.  Journal of Chromatography A 993(1 -2): 1 03- 
110 
Santillo, D., Labunska, I ., Dav idson, H ., Johnston, P., Strutt, M. & Know les, O . (2003a) Consum ing Chemicals: 
Hazar dous Chem icals in hous e dust as  an indicator of chemical exposure in the  home: Part I - UK. 
Greenpeace Res earch Laboratori es Tec hnical Note 01/2003, April 2003: 74 pp. 
Santillo, D., Labunska, I ., Fairley , M. & Johnston, P. ( 2003b) Hazardous chem icals in house dusts as indicators 
of chemi cal ex posure in the home: P art II – Germany, Spain, Slovakia, Italy and France.  Greenpeace Research 
Labo ratories Tech nical Note 02/2003, December 2003: 96 pp. 
Sauve, S., McBri de, M.B. & H endershot, W.H. (1997)  Speciation of lead in cont aminated soils. Environmental 
Pollution 98(2): 149-155 
Schutz, A., Ol sson, M., Jensen, A ., Gerhardsson, L., Borjesson, J., Mattsson, S ., & Skerfving, S. (2005) Lead 
in finger bone, wh ole blood, plasm a and urine in lead-smelter w orkers: extende d exposure range.  International 
Archives of Occupational and Env ironmental Health 78( 1): 35-43 
Seegal , R.F. & S hain, W. ( 1992)  N eurotoxicity of polychlorinated biphenyls.  Th e role of ortho-su bstituted 
congeners in altering neurochem ical functi on.  IN: The vulnerable brain and env ironmental risks, vo lume 2: 
Toxins in food, Isaacson, R.L. & J ensen, K.F., Eds. Publ: Plemin Press: 169-19 5 
She, J.,W inkler, J.,Visita, P., McKinney , M. & Petreas, M. ( 2000) Analysis of PBD Es in seal blubber and human 
breast adi pose tissue samples. O rganohalogen Compounds 47: 53-56 
Silva, M.J ., Barr, D .B., R eidy, J.A., Mal ek, N.A., Hodge, C.C., Caudill, S.P., Bro ck, J.W., Needham, L.L. & 
Calafat, A.M. (2 004) Urinary levels  of seven phthalate metabolites in the U.S. population from the National 
Health and Nutr ition Examination S urvey (NHANES) 1999-2000. Environm ental Health Perspectives 112 (3): 
331-338 
Sjüdin, A., C arlsson, H.,Thuress on, K., Sj olin, S., Bergman, Ö. & Ostman, C. (20 01) Flame retardants in indoor 
air at an el ectro nics recycling plant and at other work  environments. Environme ntal Science and Technology 
35(3): 448-454 
Sjüdin, A., P atters on, D.G . and Bergm an, A. (2003). A review  on human exposure to brominated f lame 
retardants  – par ticularly polybrom inated diphenyl ethers. Environment Internatio nal 29: 829-839 Süderstrüm, G., Mar klund , S. (20 02) PBC DD and PBC DF from incineratio n of waste c ontaining brominated 
flame retar dants. E nvironmental S cience &  Technolo gy 36(9):1 959–1964 
Strandman, T ., Koistinen, J., Kivir anta, H ., Vuorinen, P.J., Tuomis to, J. & V artiainen, T. (1999) Levels of some 
polybrominated  dipheny l ether s (PBDE s) in fish and human ad ipose tissue in Finland . Organohalogen 
Compounds 40:355-358 
Swami, K., N arang, A.S., N arang, R.S. &  Eadon, G.A. (199 2) Ther mally induced  formation of PCDD and PCDF 
from tri- and tetrachlor obenzene in  dielectric f luids. C hemosp here 24 (12): 1 845-1853 
Swan, S.H ., Main, K.M., Liu, F., Stewar t, S.L., Kruse, R .L., Calaf at, A.M., Mao, C.S., R edmon, J.B., Ternand, 
C.L., Sulliv an, S. & T eague, J.L. (20 05) Decreas e in anogenital d istance among  male infa nts with prenatal 
phthalate ex posure.  Environment al Health Persp ectives  113 (8): 105 6-1061 
Swed ish EPA (1 999) Persistent Or ganic Pollutants . A Swed ish view of  an Internatio nal Problem. Text:Claes 
Bernes. ISBN 91-620-1189-8 
Thomsen, C ., Lund anes, E . & Becher, G. (2 002) Brominated f lame retard ants in archiv ed serum samples from 
Norway: A study on tempo ral trends  and the ro le of age. Env ironmental Science and  Technology 36(7): 1414- 
1418 
Tyler, G. (2 004)  Rare ear th elements  in soil and  plant sy stems – A r eview.  Plant and  Soil 267: 191–206 
UNEP (20 03) Report of the techno logy and eco nomic asses sment panel, H CFC task force report, Montreal 
Protocol on sub stances that d eplete the ozo ne layer, May  2003. 
http://ozone.unep .org/teap/R eports/Other_T ask_Force/H CFC03R1.pdf 
UNEP (20 05)  “E-waste: the hid den side of IT eq uipment’s manuf acturing  and us e”.  Early Warnings on 
Emer ging Environmental Thr eats No. 5, United N ations Env ironment Pr ogramme 
UNEP (20 06a)  Ad vance Rep ort of the seco nd meeting o f the Per sistent Or ganic Po llutants Review Committee 
(POPR C), 6 -10 Novemb er 2006, Geneva, Switz erland : 48 pp. 
http://www.p ops.int/documents /meetings/p oprc_2/meeting_d ocs/report/default.htm 
UNEP (20 06b) Guid elines f or the tr ansbo undar y movement o f collected mob ile phones.  Mobile phone 
partnership initiative p roject 2 .1. www.basel.int/ind ustry/mppiwp/guid-info/guidTBM.pdf 
United States  Environmental Pr otection Aency (US E PA) (199 8) App roach for addr essing dioxin in soil at 
CERCLA and  RCRA Sites. Was hington, DC. OSWE R Directive 920 0.4-26 
van B irgelen, A.P.J.M. (1 998) Hexachlo robenzene as a p ossible major  contrib utor to the dioxin activity of 
human milk. E nviron. Health Pers p. 106(11): 683-688 
van de Plass che, E ., Schwegler , A., R asenber g, M. & Scho uten G. (200 2)  Pentachlor obenzene. Report 
presented  at the T hird Meeting  of the POPs  Expert Gr oup in Genev a, Switzerland , in Ju ne 2002, available at 
http://www.unece.o rg/env/popsxg/pentachlo orbenz een.pdf 
Viberg, H., Fred riksson, A., E riksson, P. (2 004) Investigations  of strain and /or gender  differences in 
developmental neur otoxic effects  of polybrominated  dipheny l ethers  in mice. T oxicological Sciences 81(2): 
344-353 
Watanab e, M., N akata, C ., Wu, W., Kawamoto , K., Noma, Y . (200 7) Char acterizatio n of semi-volatile organic 
compound s emitted d uring heating o f nitrogen-containing p lastics  at low temperatur e. Chemosphere 68(11): 
2063-2072 
Weisglas-Kuperus, N., Vreugdenhil, H .J.I. and Mulder , P.G.H. (20 04) Immuno logical eff ects of environmental 
exposure to p olychlo rinated b iphenyls and  dioxins in Dutch scho ol child ren. Tox icolog ical Letters 149: 281- 
285 
WHO (2004) Chlo robenzenes o ther than hexachlor obenz ene: enviro nmental as pects. Concise international 
chemical as sessment d ocument: 60 . ISBN  92 4  153060 X, ISSN  1020-6167, Geneva  2004 
Wikstrom, E .  & Marklund ,  S. (2 001)  The inf luence of  level and chlo rine so urce on the f ormation of mono- to 
octa- chlorinated  dibenzo-p-dioxins, d ibenzo furans and co planar p olychlo rinated b iphenyls during combustion 
of an ar tificial municip al was te. Chemo sphere 4 3(2): 2 27-234 
Wong, M.H ., Wu, S.C ., Deng , W.J., Y u, X.Z ., Luo, Q., Leung, A.O.W., Wo ng, C.S.C ., Luksemburg, W.J. & 
Wong, A.S. (20 07) Export of toxic chemicals  – A review o f the cas e of uncontro lled electr onic-waste recycling. 
Environmental Po llution 149(2): 131-140 
World Health Or ganis ation (1989) Lead; env ironmental as pects. E nvironmental Health C riteria 85. ISBN 
9241542853 
World Health Or ganis ation (1992) Cad mium. Env ironmental Health C riteria 135. ISBN 9 241571357 
Zhu J., H irai Y.,Yu G., Sakai S. (20 08) Levels  of polychlorinated  dibenz o-p-dioxins and  dibenzofurans in China 
and chemo metric analy sis of potential emissio n sour ces, Chemo spher e 70 (4 ):703-711 
©GREENPEACE / XXX 

Appendix 1.Results from the quantification of 2,3,7,8-substituted 
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and furans (PCDD/Fs) in samples 
GH08003 and GH08006 
22 Greenpeace InternationalGH08003 (soil/ash) GH08006 (lagoon sediment )
Congener Conc (pg/g)TEQ (pg/g) Conc (pg/g) TEQ (pg/g)
2378-TCD F 15.2 1.5 298 29.8 
12378-P CDF 15.1 0.8 406.6 20.3 
23478-P CDF 19 9.5 702.5 351.3 
123478- HxCDF 26.6 2.7 673.9 67.4 
123678- HxCDF 19 1.9 602 60.2 
234678- HxCDF 30.3 3.0 613.6 61.4 
123789- HxCDF 6.9 0.7 185.8 18.6 
1234678-HpC DF 84.2 0.8 1774.9 17.7 
1234789-HpC DF 10.1 0.1 194 1.9 
OCDF 51 0.1 665.7 0.7 
2378-TCD D 2 2.0 48.8 48.8 
12378-P CDD 2.4 1.2 242.4 121.2 
123478- HxCDD 12.1 1.2 234.1 23.4 
123678- HxCDD 21.9 2.2 573.1 57.3 
123789- HxCDD 12.5 1.2 474.2 47.4 
1234678-HpC DD 167.5 1.7 5222.1 52.2 
OCDD 351.7 0.4 8272.1 8.3 
TOTAL 30.9 988 
Table A1. Results of the quanti fication of polychlorin ated dibenzo-p-di oxins (PCDDs) and polychlorinated  dibenzo-p-furans (PC DDFs) in GH08003  and GH080 06, expr essed as 
concentrations and toxicity equ ivalent values (TEQs), both in pg/g. 

Greenpeace International23 
©GREENPEACE / XXX 
Appendix 2. Analytical methodology 
On arrival at the lab, two sub -samp les we re taken from ea ch original 
sample.  One of the sub-samp les was subject ed to q ualitative organic 
analy sis and the ot her was analysed  for me tals content.  Details of the 
metho ds for samp le preparation, organic chem icals scr eening 
analy sis and metals analysis ar e given below. 
Analysis for extractable organic compo unds 
20 Åg of deuter ated naphthalene wa s added as an Intern al Standard 
(IS) to each sub-sam ple.  F or sedime nt samples, ap proximately 30 g 
of each  sampl e was extr acted  twice using 1 5ml pent ane and 5 ml 
acetone at 69 °C with sonication  for 2 h, once at the o riginal pH and 
once fo llowing acidification t o pH 2 with nitric acid (1 0% v/v).  The 
extracts und erwent clean-up  prior to  analysis.  The two extracts 
obtained  were comb ined, conc entrat ed to 3 ml, shaken with 3 ml 
isopropyl alcohol and 3ml TBA-r eagent (mixture of 3 % 
tetrabutylammonium h ydrogen sulphate an d 20% sodium  sulphite in 
deionised water) and  left for separa tion.  The  pentane  phase was 
collected and eluted through a Florisil c olumn using a 95:5 
pentane:toluene  mixed eluen t, and  then co ncentrat ed to 2 ml.  20 Åg 
of bromonaphthalene wa s added as an  IS to  each extr act pr ior to 
GC/MS analysis. 
Sample extracts we re an alysed  using an Agilen t 6890  Series gas 
chromatograph with a Restek Rtx-X LB column (3 0m , 0 .25mm  ID, 
0.25 Åm film thickne ss) lin ked to an Agile nt 597 3 Inert M SD op erated 
in EI mode and interfaced with an Agilent Enhance d Chem Station 
data system.  GC oven temp erature pro gram was: 35°C, ra ised to 
260°C at 100C/min, then t o 295°C at 5 0°C/min (held fo r 5min), then 
to 325°C at 50°C/min (h eld for 12min), and  then to  330°C at 
50°C/min (held for 4min).  Carrier gas was helium at 2 ml/min. 
Identification of compounds was car ried out by matching  spectra 
against Agilent Wiley7N and  Pesticides Libraries.  Add itionally, spectr a 
and r etention time o f com pounds isolated from th e samples were 
match ed against those o btained during GC/M S analysis of stand ard 
mixtures containing a range  of chlor inated be nzenes, phen ols and 
pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), phthalate s, polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) a nd aliphatic hydr ocarb ons. 
Extra ction efficiency was evalu ated u sing the resp onse of IS 
deuterated naphthalene spike. 
Analysis for metals 
Sedim ent and soil samp les were air d ried to constant we ight, sieved 
through a 2mm  mesh and then  powdered  using a pe stle and mor tar. 
Appr oximately 0.5 g of each sample was d igested by th e addition of 
7.5ml concent rated  hydrochloric acid, 2 .5 ml co ncentrat ed nitric acid 
and 1 0 ml deionised  water , firstly overnight  at roo m temp erature, then 
for 4 hours under reflux at 1 30°C.  Digests wer e filte red and  made up 
to 50ml with deionised water . Two sampl es were prepar ed in duplicate and analysed  to verify 
method rep roducibility, along with an identically prepared blank.  
To check the method efficiency certified reference material (CRM) sampl es were prepared in an identical manner (GBW07406, yellow- 
red soi l, certi fied by the China N ational; Analysis Centre for Iron and 
Steel, B eijing, C hina and LGC6180, Pulverised Fuel Ash certified by 
the Laboratory  of the Government Chemist, UK) 
Prepared sampl es were analysed by Inductively Coupled Plasma 
Atomic Emi ssion Spectrometry (ICP-AES) using a Varian MPX 
Simultaneo us Sp ectrometer.  Multi-element standards at 
concentrati ons of 1 mg/l and 1 0 mg/l, and matrix matched for the 
sampl es, were used for instrument calibration.  Calibration of the ICP- 
AES was val idated b y the use o f quality contr ol standards at 8 mg/l 
prepar ed from  different reagent stocks to the instrument calibration 
standards.  A ny sample exceeding the calibration range was diluted 
accordi ngly, in duplicate, and re-analysed. 
In addi tion, for each sample, mercury (Hg) was also de termined using 
cold vapour generation ICP-AES.  Ionic mercury, Hg (II), was reduced 
to elemental  mercury, Hg (0), through reation o f the sample with 
sodium borohy dride (0 .6% w/v), sodium hydroxide (0.5% w/v) and 
hydrochl oric acid (10 molar).  The elemental mer cury v apour was 
carried in a stream of argon into the sp ectrometer.  Two calibration 
standards were pr epared, at 10 μg/ l and  100 μ g/l, matrix matched to 
the sampl es.  The calibration was validated using a quality control 
standard (80 μ g/l), prepared internally from different r eagent stock.  

Greenpeace is an  independent glo bal 
campaigning organisa tion that  acts to 
change  attitudes and beha viour, to 
protect and con serve t he environm ent 
and to promot e peace. 
Greenpeace International 
Ottho He ldringstraat 5 
1066 A Z Amste rdam 
The Nether lands 
Tel: +31 2 0 7182000 
Fax: +31 20 5148 151 
ggrreeeennppeeaaccee..oorrgg