# Archivo original: clicking-clean.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:38 -03 2025

greenpeace.orgClicking Clean: 
How Companies 
are Creating the 
Green Internet
April2014  

2
For more information contact: 
enquiries@greenpeace.org
Lead Author:  
Gary Cook, Greenpeace
Co-Authors: 
Tom Dowdall, Greenpeace
David Pomerantz, Greenpeace
Yifei Wang, Greenpeace
Editor:
David Pomerantz, Greenpeace
Creative Direction & Design by:
Arc Communications
Published in April 2014 by 
Greenpeace Inc.702 H Street, NW
Suite 300Washington, D.C. 20001 
United Statesgreenpeace.org


Executive Summary   5
Company Scorecard   7
Cloud Source   9
Global Energy Snapshot   13
The Cloud’s Next Stop: China   17
The Road Map to a Green Internet   19
Your Online World: Green IRL, or #dirty?  25
Green Internet Leaders and Best Practices  29
Where the Cloud Touches the Ground   35 
-- Map: Global Data Center Hot Spots   36 
-- Map: US Data Center Hot Spots   38 
-- US Regional Profiles   40
Appendix 1: Methodology   42
Appendix 2: Company Scores Explained  44
Appendix 3: Company Data Center  
Facilities and Estimates of Power Demand  64
Notes    78Contents


03
44

Greenpeace  
USA5  
Clicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetExecutive  
Summary
  5  For the estimated 2.5 billion people around the 
world who are connected to the internet, it is 
impossible to imagine life without it. The internet 
has rewoven the fabric of our daily lives – how we communicate with each other, work and entertain ourselves – and become a foundation 
of the global economy. 
Seemingly on a daily basis, new businesses that use 
the internet as their foundation are disrupting and often 
replacing long-standing business models and industries. 
From music and video to communications and mail, more and more of our “offline” world is moving online. We can 
expect that trend to continue and accelerate as the global 
online population reaches 50% of the world’s projected population, moving from 2.3 billion in 2012 to an expected 
3.6 billion people by 2017.
1 
While the online world appears to grow at the expense 
of some traditional business models in the offline world, it is rapidly creating increased demand for at least one 
offline product: electricity. The rapid growth of the cloud 
and our use of the internet have produced a collective electricity demand that would currently rank in the top six 
if compared alongside countries; that electricity demand 
is expected to increase by 60% or more by 2020 as the online population and our reliance on the internet steadily 
increase.
2 
While shifting businesses to an online model can create 
significant gains in energy efficiency, the energy appetite of the internet continues to outstrip those gains thanks to its 
dramatic growth. Critically, the internet’s growing energy 
footprint has thus far been mostly concentrated in places where energy is the dirtiest.But there is good news to report: since our last report, How Clean is Your Cloud? (April 2012),
3 leading data 
center operators have taken key steps toward building 
a green internet, particularly those companies that have 
committed to build a 100% renewably powered platform. These commitments are having a profound impact in the 
real world, shifting investment from legacy coal, gas and 
nuclear power plants to renewable energy technologies, and disrupting the status quo among major electric utilities.
In US states like North Carolina, Nevada and Iowa, these 
companies’ commitments to clean energy are resulting in large amounts of wind and solar power displacing coal, gas 
and nuclear plants or preventing them from being built, to 
the tangible benefit of the global climate and communities living in those states.
The environmental rationale for technology companies 
to act has been clear for many years, as a rapid shift to 
renewable energy is necessary to stem the worst impacts 
of climate change. Now, the business case is becoming more compelling as well: costs for renewable energy 
continue to drop, prices for fossil fuel-based electricity are 
rising, and leading companies are perceiving those price cues. They are also heeding customers who increasingly 
value sustainability.
Unfortunately, despite the leadership and innovation 
demonstrated by green internet pioneers, other companies 
lag far behind, with little sense of urgency, choosing to 
paper over their growing dirty energy footprints with status quo solutions such as renewable energy credits and 
carbon offsets while rapidly expanding their infrastructure. 
Other internet companies have refused to pay even lip service to sustainability, and are simply buying dirty energy 
straight from the grid. Those companies, most notably 
Amazon Web Services, are choosing how to power their infrastructure based solely on lowest electricity prices, 
without consideration to the impact their growing electricity 
footprints have on human health or the environment.Executive  
Summary 
© Frank van Biemen / EvoSwitch / Greenpeace

6
6 A Green Internet is Crucial  
for a Healthy Climate
We witness on a daily basis evidence that the foundation 
of our offline world, our planet, is out of balance as a 
result of climate change and other threats caused by 
our reliance on dirty sources of energy. The scientific community is issuing warnings, increasingly dire in nature, 
that our continued reliance on the energy technologies 
of the past is putting our future in grave danger. We need to shift at internet-like speed to a world powered by 
renewable sources of energy, disrupting the status quo 
to which electric utilities and other fossil fuel providers are desperately clinging.
We cannot make the transition to a renewable powered 
society fast enough unless the internet is a platform leading the world toward a clean energy future, and not building a 
new attachment to our dirty energy past.
The pressing need for the internet to drive the clean 
energy revolution is perhaps most evident in China, which 
will host much of the internet’s growth in the decade to 
come. China is also the country with the world’s largest 
carbon footprint. As companies begin to build their 
internet infrastructure there, acceptance of status quo dirty energy would be disastrous for efforts to wean China 
off of polluting energy sources. Innovative approaches 
to clean energy procurement, by contrast, could be transformational there.
Major brands are taking meaningful steps to steer their 
infrastructure investments toward cleaner energy, but the 
sector as a whole remains focused on rapid growth. Most companies still are myopic to the critical nature of their 
energy choices, focusing only on maximizing efficiency. 
The replacement of dirty sources of electricity with clean renewable sources is still the crucial missing link in the 
sector’s sustainability efforts.
With this year’s update, we have expanded our analysis to 
examine a total of 19 global IT companies that are leading 
the sector’s move to the cloud, including several major colocation companies for the first time. These companies, 
while less well-known than branded giants like Google 
or Amazon, operate the data centers behind much of the Internet. As a function of that expanded analysis, this 
update now includes over 300 data centers in our survey, 
up from approximately 80 in the previous edition. We have updated our evaluation to account for how these 
colocation companies are pursuing opportunities to play a 
meaningful role in driving renewable energy deployment to meet the internet’s energy needs.Key Findings
(1) Six major cloud brands – Apple, Box, Facebook, 
Google, Rackspace, and Salesforce – have committed 
to a goal of powering data centers with 100 % 
renewable energy and are providing the early signs of the promise and potential impact of a renewably 
powered internet.
(2) A number of leading brands, most notably Apple and 
Facebook, have made significant improvements in their energy transparency, discarding the previous 
dogma within the sector of withholding energy data due to competitiveness concerns. Transparency still 
remains weak overall among many brands, particularly 
colocation providers.   
(3) Amazon Web Services (AWS), which provides the 
infrastructure for a significant part of the internet, remains among the dirtiest and least transparent companies in the sector, far behind its major 
competitors, with zero reporting of its energy or 
environmental footprint to any source or stakeholder. 
Twitter lags in many of the same areas.
(4) As a result of pressure by three major brands (Apple, 
Facebook and Google) located in North Carolina, 
Duke Energy, the largest utility in the US, adopted a 
Green Source Rider, opening the market to renewable 
electricity purchases for large customers in North Carolina.
(5) Google maintains its leadership in building a renewably 
powered internet, as it significantly expands its 
renewable energy purchasing and investment both 
independently and through collaboration with its utility vendors. 
(6) Facebook continues to prove its commitment to build a 
green internet, with its decision to locate a data center in Iowa driving the largest purchase of wind turbines in 
the world.
(7) Apple is the most improved company since our last full 
report, and has shown itself to be the most innovative 
and most aggressive in pursuing its commitment to be 100% renewably powered.
 
Company Scorecard

7  Energy 
TransparencyClean 
Energy 
IndexNatural 
GasCoal Nuclear
A
F
A
A
A
BB
CCCC
B
F
C
D
C
B
C
CRenewable 
Energy 
Commitment 
& Siting 
Policy
B
F
A
D
A
B
D
D
C
F
B
B
D
B
DDD
D
DEnergy 
Efficiency & 
Mitigation
B
D
B
B
A
B
B
B
C
D
C
C
F
B
DD
C
C
BRenewable 
Energy 
Deployment  
& Advocacy
C
F
AC
B
A
C
C
C
D
CC
F
B
DDD
D
C
  7  
Company ScorecardCompany 
Scorecard
Colocation Companies17%
15%
100%
6%
49%48%15%
18%
29%15%27%28%21%
59%
17%
6%
16%
21%
NA
* 25%
0%
47%
7%
13%
37%
37%
21%20%
26%
17%42%
6%
31%
21%
29%26%
NA
* 28%
0%
24%25%
22%
32%
25%
32%44%
30%
22%22%20%
25%
32%
27%27%
NA
* 27%
0%
14%16%
15%
12%
15%
18%10%
17%
26%15%12%
19%
38%
23%24%
NA
* 
(a) Clean Energy Index and Coal Intensity are calculated based on estimates of power demand for evaluated facilities. See Appendix III: Facilities Table.
(b) Akamai’s energy consumption is spread across 1,100 data centers around the world, making individual tracking difficult. Regional demand and renewable energy data from Carbon Disclosure Project and information provided by company.(c) Greenpeace provided AWS and Twitter with respective facility power demand estimates to review. Both companies responded that the estimates were not correct, but neither provided alternative data. Using conservative calculations, Greenpeace has used the best information available to derive power demand. Greenpeace invites both AWS and Twitter to be transparent and provide more accurate data fortheir facility power demands.* (d) There is insufficient public data to evaluate Verizon Terremark’s energy footprint. Greenpeace encourages Verizon Terremark to release more data and will update our analysis in the future.


03
801

Greenpeace  
USA9  
Clicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetSection 01  
Cloud Power
01
Information Technology (IT) companies have 
a central role to play in enabling a modern, 
renewable-powered energy infrastructure.  
An estimated 2.5 billion people are currently online, and that number is expected to increase by nearly 60% in the next five years.
4 If the 
rapid growth of the digital economy is linked to 
renewable energy sources, the IT sector has the 
opportunity to catalyze transformative change in the consumption and production of energy, with the potential to drive a significant reduction 
in the greenhouse gases (GHGs) that cause 
climate change.   Powering the Digital Economy
Despite significant improvement in transparency from 
some companies since 2012, estimates of the energy 
demand of our growing number of electronic devices 
and the online world to which they are connected have varied widely in their methodology and scope. Many of 
the existing studies are based on country samples, annual 
surveys or industry predictions that are difficult to compare due to variant methods and areas of focus between the 
three different parts of the internet system: data centers, 
communication networks and end user devices.   
One of the most comprehensive and well recognized 
snapshots of the internet’s energy demand at the global 
level is the SMART 2020 report (2008), and the update in 2012, the SMARTer 2020 report, which pegs IT-related 
emissions at approximately 2% of global emissions, on par 
with emissions from the global aviation sector.
5Cloud Source
© Frank van Biemen / EvoSwitch / Greenpeace
2002 2011 202062%
End User Devices Networks Data Centers2002 2011 202013%
25% 22%
24%17%23%
61% 53%
The Cloud’s Growth:  
A Breakdown

1010   
The updated analysis of the SMARTer 2020 report shows 
the relative shift in the energy footprint of the IT sector from 
devices to data center and networks, tracking the ongoing 
growth of internet-based computing and the shift to thin client devices like tablets. Data centers will be the fastest 
growing part of the global IT sector energy footprint as our 
online world rapidly expands; their energy demand will increase 81% by 2020.
Based on the estimates contained in the SMARTer 2020 
analysis, the aggregate electricity demand of the cloud (including data centers and networks, but not devices) in 
2011 was 684 billion kWh. If compared with the electricity 
demand of countries in the same year, the cloud would rank 6th in the world, with demand expected to increase 
63% by 2020.
6
The US remains the largest consumer of data center 
power globally, followed by Japan, the UK, Germany 
and France. Emerging markets in Latin America, China, 
Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore, Poland and Turkey are countries where power demand is growing above the 
global average (See China ” The Cloud’s Next Stop: China” 
on page 17). Global power demand for data centers alone grew to an estimated 40GW in 2013, an increase of 7% 
over 2012.
7 Data Drivers
Internet data will almost triple from 2012-2017, growing 
from 44 to 121 exabytes.8 Streaming video and audio are 
the biggest drivers of explosive data growth, along with 
a 50% increase in the number of internet users globally. 
Netflix and YouTube combined represent more that 50% of internet traffic at peak times in North America.
9  Globally, 
YouTube remains the largest single source of data growth, 
but social media services Instagram, Twitter, and Pinterest 
are also growing rapidly. 


11  
Greenpeace  
USASection  
xxxxClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetApril2014Greenpeace  
USA
Section 01  
Cloud Power
Electricity in Billion kWh, 2011
UK 318
France 420
Brazil 457
Canada 519
Germany 522
India 774
Japan 939
US 3790
China 3862
Cloud computing 684
Russia 7296th largest
consumerElectricity demand:  
Cloud computing  
vs. Countries


03
121202

©  Greenpeace
Greenpeace  
USA
13  
Clicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetSection 02  
Energy Snapshot
02 Global Energy  
Snapshot
Power for a Green Internet  
is Growing Rapidly
Renewable energy is available to power the Internet: the 
transition to a clean energy economy is underway, driven 
by the increasingly competitive price of renewable power 
compared to fossil fuels. Germany is leading the way with 25% of its electricity coming from renewable sources, 
and targets of 50% by 2030 and 80% by 2050. More and 
more studies show how renewable energy can provide all future power needs for countries across the globe; indeed, 
countries like Scotland, Denmark and the Philippines have 
now set targets to be 100% renewable powered. 
In 2012, over half of all new installed electric capacity 
worldwide came from renewable sources. In the EU 
the share was almost 70%, mostly due to solar and wind power growth. The US added more capacity from 
wind power than any other energy form in 2012, and all 
renewable energy made up about half of total electric capacity additions during the year.
10  Solar is booming 
in the US as well, following in wind energy’s footsteps; in 
2013, solar energy accounted for 29% of all new electric 
generation capacity, up from 10% in 2012.11 
In the US, there are now nine states that are getting 10%  or more of their electricity from wind power, with Iowa (25%) – a data center hub – topping the list.
12  In China, 
wind energy produced 135TWh in 2013 – 22% more 
power than all of the country’s nuclear reactors.13 
Fossil Fuels: Barriers to a Green Internet
While penetration of renewable energy technologies 
like wind and solar energy has grown rapidly in the past 
decade, legacy energy generation from coal, gas and 
nuclear power remains the status quo for most parts of the world. To prevent the most dangerous climate change 
(brought on by global warming of 2 °C or more), global 
emissions must peak before 2020. The International Energy Agency (IEA) states that most proven reserves of 
fossil fuels must stay in the ground in order to meet those 
goals.
14 
Coal is the chief culprit for global greenhouse gas (GHG) 
pollution.15  A combination of energy efficiency, activism, 
environmental regulations and cheaper gas has started a wave of coal plant shutdowns in the US in recent years, 
and caused a halt in the construction of new coal-fired power plants.
16  However, coal is still the source for 
approximately 40 % of electricity in the US,17  and is still 
burnt for electric generation around the world. It should be 
the energy source most avoided by IT companies when 
making decisions about how to power their data centers.
Solar PV Global Capacity, 1995-2012 
100 283
199519961997199819992000200120022003200420052006200720082009201020112012102030405060708090100
0
GigawattsWind Power Capacity, 1996-2012 
1996199719981999200020012002200320042005200620072008200920102011201250100150200
Adapted from REN21's Renewables Global Status Report250300
0
Gigawatts

1414   Is it green? 
Nuclear: Nuclear power plants create unacceptable 
risk to the environment and human health and are an 
expensive diversion from the deployment of renewable 
energy and energy efficiency required to stave off the worst impacts of global warming. Efforts to revive 
the nuclear industry in the US have failed due to the 
impossibly high costs of building and maintaining nuclear power plants – that money is best spent on 
renewable sources of power.
20 
Hydropower: Hydropower is the most established 
baseload clean energy source. Sourcing energy for a 
data center from existing hydropower reduces carbon 
emissions and is more environmentally friendly than 
powering from a predominantly coal, gas, or nuclear powered grid. However, using existing hydropower 
does not lead to investment in new renewable energy 
capacity, and large hydropower projects can have detrimental effects on local environments. Well-
planned and managed small-scale or microhydro 
power projects have much less impact on river ecosystems, and have the potential to provide a 
scalable baseload power source for data centers.
Geothermal: Geothermal energy is a consistent and 
renewable source of power in areas of the world where 
it can be found. It provides significant and growing electric generation in countries like the US, Iceland, 
and Indonesia. In 2013, 600MW of new geothermal 
power was added globally.
21  Apple has recently 
secured electricity for its Reno data center for local 
geothermal sources.22 
Biogas: Biogas can come from many sources; 
methane from landfill sites and anaerobic digestion of 
farm waste or sewage sludge are the most common. 
The environmental benefits of biogas vary widely 
depending on the source.
Biomass: Large-scale biomass used for electricity 
generation can create significant environmental 
problems, as the source of biomass is likely to come 
from unsustainable sources. Wood pellets from the 
southeast US are currently being shipped to the UK and other parts of the EU, simultaneously driving 
deforestation and undermining climate protection 
goals in both countries.
23 
Dont Frack the Internet
In the US, utilities have vastly increased their generation of electricity from gas obtained from unconventional 
reserves, known as “shale gas” or “tight gas.” Shale gas 
requires drillers to crack the reservoir rock using a process known as hydraulic fracturing. Hydraulic fracture methods 
(“fracking”) are associated with a range of environmental 
impacts, including the pollution of local groundwater. While natural gas from conventional reserves has a lower 
carbon intensity than coal, it still generates significant 
GHG emissions.The GHG footprint of shale gas may be significantly greater than for conventional gas, with some 
life-cycle analyses showing shale gas to have a GHG 
footprint that is higher than even coal, due to fugitive methane emissions that are leaked during gas extraction 
and transportation.
18 While the increasing supply of natural 
gas due to fracking has helped to shut down a number of coal plants, shale gas also diverts investment away from 
renewable energy.
19 
A small but increasing number of data center companies are deploying natural gas-powered fuel cells on site as both primary and backup power supplies. Natural gas 
used in fuel cells creates less pollution than when it is 
combusted in power plants, and fuel cells can be a good mitigation strategy when used as a primary power source 
to unplug a data center from a coal-fired grid (See “eBay 
unplugs from a dirty grid: p 29). Nonetheless, natural gas cannot be considered renewable even when used in fuel 
cells.

15  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green Internet
© Frank van Biemen / EvoSwitch / Greenpeace

03
1616  03

Greenpeace  
USA17  
Clicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetSection 03  
The Cloud’s  
Next Stop:  
China
China has 618 million internet users and is the single 
largest internet market on the planet,24 with more people 
online than inhabitants of Western Europe. In 2012 alone, 
almost 53.5 million people came online in China – a rate of 
1.7 new online users per second. China will add another 200 million users by 2015,
25 with most accessing the 
internet via mobile technology.
Internet companies are growing rapidly to provide 
services for the new market. China’s largest internet company, Tencent, ranked as the 4th largest in the world 
by market capitalization, behind only Google, Facebook 
and Amazon.
26  In addition to Tencent, Alibaba, Baidu and 
Sina (owner of Weibo) are the biggest internet companies 
in China. Both Tencent and Alibaba are expanding into 
international markets. These companies are investing billions of dollars in new Chinese data centers to match 
their explosive growth.
27 
The rapid growth in internet use in China means huge 
quantities of electricity will be needed to power internet and online mobile services. Between 1.5% (700TWh) and 
3% (1412TWh) of all electricity generation in China was 
used for the internet in 2011, according to estimates.
28  
That power comes from a national grid that is currently 
dominated by coal. 
Chinese IT companies have been introducing energy 
efficiency measures to reduce power consumption, but 
the rapid growth in demand for online services means any carbon savings are quickly overwhelmed, and emissions 
from the Chinese IT sector will continue to grow unless 
aggressive energy efficiency targets are combined with prioritizing renewable energy sources.International internet companies are all looking at options to grab a share of the Chinese market. Amazon has just 
announced plans for a Chinese-hosted AWS China Region 
and IBM has plans to build its own Chinese data center
29,30.  
Industry experts are predicting that China will become the 
key location for data center construction in the coming 
years.31 
Until 2012, any company plugging into the grid in China 
had no choice over its source of power. However, the 
Chinese Government is now acting to cap the growth of coal power in key regions to tackle its air pollution crisis, 
and is introducing ambitious renewable energy targets 
to transition China’s electricity generation toward clean energy. 
32  In 2013, China increased its solar target to 
35GW by 2015 and enacted new policies to allow private 
solar installations to connect to the grid and achieve 
attractive economic terms for the power they generate.33  
The changes represent a crucial opportunity for internet 
companies and data center operators in China to invest 
directly in clean energy and slash their growing energy bills.
IKEA34 and Lenovo35  are investing in their own solar PV 
installations in China. China’s top internet companies have 
yet to take advantage of the new opportunities to invest 
in solar power, as sector leaders Apple, Facebook and Google are doing in the US. The Cloud’s Next  
Stop: China03
©  Greenpeace

03
181804

Greenpeace  
USA19  
Clicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetSection 04  
Defining a Green 
Internet Company 
  19  The IT sector has made substantial progress in driving 
innovation in data center and server energy efficiency 
design in the past 5-plus years, which is helping to curb the 
expected growth in data center energy demand. However, given the scale of predicted growth in the energy footprint 
of the online world, all major online companies must 
factor access to renewable sources of electricity into any meaningful sustainability strategy.  At both a company and 
a sector level, delivering  a green internet has to include a 
long-term commitment to growing with renewable energy, and a near-term strategy that will put both existing demand 
and future growth on a path to being 100% renewably 
powered.
The environmental rationale for technology companies 
to act has been clear for many years, as a rapid shift to 
renewable energy is necessary to stem the worst impacts of climate change. Now, the business case is becoming 
more compelling as well: costs for renewable energy 
continue to drop, prices for fossil fuel-based electricity are rising, and leading companies are perceiving those price 
cues. They are also heeding customers who increasingly 
value sustainability.Fortunately, several leading companies have recently  
made meaningful commitments to embed within their 
business model the goal of a renewably powered internet, and taken steps to implement those goals. These 
leaders recognize their rapid energy demand growth as 
a responsibility, but also as an opportunity to disrupt the status quo in the energy sector and ensure their long-
term sustainability. While each company will have different 
opportunities depending on their business model and geographic location, key ingredients for any company 
that wants to build their part of the internet with renewable 
energy must include:
• A long-term commitment to become 100%  
renewably powered. 
• A commitment to transparency on IT performance 
and consumption of resources, including the source 
of electricity, to enable customers, investors, and stakeholders to measure progress toward that goal.
• A strategy for improving energy efficiency while 
increasing the supply of renewable energy, through a mixture of procurement, investment, and corporate 
advocacy to both electricity suppliers and government 
decision-makers.
By making better energy choices and demanding more 
from utility vendors, some internet companies are already 
demonstrating their ability to be critical catalysts in driving utilities and governments toward the development of 
cleaner electricity generation that will ensure a truly green 
online world – and a greener offline world for us all.The Road Map to  
a Green Internet04
© Frank van Biemen / EvoSwitch / Greenpeace

2020   
I. Energy Transparency
It is not possible to properly assess whether a company 
or its products are sustainable without adequate 
transparency on the company’s inputs and outputs. Just 
a few years ago, while there were a number of companies touting how “green” the cloud or their cloud was, very few, 
if any, offered useful details on one of the biggest inputs 
into a data center: electricity. The sector was reluctant to discuss electricity use in any level of detail, as if IT 
companies had adopted a collective code of silence.
Fortunately, we are beginning to see a meaningful shift 
among leading data center operators, particularly within 
the last two years, to acknowledging that revealing energy 
information is no longer equivalent to publishing the secret formula for Coca-Cola. Business and government 
customers increasingly want to know key data points 
on the environmental performance of facilities to which they have “off-shored” their computing capacity, as 
they have goals on carbon reduction and renewable 
energy they expect their cloud provider to help them achieve. Customers need reliable data to evaluate the 
environmental performance and carbon footprint of their IT 
vendors and suppliers. Among the major cloud providers, only Amazon refuses to provide any details on the energy 
performance and environmental impact associated with its 
operations.
Despite the adoption by the Green Grid of new data 
center environmental performance metrics like Carbon Utilization Effectiveness (CUE, to measure carbon intensity) 
and Green Energy Coefficient (GEC, to indicate the 
amount of renewable energy),
36 the number of companies 
reporting under these new metrics remains quite low, 
though there has been some recent improvement. eBay 
provides the best example, including CUE as part of its regularly updated Digital Service Effectiveness dashboard, 
illustrating the performance connection between 
environmental and business metrics.
37 II. Renewable Energy 
Commitment & Siting Policy
Starting with Facebook in 2011, six major cloud 
companies have now made long-term commitments to 
be 100% renewably powered (Apple, Box, Facebook, 
Google, Salesforce and Rackspace). These commitments send a powerful signal to both utilities and colocation 
providers that if they expect to earn the business of these 
companies, they will need to provide a strategy for how they can help them achieve this goal.  
Site selection is a critical decision for determining the near-
term sustainability of the facility, whether a company is building or renting data center space. Location has a large 
impact on what options are available to leverage outside 
air cooling, as well as access to renewable energy sources. These six companies and others have also strengthened 
the weighting of access to renewable electricity in their 
site selection criteria and energy policies, as shown by Facebook and through the energy policies published by 
Google
38   and Apple. 39
“ Utilities are now much more 
interested in collaborating 
with us, and I think we are at the beginning of a period in 
which we could see a very 
rapid change in the energy mix utilities are providing in just a few short years
”Bill Weihl, Facebook Manager of Energy 
Efficiency and Sustainability

21  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetSection 04  
Defining a Green 
Internet Company 
III. Energy Efficiency and 
Mitigation Strategy
Energy efficiency is a critical element in each aspect of 
operating a data center: data center design to reduce 
energy spent on cooling; energy efficient servers; and 
software and load management strategies to maximize utilization of data center compute capacity. Improvements 
in the utilization of data center compute resources has 
been a key factor in curbing the rate of growth across the sector.
Those companies which own and operate their own 
facilities are already aggressively managing energy use, and many have begun to collaborate in sharing and 
developing more efficient facilities with peer operators 
as well as many equipment manufacturers (see “Open Compute Project shows potential of collective action” 
p 30). While some companies still conflate their energy 
efficiency with operating a green data center, often with little in the way of comparative data to substantiate their 
claims, leading companies such as Akamai, Yahoo and 
IBM are setting clear benchmarks for improving the energy efficiency and carbon intensity of their operations, 
and regularly report their progress to stakeholders and 
customers.IV. Clean Energy Strategy
The options for securing a greater supply of renewable energy for data center operators varies significantly 
depending on their business model (cloud, colocation or 
managed hosting) and the options available to them by the state or utility to choose their electricity supply or electricity 
supplier.
Moving away from RECs
With a few notable exceptions, the trend away from simply 
buying renewable energy credits (RECs) as a means of achieving environmental performance goals has continued 
and accelerated among data center companies. By 
themselves, RECs (and their cousins carbon offsets) are largely instruments that preserve the status quo, as they 
do little to increase the amount of renewable energy on 
the grid, or displace dirty sources of electricity.
40  RECs 
also do not provide any meaningful return on investment, 
as companies must continue to “rent” the right to claim 
they are renewably powered each year. Companies that buy them should only do so when they do not have 
more meaningful options for securing renewable energy 
in the locations available to them. If companies do buy RECs, they must at a bare minimum buy RECs that 
demonstrate strong additionality, and are in close proximity 
to the facilities they wish to claim are renewable. They should otherwise look to make more direct investments 
in renewable energy or push utility and government 
policymakers to add more renewable energy on the grid, allowing customers to have the right to directly contract  
for it.
Utility-based Strategies to Procure 
Renewable Energy
Renewable Grid Power 
Options for grid-supplied renewable electricity for a 
data center operator depend upon the location of the 
data center, its proximity to available renewable energy generation capacity, and the investment strategy of the 
respective utility. High availability of low-cost hydroelectric 
or renewable sources of energy has led many companies to locate in the Pacific Northwest in the US (hydropower), Iceland (geothermal), and Sweden (hydro and wind).“ Our goal is to power 
every facility at Apple entirely 
with energy from renewable sources — solar, wind, hydro, 
and geothermal
”Apple Facilities Report  
on Renewable Energy

2222   
Investment in renewable energy 
While renewable energy and energy efficient technologies 
continue to develop and grow, there are still significant 
gaps in private-sector financing needed to deploy them at scale across many markets. IT companies such as Google 
have demonstrated significant interest (over $1 billion 
invested) in making direct clean energy investments.
42  
Google’s investments have created much higher impact 
than when companies purchase RECs; such investment 
can provide much-needed capital for the development and deployment of renewable energy, as opposed to RECs, 
which only “rent” the clean attributes of renewable energy 
generated by others. Investments can be structured so that the investing company becomes an owner of the 
project, or is only providing capital for the tax equity portion 
of the project.
V. Advocacy
In order to ensure that the supply of clean energy can keep pace with a data center’s growing electricity demand 
over its lifetime, companies need to at a minimum make 
a corporate commitment to engage in energy policy decisions in regions where they establish operations. As 
large commercial consumers of electricity, IT companies 
have standing with utilities and policy-makers to influence acceleration in the investment and deployment of the clean 
electricity supply, enabling data centers to operate on 
100% renewable energy. Companies can support:
• Adoption of renewable energy investment incentives, 
including those specific to the IT sector for energy 
efficiency and renewable energy deployment. 
• Deployment of cost-effective, regionally appropriate sources of renewable power generation for data centers, and the retirement of coal-fired generation.
• Increased distributed generation to drive greater deployment of renewable energy, which increases grid stability and enables the retirement of older, dirtier 
centralized generation. Facebook and Microsoft recently 
advocated for this in Iowa.
43 
• Investment in the development of grid infrastructure and 
energy storage technology to enable higher utilization of 
variable renewable energy sources, such as wind and solar.
• Greater availability of options for renewable energy procurement, especially in states with monopoly utilities that do not allow third-party sales of electricity.
 Renewable Energy Tariff Programs 
A number of utilities have recently established renewable 
energy tariffs, or green tariffs, as a means of offering a renewable class of electricity service to interested 
customers, often at the behest of major data center 
operators.
41 Utilities in regulated markets in the US, such 
as North Carolina and Virginia, which otherwise offer very 
low percentages of renewable energy in their generation 
mix, have been among those to offer renewable energy tariffs.
Direct Access 
Direct Access programs allow the customer to purchase electricity from a different generator than the utility, 
potentially creating stronger options for securing a 
renewable electricity supply. Direct access is not available in every jurisdiction, and is often made difficult by utilities 
aiming to discourage participation.
Non-Utility Strategies to  
Procure Renewable Energy
On-Site Generation 
A growing number of data center operators have installed 
renewable or alternative generation technology (primarily 
fuel cells) on site to generate power for their facilities.  The declining cost of solar technology, along with tax incentives 
available in many jurisdictions, has made solar an 
increasingly attractive option for some facilities. However, it may be difficult technically or economically for many data 
centers to power a significant portion of their electricity 
needs with on-site renewable energy, unless there is nearby land available, as Apple had in North Carolina. 
In jurisdictions that allow third-party sales of electricity, 
it may be possible for data center operators to allow the renewable technology to be owned and operated by third 
parties.  
Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) 
An increasing number of cloud companies, such as 
Google and Microsoft, have begun to take charge of their electricity supply chain by signing long-term contracts to 
buy renewable electricity from a specific source through 
a utility or renewable energy developer via a power purchase agreement (PPA), which helps to increase the supply of renewable electricity onto the grid, and provides 
the purchaser an effective buffer against rising or volatile 
electricity prices.   “ The wonderful thing about 
power purchase agreements 
for clean energy is that they’re at a fixed price, unlike brown 
power costs which are going 
up
”Gary Demasi, Google Director  
of Global Infrastructure.

23  
©  Greenpeace

03
2424    How Clean is Your Cloud? 2405© Frank van Biemen / EvoSwitch / Greenpeace

Greenpeace  
USA25  
Clicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetSection 05  
Your Online  
World: Green  
IRL, or #dirty? 
From social media to music, streaming video, 
email and commerce, we are increasingly 
moving much of our lives online. That means a 
lot of new data to store. But where is that data being stored, which companies are storing it, and what kind of energy are they using? 
Unlike internet giants like Google and Facebook, most 
online companies do not, in fact, own their own data 
centers. Most internet sites, video streaming services, 
and cloud based storage services operate in data centers 
managed by other companies, paying rent to digital 
landlords that rent data center space or computing and storage capacity. Many companies have turned to Amazon 
Web Services to host their data, a problematic trend as 
long as Amazon continues to power its data centers with dirty forms of energy. 
In the graphic on the next page, we offer a sampling to 
show where some of the internet’s most popular sites and 
services are being hosted – and the relative greenness 
of the energy that those data centers are using. Energy 
demand symbols are not drawn to scale and are meant to offer a relative indication. For more information on the 
energy footprints of each hosting company, see “Company 
Scores Explained” starting on page 44. 
44Your Online World: 
Green IRL, or #dirty?05
© Frank van Biemen / EvoSwitch / Greenpeace


Amazon
Web
Services
Digital
RealtyDupont
Fabros Ebay
EquinixGoogle
FacebookTwitterMAIL
Yahoo
IBMTelecityMicrosoft
Apple
2626   
Your Online World: 
Green IRL, or #dirty?

Amazon
Web
Services
Digital
RealtyDupont
Fabros Ebay
EquinixGoogle
FacebookTwitterMAIL
Yahoo
IBMTelecityMicrosoft
Apple
  27  

03
2828 06

Greenpeace  
USA29  
Clicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetSection 06  
Green Intenet  
Leaders and  
Best Practices 
II. Energy Efficiency & Mitigation
Greenhouse Gas Mitigation:  
eBay Unplugs From a Dirty Grid
The electricity grid surrounding eBay’s Topaz data center 
in Utah is one of the dirtiest in the United States, with over 60% of the electricity still coming from coal-fired 
generation.
47  To address its outsized carbon footprint for 
Topaz, eBay has chosen to effectively “unplug” its facility from the local grid as its primary power source, relying 
instead upon on-site fuel cells powered by natural gas for 75% of its electricity needs, and using the grid only as 
backup power in case of fuel cell failure.
48  In addition, eBay 
is currently financing a combined heat and power project at a nearby facility, which it uses to offset the carbon 
emissions produced by the natural gas powered fuel cells. While fuel cells powered by natural gas are not renewable, 
eBay’s innovative approach highlights the potential to use 
distributed generation to power the cloud in certain areas, rather than driving further utility investment in centralized 
fossil fuel generation. 
Honorable Mention: IBM, for repeated strong performance 
on emissions reduction goals, and its patent for shifting 
cloud computing demands on a distributed network to 
meet environmental impact criteria.
49I. Energy Transparency
Energy Performance Transparency:  Facebook opens its books 
Facebook dramatically improved its energy transparency 
just a few months after it became a publicly traded company in 2012, and now provides one of the most 
accessible snapshots of its energy footprint in the sector. 
Facebook now annually publishes its energy and carbon footprint across its entire operations, and has also added 
facility-specific performance dashboards
45  to provide 
nearly real-time reporting of the Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE) and Water Usage Effectiveness (WUE) of its data 
centers. Facebook recently open-sourced the code for those dashboards.
46 While many companies remain 
reluctant to provide facility-level information, Facebook 
sets a high bar for others to meet by allowing its users to 
follow the platform’s progress toward becoming 100% renewably powered. 06 Green Internet Leaders  
and Best Practices
©  Greenpeace

3030   
Energy Efficiency:  
Open Compute Project  
shows potential of collective  
action (Multiple Companies) 
Launched initially by Facebook in 2011, the Open 
Compute Project (OCP) seeks to replicate the success 
of the open-source software model in data center and server design.
50 OCP aims to spur improvements in energy 
efficiency across the sector, which is critical to building an 
internet that can be renewably powered. With participating 
companies sharing their hardware designs, OCP could 
disrupt the status quo among server manufacturers, a key 
sector vendor, allowing best practices to drive the market more quickly. While OCP’s impacts are still emerging, the 
project shows the potential of collective action in tackling 
the sector’s energy footprint.  
OCP provides one model for how internet companies 
could approach another key vendor, electric utilities, to 
accelerate the deployment of renewable energy. Such a collective approach could have a truly disruptive effect 
on the status quo in the utility sector, which is stubbornly 
clinging to outdated models of centralized, polluting power plants. That type of effort would ultimately help both the 
internet and utility sectors accelerate their transition to 
sustainable business models based on renewable energy. III. Siting Policy & Commitment to 
Renewable Energy
Commitment to Renewable Energy: Rackspace, 
Salesforce, and Box Show That Renters Can Buy 
Renewable Too
Three rapidly growing cloud companies, Rackspace, 
Salesforce and Box, all adopted 100% renewable energy 
policies in 2013.51,52,53 These commitments show that the 
desire and motivation to build a green internet is not limited 
to big public brands or those that own and operate their 
own data centers. While internet companies enjoy a more limited set of options to meaningfully procure renewable 
energy when they do not own their facilities, commitments 
by such prominent and fast-growing cloud brands create important pressure on colocation companies to offer their 
best customers real options for green hosting.  
The launch of companies such as GreenQloud and Green 
Mountain, data center operators in Iceland and Norway 
respectively, are evidence of the rising demand for cleaner 
options in the colocation sector. Rackspace’s sustainability director described why they set the ambitious 100 % 
renewable goal at a Greenpeace forum in November, 
saying: “Our customers simply expect green energy.”
Renewable Energy Commitment & Siting Policy: 
Facebook harnesses Iowa’s wind
Facebook adopted a strong preference for renewable 
energy supply in its data center siting policy in 2011 to 
support its long-term commitment to make the platform 
100% powered by renewable energy. The company showed the power of that siting policy in April, 2013, 
when it announced plans to build its fourth data center in 
Iowa, choosing the state over neighboring Nebraska in part because Iowa had better policies and a more willing 
utility to help Facebook meet its renewable goals. Just two Google increases 
transparency on its data center energy use
Google releases information 
on exactly how much energy it takes to provide searches, 
email, youtube videos and 
all other Google services, as well as its energy mix.Facebook to renewable energy siting policy for data centers
Facebook commits to a 
siting policy with a stated preference to locate data 
centers in areas with 
renewable energy available, bringing to a close the 20-month Greenpeace Unfriend Coal campaign.Apple commits to  100 % renewable  energy for iCloud
Apple announces a doubling 
of its solar installation at its North Carolina data center, 
along with a commitment 
that all of its data centers will be powered by 100 % renewable energy.Sept 2011 Timeline: 
Creating  
the Green InternetDec 2011 May 2012


31  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetSection 05  
Green Intenet  
Leaders and  
Best Practices 
In North Carolina, Apple’s large-scale solar investment, 
made economically feasible in part by its ability to leverage 
tax incentives against other parts of its business, helped 
propel North Carolina to third place in 2013 among US states in solar growth.
58 Apple’s solar installations, in 
combination with pressure for better energy options that 
it applied along with data center neighbors Facebook and 
Google, led Duke Energy to offer a new tier of renewable electricity service. Duke’s new Green Source Rider 
program is geared to prevent losing additional business to 
increased solar investments from customers like Apple.
59 
In Nevada, Apple’s solar installation broke new ground for 
renewable energy from the local utility, NV Energy, which 
agreed to work in partnership with Apple to co-develop a solar project and adopt a Green Energy rate tariff. That tariff 
opened the door for other companies to explore renewable 
energy options, showing the catalytic power that data center operators can have when they push for more 
renewable energy. 
Google Greens the Grid with Renewable Purchases 
at Unprecedented Scale
Google has continued to lead the charge among major 
IT brands by signing five long-term power purchase 
agreements (PPAs) for renewable energy,
60 helping to 
green the grid for its data centers in Iowa,61 Oklahoma,62  
and Finland63 to date. Google has also worked to expand 
its options for green electricity in Oklahoma to include buying directly from the utility, resulting in the utility making 
its first ever renewable energy investment.
64 In addition to 
greening its data centers, Google has invested over $1 
billion in 15 renewable energy projects, such as the world’s 
largest solar plant in Southern California, collectively good for 2 GW of clean power.
65weeks after Facebook’s announcement, MidAmerican Energy, the local utility in Iowa, announced plans to invest 
$1.9 billion to increase its wind generation by 1,050MW. 
That plan simultaneously marked the largest investment in Iowa’s history
54 and the world’s largest order of wind 
turbines.55
Facebook has since announced it has an agreement56 
with MidAmerican to purchase energy from a new wind 
project nearby its data center to allow it to fully power the 
facility with renewable energy, but its desire for renewable energy clearly had a much larger catalytic role in Iowa – and 
potentially in Nebraska as well. Facebook’s decision to 
spurn Nebraska has spurred debate in that state legislature to strengthen policies to support renewable energy 
investment, so that Nebraska can be more competitive for 
future data center business.
57
IV. Renewable Energy  
Deployment & Advocacy 
A) Renewable Energy Deployment
Apple applies innovation to on-site solar in Nevada 
and North Carolina
Apple has done the most of any data center operator to 
make its part of the internet green through the on-site 
installation of renewable energy, particularly solar power. 
For both its Maiden, North Carolina and Reno, Nevada data centers, Apple is deploying large solar farms on site  
or at nearby locations to provide a significant amount of 
new renewable energy to meet its data center electricity needs and fulfill its goal to be 100% renewably powered 
and coal-free.  eBay quits the coal grid 
for its Utah data center
eBay installs fuel cells 
for its Utah data center, setting them up in a way that allows the facility to 
run independently from 
the electricity grid, which is heavily powered by coal there. Facebook publishes its energy and carbon footprint data for first 
time
Facebook publishes 
its 2011 energy and 
carbon footprint data and 
announced a 2015 goal of powering 25% of the platform with renewable energy.  Rackspace commits to 100 % renewable energy Rackspace commits to a 
goal of powering its data 
centers with 100 % clean energy. Salesforce commits to 100 % renewable energy Salesforce becomes the 
fifth company to commit to 
powering its cloud with 100 % clean energy. 
June 2012 Aug 2012 Feb 2013 March 2013


3232   
In purchasing and investing in renewable energy at scale, 
Google is also developing options that can be seized 
by others. Google’s earlier PPA in Iowa contributed to 
MidAmerican’s decision to dramatically expand its wind generation capacity and enter into an agreement to provide 
Facebook wind energy directly.
B. Advocacy
Apple, Google, Facebook try to make NC into a  
Clean Data Triangle 
North Carolina has been a hot spot for data center 
expansion (see “Where the Cloud Touches the Ground”, 
p 40), featuring major facilities operated by three of the 
largest internet brands, Apple, Facebook and Google. The dirty energy mix offered by utility Duke Energy to these 
large electricity customers prompted a North Carolina 
newspaper in 2011 to ask whether the companies were creating a “Dirty Data Triangle.”
66Since then, all three of the companies have developed long-term commitments to be 100% renewably powered. 
The companies successfully teamed up with others to 
compel Duke Energy, the nation’s largest utility and one of its biggest emitters of global warming pollution, to offer 
renewable energy to its major customers through a special 
“Green Source Rider.”
67 While not perfect, the program 
represents an important shift in North Carolina, particularly 
coming from a utility that has sold only a one-size-fits-all 
dirty energy offering for decades. Google, Facebook and Apple’s leadership shows how innovative companies can 
disrupt the status quo, and how the online world can drive 
green behavior in the offline world, even wrestling changes 
from recalcitrant utilities, when IT leaders work together.Apple report reveals  
its path to 100% renewable energy
Apple releases an 
environmental report disclosing how it would 
reach 100 % renewable 
energy for its data centers allowing customers to have faith that Apple is meeting its ambitions with real action. Apple, Facebook, Google Team Up to Push Nation’s Largest Utility 
to Renewable Energy 
Offering
Apple, Facebook and 
Google team up to compel 
their electric utility in North Carolina, Duke Energy, to offer a new breakthrough renewable energy program. Apple chooses solar for Nevada data center
Apple announces it will work 
with the local utility to power its data center near Reno, NV with 100 % solar and 
geothermal power. Microsoft makes its first 
large-scale purchase of renewable energy to 
power a data center
Microsoft purchases wind 
energy in Texas to power its 
data center there, marking 
its first ever large-scale purchase of renewable energy. 
March 2013 April 2013 June 2013 Nov 2013


33  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green Internet
Section 05  
Green Intenet  
Leaders and  
Best Practices 
A Stain on IT clean energy efforts: ALEC 
Some of the same companies using innovative 
strategies to power the internet with renewable 
energy are undermining those very efforts via their 
political support for organizations which are actively committed to sabotaging the clean energy revolution 
and efforts to address climate change. 
The most troubling of these political affiliations 
is the membership by many IT companies in the 
American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC), a 
group that allows member corporations to pay to ghostwrite model legislation for mostly right-wing 
state legislators around the country. ALEC members 
evaluated in this report include:
68,69,70 
• Google
• Facebook• Microsoft
• Yahoo!
• eBay
• Verizon TerremarkALEC is actively collaborating with many of the 
nation’s worst polluters to kill clean energy and climate 
policies around the country. In 2013, ALEC pushed 
model legislation to repeal renewable energy portfolio standards in over a dozen states, failing across the 
board.
71 
The group’s 2014 agenda includes continued assaults on renewable energy laws, plus a new effort to 
attack net metering policies,
72 which encourage the 
growth of decentralized solar energy by allowing solar 
customers to be fairly compensated for extra electricity 
they sell back to the grid. ALEC is also targeting the Environmental Protection Agency’s effort to limit global 
warming pollution from coal-fired power plants.
73
In addition to their membership in ALEC, Google and 
Facebook also attracted criticism in 2013 for offering 
political contributions to the Competitive Enterprise 
Institute, a conservative think tank funded by fossil fuel interests with a history of denying the reality of climate 
change.
74Box becomes sixth 
company to commit to 100 % renewable energy
Box becomes the sixth 
and latest company to join the growing club of global 
technology firms who have 
committed to powering their cloud computing operations with 100 % renewable energy. Apple begins powering manufacturing with renewable energy too
Apple announces it will start 
building high-tech glass for its products in Arizona 
at a facility that will be 100 
% powered by solar and geothermal energy.Facebook powers new Iowa data center with 100 % wind energy
Facebook announces that it 
will use 100% wind energy to power its data center in 
Iowa. 
Nov 2013 Nov 2013 Nov 2013 ?


03
3434  07

Greenpeace  
USA35  
Clicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetSection 07  
Where the  
Cloud Touches  
the Ground
Data center operators have followed each 
other to different regions, forming data center 
hubs that create concentrated pockets of high 
electricity demand. Those data center hot spots push utilities to build new electricity generation that can harm both the local environment and 
the broader climate if fueled by gas or coal-
fired power plants. The clusters could also drive utilities to invest in clean energy if the data center operators demand it. Three regions in the 
US which feature explosive data center growth 
are North Carolina, the Pacific Northwest, and Virginia.07 Where the Cloud 
Touches the Ground
© Frank van Biemen / EvoSwitch / Greenpeace

3636    How Clean is Your Cloud? 
RE GOAL - NA
Japan
RE GOAL 14%
NetherlandsRE GOAL - NA
RE GOAL 20%
Nordic
RE GOAL - 38.6%
Germany
RE GOAL 40%
Ireland
RE GOAL 32%
UK
RE GOAL -  NA
Singapore
Nuclear Power 
Natural Gas
Hydro
Coal
Other Fossil Fuels
Renewable Energy
Data Center Growth: 3%
Data Center Growth: 3%Data Center Growth: 9%
Data Center Growth: 14%
Data Center Growth: 6%Data Center Growth: 10%
Hong Kong
RE GOAL - 35 GW SOLAR
China
Data Center Growth: 9%
RE GOAL - NA
Brazil
Data Center Growth: 11%Data Centers  
Go Global
Key countries’ data center investments,  
current grid mixes and expected renewable  energy supplies by 2020.
75

  37  
Greenpeace  
USAHow Clean is Your 
Cloud?  Section 05  
Location Matters
RE GOAL - NA
Japan
RE GOAL 14%
NetherlandsRE GOAL - NA
RE GOAL 20%
Nordic
RE GOAL - 38.6%
Germany
RE GOAL 40%
Ireland
RE GOAL 32%
UK
RE GOAL -  NA
Singapore
Nuclear Power 
Natural Gas
Hydro
Coal
Other Fossil Fuels
Renewable Energy
Data Center Growth: 3%
Data Center Growth: 3%Data Center Growth: 9%
Data Center Growth: 14%
Data Center Growth: 6%Data Center Growth: 10%
Hong Kong
RE GOAL - 35 GW SOLAR
China
Data Center Growth: 9%
RE GOAL - NA
Brazil
Data Center Growth: 11%

RE GOAL 33 % by 2020
San Jose
Utilities: 
Silicon Valley Power
RE GOAL15% by 2025
Virginia
Utilities:
Dominion Power
RE GOAL - NA
Atlanta
Utilities: 
Georgia Power
RE GOAL 25% by 2025
Chicago
Utilities:ComEd
RE GOAL - NA
Iowa
Utilities: 
MidAmerican
RE GOAL - NA
Utah/Wyoming
Utilities: 
Rocky Mountain 
Power
RE GOAL 15% by 2025 
Phoenix
Utilities: 
Arizona Public 
Service
RE GOAL 22.5% by 2021
New Jersey
Utilities: 
PSEG
Nuclear Power 
Natural Gas
Hydro
Coal
Other Fossil Fuels
Renewable Energy
RE GOAL Add 5880 MW by 2015
Dallas
Utilities: 
ERCOT
RE GOAL 12% by 2021
N Carolina
Utilities:
Duke Energy
RE GOAL 25 % (OR, 2025); 15 % (WA)
Paciﬁc NW
Utilities: Umatilla Electric, 
Grant County PUD, 
North Wasco PUD
RE GOAL 25 % (2025)
Central Oregon
Utilities: 
Paciﬁc Power
Data Centers in the US
The US has more data centers than any other country. Below, some 
of the regions that have been data center hot spots, their energy mixes, and projected growth of renewable energy.
76 

RE GOAL 33 % by 2020
San Jose
Utilities: 
Silicon Valley Power
RE GOAL15% by 2025
Virginia
Utilities:
Dominion Power
RE GOAL - NA
Atlanta
Utilities: 
Georgia Power
RE GOAL 25% by 2025
Chicago
Utilities:ComEd
RE GOAL - NA
Iowa
Utilities: 
MidAmerican
RE GOAL - NA
Utah/Wyoming
Utilities: 
Rocky Mountain 
Power
RE GOAL 15% by 2025 
Phoenix
Utilities: 
Arizona Public 
Service
RE GOAL 22.5% by 2021
New Jersey
Utilities: 
PSEG
Nuclear Power 
Natural Gas
Hydro
Coal
Other Fossil Fuels
Renewable Energy
RE GOAL Add 5880 MW by 2015
Dallas
Utilities: 
ERCOT
RE GOAL 12% by 2021
N Carolina
Utilities:
Duke Energy
RE GOAL 25 % (OR, 2025); 15 % (WA)
Paciﬁc NW
Utilities: Umatilla Electric, 
Grant County PUD, 
North Wasco PUD
RE GOAL 25 % (2025)
Central Oregon
Utilities: 
Paciﬁc Power


4040   
Energy 
Demand in MW
2010
2011 2012500
0
Energy Demand in MW
(Not to 
scale)
2012 2013 20302500
500
0North Carolina
North Carolina has become a hot spot for data centers in 
recent years, led by the high-profile entrances of Google, 
Facebook and Apple into the state. Others have joined 
them, including Walt Disney, AT&T, Wipro, Bed, Bath & Beyond and others.
77 
As a result, data center electricity demand nearly tripled in 
North Carolina from 2010 to 2012, according to data filed 
by the local utility there, Duke Energy. Since Duke enjoys a virtual monopoly on electricity sales in the state, its load 
has grown considerably due to this data center investment 
– and that load is powered by one of the dirtiest energy mixes in the country. Duke generated 57 % of its electricity 
in 2013 from nuclear power plants, 38% from coal, and 4 
% from gas.
78 A mere 0.1 % of their electricity came from 
renewable sources like wind and solar power.79 Duke has 
shown little ambition to get cleaner – its resource planning 
documents show that in 2028, it still intends to generate 
only 3 % of its energy from renewable sources.80Internet companies’ growth in North Carolina gives them a great deal of leverage over Duke – an official from the 
utility once said that a data center “may be the most ideal 
customer we could have.” 
81 
Pacific Northwest
Oregon and Washington’s large data centers demanded 400 MW of electricity in 2012 and grew by almost 40 %  
to 550 MW in 2013. A report from the Northwest Power 
and Conservation Council estimated that data center demand for the region could get “potentially as large as the 
past aluminum industry in the region with loads in excess 
~2500 MWa”.
82 
Amazon’s data centers in Boardman, OR have grown so 
quickly that it appears to have almost single-handedly 
pushed its electricity provider, the Umatilla Electric Cooperative, to a large enough size that it now is bound 
by a state law to generate more renewable energy.
83 
Umatilla sought to avoid having to comply with the state’s renewable energy requirement, financing a statewide ballot 
initiative to redefine renewable energy to include 60-year-old dams.
84 Amazon has been content to let Umatilla do 
just that, exerting none of its leverage as one of Umatilla’s 
biggest customers to pressure the utility to call off its 
assault on the law. In early 2014, Umatilla successfully bullied its way into attaining a legislative loophole that 
would allow it to comply with the law without investing in 
wind and solar energy.
85Amazon’s course of inaction stands in stark contrast to Apple, Google, Facebook and Rackspace, which operate 
or are building data centers in Oregon, and are demanding 
that their utilities provide more, not less, renewable energy. In response, some utilities are asking the state for the ability 
to provide more renewable energy to their data center 
customers.
86Data Centers Driving Utility Growth: NC
Data Centers Driving Utility Growth: 
Pacific Northwest

41  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetSection 07  
Where the  
Cloud Touches  
the Ground
Energy 
Demand 
in MW
2010 2011 2012 2013 20175001000
0Virginia
Northern Virginia contains one of the most concentrated 
epicenters of data centers in the world – it is a key location 
in the internet’s infrastructure. Amazon operates multiple 
data centers in the region, but is far from the only company there. Much of the internet’s traffic is routed through this 
area, and large amounts of federal government data are 
stored in the region’s data centers as well. 
Dominion, the utility in Virginia, services these data centers 
with electricity. Its web site shows that data centers 
demanded over 500 MW of electricity in 2012, a quantity it expects to double by 2017. Unfortunately, Dominion’s 
generation mix is comprised of almost entirely dirty 
energy sources.
87 Burning coal generates 38 % of the 
state’s power; nuclear power plants generate 42 %; gas 
generates 17 %. Renewable energy generates only 2 % 
of the company’s power.88 Dominion’s long-term plan that 
it submitted to regulators shows that it does not intended 
on making any significant increase in its investment in 
renewable energy over the next 15 years.89Data Centers Driving Utility Growth: Virginia

034242 Clean energy index methodology (Column 2)
Greenpeace has established the Clean Energy Index as a 
response to the lack of useful metrics and publicly available 
data to evaluate and compare the energy footprints of major cloud providers and their respective data centers.
This lack of data is not due to the fact that data does 
not exist. However, most companies remain unwilling to provide even the most basic information about both 
the amount and source of their growing electricity 
consumption. Despite a proliferation of metrics created by the industry (such as PUE) that attempt to quantify how 
green a data center is as measured by energy efficiency, 
very few companies report under newer metrics (such as 
Green Energy Coefficient, GEC) that could shed any light 
on the basic question: how much dirty energy is being used, and which companies are choosing clean energy to 
power the cloud?
The Clean Energy Index attempts to provide a basic 
answer to this question, based on what can be gleaned 
from the limited information available, and focusing on 
recent investments of select brands and the current clean energy supply associated with each investment.
Starting with an initial set of some of the largest cloud 
providers, Greenpeace has attempted to identify two main inputs from a representative sample of their most recent 
(five years or less) infrastructure investments. 
Those inputs are:
(1) Estimated size of electricity demand of each facility (in 
megawatts);
(2) Amount of renewable electricity being used to power it 
(by percentage).This information is then used to approximate, initially on a 
facility level, the number of megawatts of clean energy the 
facility will consume. Having calculated a facility-level Clean 
Energy Index for a representative sample of data centers, Greenpeace derives a company average of clean energy 
percentage across its facilities.
In compiling the information included in this report, 
Greenpeace contacted all companies featured here and 
asked for information regarding their data center facilities, and for information on their infrastructure siting and mitigation efforts. Greenpeace made estimates of data 
center power demand available to companies for comment 
in advance of publication, and issues raised by the companies are highlighted in footnotes on the scorecard.The above inputs are from the following sources:
• Submissions by companies directly to Greenpeace
• Public submissions by companies to reporting entities or 
stakeholder publications
• As defined by company when announcing investments• As reported by the media (in stories on the investments or 
construction of facilities, etc.)
• Electricity demand is derived by taking the announced 
size of investment and deriving total number of MW, using 
industry average cost per IT load ($15million US dollars per MW) multiplied by publicly available PUE for facility or, 
if not available, 1.5 for new facilities.
• If not reported by the company, the generation mix of the 
electricity is taken from one of the following sources, as available, in declining order of preference:
• The most recent published generation mix of the local 
utility
• In the U.S., the 2010 eGrid State level generation mix 
(9th Edition) as reported by US EPA, or if not applicable, reported subregional eGrid generation mix
• Outside the US, the European Commission and 
International Energy Agency 2009 Statistics
Important Note: This analysis does not attempt to 
represent itself as a comprehensive snapshot of how much 
clean energy is being consumed on a company-wide level. 
Only the companies can properly provide that.
Greenpeace would welcome the opportunity to incorporate 
more detailed data to inform our analysis, as that would 
likely provide a more complete and refined picture of cloud 
providers’ energy use. As companies provide better data, Greenpeace will incorporate this into our evaluation and 
encourage other companies to follow.
For those companies that have adopted 100% renewable 
energy targets and also provide facility-level energy details, 
Greenpeace uses current consumption and renewable procurement data provided by the company instead of 
ultimate facility capacity.Appendix 1
Methodology

43   43  Clicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetGreenpeace  
USAAppendix 1
Coal and nuclear intensity (Column 3)
A company’s coal intensity is a simple calculation of the 
approximate total percentage of coal-generated electricity 
powering the company’s data centers. A company’s nuclear and gas intensities are similar: simple calculations 
of the approximate total percentages of nuclear- and gas-
generated electricity powering the company’s data center. This is calculated initially on a facility level, based on the 
estimated maximum power demand of the facility and 
the percentage of coal and nuclear-generated electricity supplied by the contracting utility or the local grid.
The company-level intensity of coal, nuclear and gas 
energy is rendered by adding the total MW of estimated 
maximum power from coal, nuclear and gas generation 
across the sample data center fleet, divided by the total estimated MW maximum power demand of the same 
sample data centers.
Energy transparency methodology (Column 4)
Companies are evaluated on the scope and level of detail 
made publicly available on energy consumption of IT 
infrastructure that allow stakeholders and customers to evaluate the energy-related environmental performance 
and impact at corporate, product, and facility levels. 
Public information includes information from a company’s website, annual reports, and submissions to regulatory 
agencies or information clearinghouses such as the 
Carbon Disclosure Project.
• For corporate and facility-level reporting, key elements 
of information include: location and size of facilities; size of 
electricity demand; generation mix and associated carbon content (including power purchase agreements specific 
to the facility); and carbon intensity of data delivery and 
storage. Reporting should include both owned and rented facilities.
• For customer level reporting, companies should provide 
regular energy and carbon footprint information (pre-offset) associated with the customers’ consumption, reported in a 
manner consistent with established reporting protocols.
Infrastructure siting methodology (Column 5)
CCompanies are assessed on the strength of their 
commitment to powering their data centers with renewable energy, including infrastructure siting criteria and investment decisions that enable the development 
of the company’s IT infrastructure to maximize the use of 
clean sources of energy, and avoid an increase in demand for coal or nuclear power to meet the growing demand for 
electricity from their operations. High scoring companies 
demonstrate:• Adoption of a 100% renewable energy commitment
• A clean energy siting policy to prioritize IT infrastructure 
investments or procurements that rely primarily 
upon renewable energy as a source of electricity and discriminate against coal and nuclear power to meet 
infrastructure electricity demand.
• Consistent patterns of major infrastructure investment 
decisions that increase or shift electricity demand to 
renewable sources of electricity.
•Commi tment to eliminate coal, nuclear and gas energy 
from powering company infrastructure.
Energy efficiency and GHG mitigation strategy 
methodology (Column 6)
CCompanies are evaluated on the strength of their strategies and measurable progress to mitigate the demand for dirty energy generated by their IT 
infrastructure. The effectiveness and strength of a 
company’s mitigation strategy is measured along the following guidelines:
• Companies with absolute emission reduction goals 
will be rated higher than those companies that adopt an 
intensity-based target.
• Companies participating in open-source sharing of 
energy efficient design and equipment specification to 
enable further learning & improvement within sector.
 
Renewable energy investment and political 
advocacy methodology (Column 7)
Companies are evaluated on the strength of their 
measurable progress and commitment to renewable 
energy investments and actions taken to advocate for ambitious policies at all levels of government that 
encourage wide scale renewable energy generation and 
use. High scoring companies also demonstrate:
• Efforts to meet electricity demand with the direct 
installation of renewable energy, and the reduction of 
emissions through higher efficiency, which will receive the highest marks.
• Investments in clean energy supply and local energy efficiency mechanisms, which will be rated higher than 
the purchase of offsets and renewable energy credits to 
reach established environmental goals.
• Proof of long-term commitment to renewable energy through local renewable energy developers.

4444   
Appendix 2
Company scores 
explained
Akamai is one the largest global content distribution 
networks (CDN), helping the bigger brand names in 
this report and other online content providers deliver 
their content faster to users around the world. Akamai delivers between 15% and 30% of internet traffic through 
its network.
90 As a CDN, Akamai’s network is highly 
distributed, with over 127,000 servers spread across 1,100 data centers in 81 countries. Akamai’s highly 
distributed business model and relationships across the internet ecosystem put it in a unique position to leverage 
influence across its vendor network, particularly as a 
growing number of its content customers have explicit goals related to energy efficiency and renewable energy.  
Transparency: A
Akamai has been an early leader among internet 
companies in providing details on the carbon intensity of 
its network data. Akamai continues to provide detailed submissions through the Carbon Disclosure Project, and 
is now reporting its network’s use of renewable energy 
by region of operation. Akamai will also provide to its customers a monthly carbon footprint associated with content delivery through the Akamai network servers. 
Akamai provides the results of its annual sustainability 
survey back to its vendor network, providing a benchmark to assist data center operators to understand how well 
they are performing in relationship both to their customers’ 
expectations, and to the competition.
91 By providing 
vendors with this information, Akamai is enabling better 
awareness of energy and carbon management associated 
with data consumption, which will hopefully trigger additional reporting and competition for environmental 
performance.  Renewable Energy Commitment & Siting Policy: B
Akamai’s distributed business model makes it more 
challenging to choose only those data centers which 
have access to renewable energy. Though its siting options are different, Akamai has been leveraging its 
influence with data center operators through an annual 
sustainability survey, and providing anonymous results to each vendor to inform them on how they compare with operators. Most significantly, Akamai’s recent 
decision to shift its network labs, which it does control 
directly, to a location with a mostly hydro-electric 
powered grid, reflected the company’s commitment to 
reduce the carbon intensity of its operations.
Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: B
Akamai has been aggressively improving its efficiency, 
with annual targets to reduce greenhouse gas intensity 
30% each year as it rapidly grows with the online world; the company has been achieving those goals. In 
addition to educating its colocation providers on best-
practice data center operations, Akamai has also been 
seeking to gradually convert its flat-rate power contracts 
to metered ones to provide a financial incentive to implement off-peak efficiency measures.
92
Renewable Enery Deployment & Advocacy: C
Akamai’s decision to shift its Network Labs to a location 
with renewable electricity available from the grid was an 
important first step toward powering Akamai’s network with renewable energy. Due to its distributed business 
model, Akamai has not made significant investments in 
direct or grid purchases of renewable energy, but has begun to become more demanding of its colocation 
providers for information on clean and low-carbon 
energy options. Akamai should also be more proactive at taking the political advocacy necessary to shift toward 
cleaner energy opportunities for the industry, as recently 
demonstrated by its joining the climate declaration sent to US decision makers.
93

45  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetAppendix 2
Amazon Web Services (AWS), owned by Amazon.com, 
has grown since its launch in 2006 into one of the largest 
digital ecosystems of the online world. With an impressive 
array of services and the ability to quickly scale based on demand, AWS now serves as the infrastructural 
cornerstone of many of the most well-known online 
brands, including Netflix, Pinterest, Spotify, and Vine. Unfortunately, despite its dominant position and well-
established business model, AWS has dropped further 
and further behind its competitors in building an internet that runs on renewable sources of energy, and is the least 
transparent of any company we evaluated.  
Transparency: F
Despite a significant shift toward greater energy 
transparency across the sector in the past two years, AWS still fails to make public even the most basic details on its 
energy footprint or its source of electricity, beyond claiming 
that its Oregon data centers are “carbon free.”
94 Even 
for AWS customers, detailed information on the carbon 
footprint or energy mix of AWS data centers is not easily 
obtained.
Renewable Energy Commitment & Siting Policy: F
Despite the recent adoption of 100% renewable 
energy commitments by competitors Rackspace, Google, and Apple, AWS continues to rapidly expand 
its global infrastructure without any apparent regard to 
environmental impact or access to renewable energy. The AWS US-East availability zone in Northern Virginia 
remains by far the largest, now with 10 data centers and 
60% of EC2 servers
95; it is powered by only 2% renewable 
energy.96  Ireland comes in a very distant second.97 The 
AWS US West (Oregon) region is located in an area that is 
significantly served by hydroelectric power, but it is unclear 
what generation mix AWS receives from the utility there, the Umatilla Electric Cooperative.Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: D
AWS certainly has advantages over many in the cloud 
sector given its raw scale, and it is clearly operating its 
data centers at a high state of efficiency. AWS professes to have much higher utilization rates, and offers 
products designed to increase utilization by offering 
below-market cost server capacity at off-peak hours.
98 
However, AWS’ near complete lack of transparency 
on its utilization or energy performance, and its lack of 
energy efficiency targets, means that customers cannot 
verify its high efficiency or compare it to other vendors, 
and peers cannot learn from any of its best practices.
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: F
AWS continues to fall further behind other major data 
center companies in procurement and investment in 
renewable energy. While AWS has been willing to invest in the capacity to build its own 50-100 MW electricity 
substations in order to maintain the grid’s ability to meet 
the scale of its energy demand, it has failed to register a single investment or purchase of renewable energy.
99  
In sharp contrast to competitors Google, Apple, Rackspace and Microsoft, which are working with their electric utilities to increase the supply of renewable 
electricity, AWS’ Oregon utility (Umatilla Electric) is 
working to gut the state renewable energy law in order to avoid having to meet the higher renewable targets it 
now faces as result of AWS’ rapid growth in electricity 
demand.  (See Where the Cloud Touches the Ground,  p 40)
100

4646   Apple’s aggressive pursuit of its commitment to power 
the iCloud with 100 % renewable energy has given the 
company the inside track among the IT sector’s leaders 
in building a green Internet. Apple has made good on its pledge by building the largest privately owned solar farms 
at its North Carolina data center, working with its utility in 
Nevada to power its upcoming data center there with solar and geothermal energy, and purchasing wind energy for 
its Oregon and California data centers. Apple still has work 
to do in some areas – its pledge gives it a strong reason to advocate in front of governments and utilities for renewable 
energy-friendly policies, and 2014 is likely to offer several 
opportunities where Apple can use its clout effectively. But on the whole, Apple’s commitment to renewable energy 
has helped set a new bar for the industry, illustrating in very 
concrete terms that a 100% renewable internet is within its reach, and providing several models of intervention for 
other companies that want to build a sustainable Internet.
Transparency: A
In March 2013, Apple released a trove of information 
disclosing the amount of energy it uses at all of its data 
centers, as well as the principles and mechanisms it would use to meet the goal of powering those data centers with 
100 % renewable energy.
101 The data Apple released 
gives its consumers confidence in its ability to meet its 100 % renewable energy goal. Apple’s report disclosed 
the electricity needs of its Maiden, NC data center, and detailed how Apple will meet that demand with two 20 MW 
solar installations, fuel cells, and limited use of renewable 
energy credits. Apple has continued to update its web site with progress toward its 100% renewable goal for Apple-
owned and operated facilities, and has also recently begun 
to report basic details on its progress in achieving this goal for its online services hosted by colocation companies.
102 
Renewable Energy Commitment & Siting Policy: A
Apple’s pledge to power its data centers with 100 % 
clean energy should steer the company to build new data 
centers in locations where renewable energy options are plentiful. This proved true in 2012, when Apple announced 
that its next data center would be built near Reno, 
Nevada, which has ample renewable resources. Apple 
made good on that pledge in 2013, when it announced 
that solar and geothermal resources would power the facility.
103 Apple also established a procurement principle 
that the renewable electricity it buys should come from 
local sources where possible, and should displace dirtier 
electricity in the same grid area.  
Energy Efficiency & Mitigation  B
Apple has gone to impressive lengths to mitigate the dirty 
energy mix providing power to its largest data center in Maiden, NC, where utility Duke Energy services customers 
with a mix of almost entirely coal, nuclear, and gas energy. 
Apple’s installation of two large solar arrays and fuel cells has helped it displace a large amount of its electricity 
demand from Duke. Apple has also provided evidence of 
a number of innovative energy efficient design features at its NC data center.
104  However, sharing more detail about 
Apple’s energy efficient designs would help the IT sector 
to learn from, and improve upon, Apple’s best efficiency 
practices. 
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: A
Given the scale of its operations and growth, Apple’s 2012 
pledge to power its data centers with 100 % renewable energy has put Apple on a path to being one of the biggest users of renewable electricity in the US. It began making 
good on that pledge by doubling the size of its solar 
installation at its Maiden, NC data center; it now owns two 20 MW solar facilities, the largest privately-owned 
solar installations in the country. Additionally, Apple has 
made a deal to source the electricity for its Reno, NV data center from 100 % solar and geothermal energy; Apple 
partnered with utility NV Energy to build those renewable 
resources. Apple is also demonstrating innovation and real commitment to its goals at its data center in Oregon, 
overcoming regulatory hurdles to bring additional wind 
energy to the facility via the state’s Direct Access program.
Apple says it has increased the use of renewable energy at 
its facilities from 35% to 75% over the past three years.
105  
Apple has not yet disclosed whether it will sign up for Duke 
Energy’s 100% renewable energy tariff, or “Green Source 
Rider” in North Carolina, which would help it reach its goal of 100 % renewable energy there without the need for 
Renewable Energy Credits (RECs) as the facility continues 
to grow. Apple joined other California companies in signing a call for US policymakers to address climate change in 
Feb, 2014.
106 

47  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetAppendix 2
eBay is one of the best known internet brands, but it has 
lagged behind other innovative companies in prioritizing 
access to renewable energy when choosing the location 
of its three data center facilities. However, eBay has recently taken several steps that indicate it is serious about 
changing the options it has to buy renewable electricity 
and otherwise reducing its data center energy footprint. Though still heavily reliant on coal, eBay’s Dashboard 
Initiative has helped demonstrate an important innovation 
in providing meaningful data about its energy use. eBay’s advocacy efforts in Utah have changed the landscape 
for companies that would like to have alternatives to the 
surrounding dirty grid.
Transparency: A
eBay has dramatically increased its energy transparency 
at both a corporate and operational level. In the spring 
of 2013, eBay launched its Digital Service Efficiency 
Dashboard, which provides up-to-date metrics on its energy performance and is integrated into important 
business performance metrics.
107  The DSE dashboard has 
helped drive a bigger conversation within the data center 
sector on energy transparency, and how environmental 
performance metrics are tightly connected to business 
performance.
Renewable Energy Commitment & Siting Policy: D
eBay’s shift from colocation to owned and operated 
facilities in 2008 has resulted in data centers that are all 
in locations with grids powered by high percentages of 
coal.108  These siting decisions were a major factor in 
eBay’s failure to meet its 2012 greenhouse gas reduction 
target of 15% below 2008 levels, instead coming in at 
224% above the target.109  eBay claims that it now has 
a siting policy that names renewable energy access as 
an important priority for future growth. eBay has recently 
adopted a near-term goal of at least 8% “cleaner” energy by 2015, but clear long-term and more transformational 
goals for renewable energy would send a signal to eBay’s 
customers and electricity vendors that the company is serious about achieving its long-term goal of becoming the 
“leading global engine for greener commerce.”
110Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: B
Despite a dirty electricity grid powering each of eBay’s 
three data center locations, the company has resisted the temptation to paper over its dirty energy problem by buying 
Renewable Energy Credits. eBay has been particularly 
aggressive in its efforts to clean up the electricity supply for its Utah facility, where it has deployed an innovative combination of fuel cells and electricity produced from 
a nearby combined heat and power project. (See “eBay 
Unplugs from a Dirty Grid”, p 29) Those mitigation efforts 
have a big impact, since the grid is currently powered by 
over 60% coal.
111  eBay has established 2015 goals both 
for efficiency (10% improvement) and for 8% “cleaner” 
electricity sources, and is sharing details on both energy 
efficiency and electricity supply innovations with other companies in the sector.  
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: C
eBay has deployed rooftop solar power at its Utah data 
center, and its fuel cell installations, while not renewable, do dramatically reduce its reliance on a grid largely 
powered by coal. Going forward, eBay must prioritize 
energy sources that are truly renewable, not just those 
that are cleaner than the surrounding grid. eBay has 
demonstrated that it recognizes the importance of advocacy, both in achieving its own environmental goals 
and for advancing greener commerce in the economy as 
a whole. eBay successfully worked with legislators in Utah to pass a change to state law that would allow “non-utility 
energy consumers to buy and transmit power directly from 
renewable energy developers” for the first time.
112 eBay 
has also publicly supported key climate and clean energy 
policy shifts at the federal and state level; it joined the 
climate declaration sent to US decision makers.113  While 
eBay is an active member of BICEP , it is also a member of 
ALEC, which undermines its clean energy efforts.114   (See 
“A stain on IT clean energy efforts: ALEC”, p 33)

4848   Digital Realty Trust (DRT) is the largest digital landlord in 
the world, with 131 data centers worldwide, roughly three-
fourths of which are located in the US, 18% in Europe and 
4% in Asia, totaling over 24 million square feet of rental space.
115 Digital Realty operates on the wholesale end of 
the colocation spectrum, providing both entire data center 
properties to large customers like Equinix and Amazon 
Web Services, and also renting portions of facilities to meet the needs of large online properties such as Facebook, 
Rackspace, Salesforce, Google, Microsoft and Yahoo. 
Digital Realty Trust was the first data center company to operate as a real estate investment trust, a special tax 
status in the US designed to attract investment in real 
estate without having to pay standard corporate taxes.
Transparency: D
Unlike some of its larger customers, DRT does not report 
the energy or greenhouse gas footprint of its properties on 
a company level, though it reports the energy capacity of 
more than half of its facilities. Digital Realty Trust does not report its aggregate power consumption, but our survey of just over half of its facilities indicated a consumptive 
capacity of over 1,000 MW.
116 
Renewable Energy Commitment and Siting Policy: D
Digital Realty Trust does not have an overall goal for 
driving renewable electricity to its facilities. As a wholesale 
provider, DRT’s siting options are less flexible than some 
cloud companies, but its massive size and penchant for concentrated growth in markets provides the company 
with a great deal of opportunity to use its buying power to 
demand or secure renewable electricity for its customers at an advantageous price. Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: D
Digital Realty’s lack of both an energy reduction plan and 
any transparency about its facilities’ energy mix makes it difficult to evaluate its overall performance. DRT claims 
to be one of the early adopters of the Power Usage 
Effectiveness standard to benchmark facility efficiency, but it does not indicate whether it uses other Green Grid metrics to measure carbon or renewable energy. Doing 
so would help DRT’s customers to better measure and 
manage their environmental performance. 
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: D
Given the scale of its operations and electricity demand, 
DRT is almost certainly a very well-known and highly sought after customer by electric utilities. Energy regulators 
in regions where it has major operations likely would be 
interested in the company’s opinions as well. If DRT made a commitment to renewable electricity, working to phase 
in clean energy in collaboration with its customers across 
the globe, the company would become a driving force for building a green internet, far bigger than even Google 
is currently. But aside from its recent collaboration with 
Rackspace to secure renewable electricity for its UK data 
center, DRT appears to be on a path that will extend the 
business model of polluting utilities and hold back a large portion of the digital economy from being powered with 
clean energy.

49  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetAppendix 2
Dupont Fabros (DFT) is one of the largest wholesale data 
center colocation providers in the US, providing large 
blocks of data center capacity to a range of customers in 
several major markets, including companies like Facebook and Yahoo which also build their own datacenters. DFT’s 
largest market is Northern Virginia, with upwards of 
200MW in data center capacity built or under construction there.
Transparency: C
Dupont Fabros does report on its web site the power 
demand and energy performance of its cloud computing 
service at the facility level.
117  However, DFT does not 
participate in the Carbon Disclosure Project or otherwise 
report its total energy or carbon footprint. DFT states that 
it will provide the carbon and energy footprint data upon request by its customers.
118 
Renewable Energy Commitment and Siting Policy: D
Dupont Fabros does not state a public preference for 
renewable energy supply when it sites its data centers, nor has it set a renewable energy target for future investments. 
Its many data centers in Northern Virginia are powered by a 
local utility, Dominion Energy, whose electricity is generated by a mix of coal, gas and nuclear energy, with no plans 
to increase its minuscule usage of renewable power to 
significant levels.
119 Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: D
As a wholesale colocation provider, DFT’s primary 
opportunity for driving efficiency across its data centers is 
in the design, monitoring, and management of the overall facility, but the performance of the servers is left to its 
customers. DFT has implemented strong energy efficiency 
practices for its Santa Clara data center. That facility is equipped with a dashboard to monitor some of the energy-related parameters, including temperature and power 
usage. Dupont Fabros expects the real-time information 
will help the facility to lower its PUE (<1.38).
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: D
DFT does not have a stated goal or vision to power its data 
center infrastructure with renewable energy. The company did install 2.7 MW of solar arrays on the roof of its New 
Jersey data center. Unfortunately, the company currently 
has no further plans to invest in renewable energy for any of its other 10 facilities.

5050   Equinix occupies a significant place in the digital economy, 
as the largest retail colocation provider in the U.S.120. Equinix 
customers include many of the other brands evaluated in 
this report, including Apple, Salesforce and Box, which all 
have made 100% renewable commitments. Equinix is also a customer of wholesale colocation companies like Digital 
Realty Trust. With over 100 data centers spread around 
the world, Equinix collectively consumed 1,830 GWh of electricity in 2012, the equivalent to 162,000 average U.S. 
121 
homes.
Transparency: B
Equinix has recently taken a big stride in its energy 
transparency. With plans for a new green web portal, Equinix will provide a snapshot of its energy demand and related 
greenhouse gas footprint, as well as electricity supply mix at a 
regional level. That makes Equinix by far the most transparent of the collocation providers, but the company needs to go 
beyond the regional level in its reporting, including through 
such mechanisms as the Carbon Disclosure Project to facilitate year-over-year benchmarking. Equinix should also 
report on resource-reflective metrics such as CUE and WUE.
Renewable Energy Commitment & Siting Policy: D
Equinix will hopefully follow its recent increase in energy 
transparency by placing a higher priority on securing 
renewable sources of electricity to power its data centers. To 
date, Equinix does not have any commitment to increasing its amount of renewable energy. While colocation providers 
do not have the same level of flexibility on where they site their 
data centers, a long-term commitment to renewable energy and short-term targets are certainly within their grasp. As we 
have seen with other companies, a commitment and targets 
would likely increase Equinix’s leverage with electric utilities.Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: C
Equinix does not currently have energy efficiency, 
greenhouse gas, or renewable energy targets to guide its growth. However, Equinix has demonstrated in several of 
its newer facilities a range of strategies to improve efficiency 
or reduce the facilities’ energy and environmental footprint, including fuel cells, combined heat and power, and green roofs. With over 100 properties globally, Equinix should take 
these strategies beyond pilots and bring them to scale, along 
with setting ambitious targets to improve efficiency and 
greenhouse gas performance.
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: D
While Equinix is able to claim a 25% renewable energy mix at 
the global level, most of that is associated with the purchase 
of Renewable Energy Credits (RECs) or the equivalent in 
the European market.
122  Given Equinix’s global reach and 
concentration of buying power in major markets, if the 
company turned its focus to steadily increasing its supply of 
renewable electricity through a combination of investment, procurement, and advocacy, it could play an important role in 
delivering a major part of a green internet.

51  
Greenpeace  
USAAppendix 2 Clicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green Internet
Facebook continues to grow and dominate the global 
social media landscape with 1.23 billion monthly active 
users. Facebook has made huge strides forward since 
2012 to become one of the clear green internet leaders. Radical improvements in transparency and efforts to 
deliver significant wind energy investment in Iowa have 
helped drive Facebook into the top tier of companies creating the green internet. By building on the advocacy it 
has started with energy utilities to drive more clean energy 
investment, and continuing to find ways to bring renewable energy to scale to power its data centers in North Carolina 
and Oregon, Facebook is setting a clear bar for other major 
social media networks and internet companies to follow.
Transparency : A
Following its shift to becoming a publicly held company, 
Facebook has drastically improved its transparency with 
annual reporting on its entire operation, broken down 
by location, operations, energy source and purchasing contracts, with annual updates and comparisons. 
Facebook’s efficiency dashboards have won industry 
awards for innovation in sustainability reporting, including facility-level Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE) and Water Usage Effectiveness (WUE).
123 
Renewable Energy Commitment & Siting Policy: A
Facebook was one of the first companies to publicly 
announce a preference for renewable energy supply when 
siting its data center infrastructure in 2011. The social 
network subsequently selected Lulea, Sweden, which is powered by 100% hydropower, for its next data center.
124  
Facebook’s newest data center will be in Iowa, where its 
agreement to purchase 100% wind power has directly 
influenced the local energy utility to invest nearly $2 billion in wind energy to meet this significant increase in demand, 
resulting in the largest single purchase of wind turbines in 
the world.
125 Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: A
In addition to its long-term goal to be 100% renewably 
powered, Facebook has also established a near-term 
target to be 25% renewably powered by 2015 and is 
regularly reporting on progress toward this goal. Facebook has continued to provide valuable leadership through the Open Compute Project, which it founded in 2010, and is 
providing a critical forum to open-source energy efficiency 
best practices in data centers, helping to reduce energy demand across the sector.
126 
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: B
Facebook has made a significant investment in securing 
a 100% wind contract in Iowa, which is helping to drive broader renewable energy investment in the state.
127 
Facebook, along with Google, Apple and other major 
electricity consumers in North Carolina, played an 
important role in pushing Duke Energy to create a new renewable electricity tariff, and is reported to be active in 
Oregon to establish a similar tariff program in that state.
128  
Facebook needs to identify how it can leverage these new tariff programs to bring new renewable energy onto the 
grid to power its operations in those states, or identify other 
pathways that will bring new renewable energy on the grid 
at scale to meet its rapidly growing energy needs. In 2014, Facebook joined Microsoft in advocating on behalf of 
distributed energy generation to the Iowa Utilities Board.
129 
Facebook’s strong reputation for climate change and renewable energy advocacy was tarnished in 2013 when it 
was revealed that the company donated money to CEI,
130  
a noted climate denying group, and became a member of 
the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) (see A 
stain on IT clean energy efforts: ALEC, p 33).131 

5252   Google has continued to lead the major internet brands in 
purchasing renewable energy at scale to power its massive 
online ecosystem. The company is now reporting electricity 
consumption of 3,315 GWh, with 34% of its operations powered by clean energy. Google’s use of power purchase 
agreements (PPAs) to procure clean energy has been 
adopted by others in the sector, like Microsoft, and it has successfully influenced utilities in Oklahoma and North 
Carolina to offer new renewable energy options by using its 
immense business clout. As Google expands its footprint to Latin America and Asia, it will need to maintain its innovative 
edge to make sure that it continues to source clean energy 
even in countries that feature dirty electric grids. 
Transparency: B
Google has steadily increased the level of detail it makes 
public on its energy footprint, particularly with regard to 
its renewable energy procurement and policy advocacy.   
Google has provided important intellectual leadership to the sector by publishing white papers on its renewable 
energy principles,
132  hosting conferences with peers on 
how to make the Internet greener,133  and publishing a 
robust web site explaining its energy footprint.134  Google 
provides detailed reporting on its facilities’ PUE135  and also 
a detailed snapshot of its corporate energy footprint to the Carbon Disclosure Project.  However, unlike Rackspace, 
Facebook and Apple, Google has yet to report the energy demand, grid mix, or carbon emissions for each of its data 
centers at a facility level or regional level, or provide details 
on its data center footprint among its colocation vendors.
Renewable Energy Commitment & Siting Policy: B
Google has committed to power its data centers with100 % 
renewable energy, an impressive goal given the scale of the 
company’s operations. Google also applies a shadow price 
for carbon when it is deciding where to build its next data centers. However, Google faces serious challenges to keep 
its renewable commitment on track given its recent growth 
in Asia. While Google scrapped plans to build a data center in Hong Kong,
136  the company has recently opened or 
expanded facilities in Singapore,137  Taiwan,138  and Chile,139  
locations which have fossil fuel heavy electric grids. Google 
has an opportunity to lead the industry again, this time in 
finding renewable energy solutions in Asia, a region where the digital economy is experiencing rapid growth and which badly needs clean energy leadership from the private sector.Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: B
Google continues to demonstrate considerable innovation 
in improving the performance of its data centers,
140  and 
has published details and held industry events that 
highlight its best practices in energy efficiency.141  Recent 
Innovations include using seawater for cooling at Google’s Finland location
142 and thermal energy storage at its Taiwan 
location.143
Aside from its long-term goals to be carbon neutral and 
100% renewably powered, Google has not established 
near-term benchmarks for either its carbon intensity or 
renewable energy procurement. As Google’s growth will increasingly be outside the US, near-term targets will be 
critical to guiding this next phase of growth, or Google will 
lose its ability to reach its carbon-zero goal without the heavy use of carbon offsets.
Renewable Deployment & Advocacy: A
Google has been the pioneer in the IT sector when it 
comes to innovating new ways to power its operations 
with renewable energy. The company reports that its use 
of renewable sources of electricity currently stands at 34%.
144 Google’s tactic of purchasing renewable energy via 
power purchase agreements (PPAs) has helped green its 
data centers in Iowa, Oklahoma, Texas145 and Finland.146  
Other tech companies, such as Microsoft, have since adopted this technique that Google pioneered. In addition 
to side-stepping utilities through the use of PPAs, Google worked with the Grand River Dam Authority (GRDA) in 
Oklahoma on a deal that resulted in the GRDA making 
its first renewable energy investment, for 48 MW of wind energy.
147  Google also used its data center expansion 
in North Carolina as leverage to push Duke Energy, the 
nation’s largest utility, to offer its first ever Green Source 
Rider, which would allow large customers like Google to purchase 100 % renewable energy.
148  In addition to 
greening its data centers, Google has invested over $1 
billion in 15 renewable energy projects, good for 2 GW of 
clean power.149 
Google advocated for an extension of key wind energy tax credits in the US, and its philanthropic arm offered $2.5 million to the Energy Foundation to support policy 
reforms leading to more intelligent energy use.
150 Google’s 
otherwise impressive pro-renewable energy political advocacy is dampened by its decision to join the American 
Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC),
151 which is actively 
fighting to dismantle renewable energy policy at the state 
level. Google also contributed political donations to a noted 
climate denying group in 2013, the Competitive Enterprise Institute.
152 (See “A stain on IT clean energy efforts: ALEC”, 
p 33)

53  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetAppendix 2
HP both provides hardware to internet companies and 
is expanding its own cloud business to compete in the 
enterprise market. The company maintains an impressive 
level of corporate-wide transparency and accountability on reducing its emissions, but it could improve public 
disclosure on how it is applying its labs division’s innovation 
to reduce the energy footprint of its data center fleet. HP does have a corporate-wide emissions reduction target for 
2020 that includes data centers. The company is slowly 
increasing its purchasing of renewable energy via a limited number of on-site solar installations and a mixture of direct 
purchasing and Renewable Energy Credits. However, HP 
is not showing the overall leadership needed to ensure its cloud expansion is driving demand for clean energy.
Transparency: B 
HP has a high level of transparency on a company-wide 
level, but beyond the consolidation of its data center 
footprint, HP does not provide any specific disclosure on its own data center operations. This lack of transparency 
about its own data center footprint means that current and 
potential future customers of HP data centers are unable to compare HP’s services to others.Renewable Energy Commitment & Siting Policy: D
HP has touted the energy efficiency gains obtained through 
its server and data center consolidation over the last five-plus years, but the company selected some of the dirtiest 
parts of the U.S. electricity grid to site its data centers: 
Houston and Atlanta.
153  Even though HP is increasing 
the amount of renewable energy purchased, the growth of its data center fleet underlines the importance for the 
company to implement stronger prioritization of renewable 
energy in order to achieve its targets for greenhouse gas 
mitigation and renewable energy usage targets.
Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: B
HP has a comprehensive emissions reduction target for 
its overall operations (20% by 2020 from a 2010 baseline) 
which includes all its owned and client-serving data 
centers.
154  HP continues to produce research papers from 
its Labs division on increasing data center efficiency and 
reducing power demand, but it does not provide much 
new information on how it is specifically applying that work to its own data centers. Project Moonshot products do 
have significant potential to reduce server energy demand, 
but to date there is limited data available on its adoption.
155 
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: C
HP operates a larger, more diversified business than 
some other companies assessed in this report. While HP purchases a small percentage of renewable energy 
(13% in 2012),
156  it has increased renewable purchasing 
(in addition to grid supply) 60% since 2010. HP has been more active than most technology companies 
in advocating for better energy policy; most recently it publicly supported extending the US wind tax credit.
157 

5454   IBM continues to shift from being a hardware company 
to an increased focus on services delivered by cloud 
computing, announcing a $1.2 billion investment in 
expanding its global cloud business and data center fleet.
158  In addition to maintaining its impressive track 
record on cutting corporate emissions, IBM has added 
a limited amount of increased transparency in its data 
center operations in its 2012 Environment report, along with an increase in renewable energy purchasing.
159  As 
it continues to scale its investments in cloud-related 
infrastructure, IBM needs to identify how it will secure 
a renewable electricity supply, and use its influence to demand clean energy and boost its direct renewable 
energy purchasing in the US.
Transparency: C
IBM participates in the Carbon Disclosure Project voluntary 
reporting program and provides significant, detailed information on the total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
of its business. IBM has added more details about its data 
center operations, but doesn’t offer the same standard of facility-level data accompanies like eBay, Equinix and Facebook.
Renewable Energy Commitment and Siting Policy: D
IBM does not have a specific siting policy for new data 
center construction, apart from a stated aim to secure 
more renewable energy across its operations.
160  As IBM 
has recently announced a large geographic expansion of 
its data centers, including a planned expansion in China, 
it is crucial that the company implements a robust siting policy to ensure that its new sites are driving demand for 
clean instead of dirty energy. Energy Efficiency & Mitigation B
IBM has engaged in comprehensive emissions reductions 
and energy efficiency work, with the company achieving 
significant absolute GHG reductions over the past few 
decades. The company’s 2012 annual report of energy savings details energy efficiency measures and renewable energy purchasing at its current data centers.  IBM also 
has developed products for better integrating renewable 
energy in power grids and load shifting to better match renewable energy outputs.
163 To show its customers how 
it plans to keep becoming more efficient, IBM should announce new energy saving goals, which it has not done since 2012. 
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: C
IBM reports that in 2012 it purchased 4990 MWh of 
renewable power from utilities, which represented 9.8 % of its global electricity usage and resulted in the avoidance 
of 212,000 metric tons of CO2 emissions.
164  Including 
renewable energy available on the grid, IBM’s total renewable energy percentage was 15% in 2012, up from 
11.2% in 2010.
165  IBM’s purchase of renewable energy is 
concentrated in Europe, according to the company’s CDP 
submission. IBM could show how it will apply its smart 
grid renewable energy integration solutions to its own data center operations, and otherwise leverage its close ties to 
electric utilities to ensure that its expansion of cloud data 
centers creates demand for additional renewable energy capacity. IBM set a positive example for the sector by 
leaving the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC), 
which is actively attacking renewable energy policy at the state level.
166

55  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetAppendix 2
With the adoption of its “Carbon Neutral by 2013” plan 
in May 2012, Microsoft sought to project that it had 
become more proactive in managing its energy-related 
environmental footprint.167  While Microsoft’s adoption of an 
internal carbon tax168 offered the potential to drive efficiency 
within the company, it is still unclear whether Microsoft 
will pursue a path to power its cloud that is innovative and 
disruptive, or one that maintains the status quo. To achieve its goal of becoming “carbon neutral” virtually overnight, 
Microsoft has thus far relied heavily on buying Renewable 
Energy Credits (RECs) (see Moving Away from RECs, p 20) and carbon offsets, creating the appearance on paper of 
being clean but not altering Microsoft’s status quo supply 
of dirty electricity.
169  Microsoft’s recent announcement 
to sign a long term purchase agreement for wind power 
near its Texas data center is an important development, 
and hopefully indicates that Microsoft has decided to join its competitors Google and Apple to apply its talents and 
resources toward building an internet that is green in real 
life, not just on paper.  
Transparency: C
Microsoft continues to provide detailed corporate reporting 
of its energy and environmental footprint through the Carbon Disclosure Project, but its data center energy 
transparency has actually decreased since announcing its 
intent to become “Carbon “Neutral.”
170  In its 2012 CDP 
Report, Microsoft reported over 147MW of data center 
demand, but in 2013, Microsoft declined to report data 
center electricity demand at all. Microsoft’s backpedaling stands in stark contrast to the significant improvement in 
transparency overall in the sector in the past two years, 
particularly by Facebook, eBay and Apple.
Renewable Energy Commitment and Siting Policy: C
Microsoft continues to invest heavily in cloud computing, 
with $15 billion invested in related infrastructure and new 
data center expansion in Ireland and Brazil in 2013, along 
with continued growth in the US, particularly to support its X-Box platform.
171  Microsoft continues to lack clear policy 
or goals on sourcing clean energy for its current and future 
data centers. While data centers are part of Microsoft’s 
Carbon Neutral and carbon price policy established in 2012, the company’s rapid expansion of data center infrastructure in the past two years does not reflect any meaningful prioritization of siting in locations with access 
to renewable energy.
172  Microsoft’s heavy reliance on 
carbon offsets and RECs to achieve its “carbon neutrality,” combined with the company’s rapid expansion to keep 
pace with Google and Amazon, places it on a dangerous path of fueling dirty energy growth. Microsoft risks locking 
itself into a long-term supply of dirty energy if it continues 
not to commit to becoming 100% renewably powered as Apple, Facebook, and Google have done.  
Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: C
Microsoft appears to have replaced its previous specific 
renewable energy and greenhouse gas targets with its 
“Carbon Neutral” policy adopted in 2012.
173  Microsoft’s 
adoption of an internal carbon tax across its operations 
has significant promise to help drive emissions reductions 
and serve as a useful model for others. The company has helpfully published a “Carbon Fee Guide”
174  so that others 
can learn from its experience. While revenue from this 
internal tax could become an important stream of funding 
for actually procuring or investing in renewable electricity, much of the current effort goes to greenhouse gas offset projects, such as methane capture from landfills, rather 
than reducing the amount of dirty energy in Microsoft’s 
electricity supply chain.
175
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: C
Until 2013, Microsoft’s approach to renewable energy 
has primarily focused on simply buying renewable energy 
credits, which often have little or no direct effect on creating new renewable energy demand.
176  In November 2013, 
Microsoft announced its first direct 20-year power purchase 
agreement in Texas, which will bring new wind energy to 
the same electricity grid as its data center.177  While this is 
an important first step for Microsoft, the company must 
quickly accelerate its efforts just to keep pace with its rapid 
data center expansion. Microsoft has become more active on the policy front, including support for extending the 
US wind energy tax credit in 2012,
178  joining the climate 
declaration sent to US decision makers,179  and writing a 
recent joint letter with Facebook to the Iowa Utilities Board in support of distributed energy generation.
180 

5656   The world’s second-largest software company,181  Oracle 
provides enterprise-scale software products and computer 
hardware systems to the world’s largest corporations. Like 
others in this space, Oracle is now making a bigger play for cloud-based offerings, even partnering with Amazon Web 
Services to offer some of Oracle’s products via the AWS 
cloud. Oracle powers its own cloud services and solutions through its three main data centers in Texas, Colorado and 
Utah, with four smaller facilities elsewhere. Like others, 
Oracle has focused on efficiency in its servers and data centers, but it lags behind sector leaders in building a 
renewably powered digital economy.
Transparency: C
Oracle reports the standard level of detail on the 
company’s greenhouse gas emissions and energy consumption to the Carbon Disclosure Project, but it 
discloses only a portion of energy-related information 
about its data centers at a fleet-wide or facility level. Those data centers reflect nearly 40% of Oracle’s greenhouse gas 
footprint.
182  Oracle does not disclose its corporate-wide or 
data center energy mix, nor has it indicated that it shares 
the carbon footprint of its services with consumers.Renewable Energy Commitment and Siting Policy: F
Having previously consolidated its data center operations, 
Oracle is now undergoing a significant expansion, 
announcing its intention to operate 17 data centers 
globally.183  Lacking a meaningful commitment to 
renewable energy, in contrast to competitors Rackspace, Google and Salesforce, Oracle is likely to continue to 
fall further behind industry leaders as it undergoes its 
expansion.
Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: D
While Oracle has established a modest carbon intensity 
reduction goal of 10% per employee by 2016, it expressly excludes data centers.  With regard to data center 
operations, Oracle only has in place a Power Usage 
Effectiveness-based reduction goal of 6% over its 2010 base year by 2016.
185 Oracle had previously established a 
renewable electricity goal for its data centers, but has not 
renewed that goal since it expired in 2010. Oracle needs 
to reestablish energy performance and renewable energy goals that are applicable to its data center operations.
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: D
Having let its previous renewable electricity goal for its 
data center expire, Oracle still purchases 5% of its Austin 
data center’s electricity demand from renewable sources, down from the 25% it had previously claimed.
186 Unlike its 
Utah neighbor eBay, Oracle has not been active in pushing 
for policies that will increase the amount of renewable 
electricity in that coal-heavy state.187

57  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetAppendix 2
Though not a household name, Rackspace is well-
known within the IT sector as one of the leading cloud 
and managed hosting providers, and a strong supporter 
of open-source computing platforms. Rackspace has begun to embrace a leadership role in supporting a 
digital economy that is powered with renewable energy. 
The company adopted a commitment to become 100% renewably powered in 2012 as part of a forward 
thinking energy policy, and is now in its early stages of 
operationalizing this commitment.
188 
Transparency: C
Rackspace regularly reports the total amount of energy 
demand across its data centers, as well as the full 
capacity under reserve. However, Rackspace does not yet 
participate in the Carbon Disclosure Project or otherwise publicize details of its energy and environmental footprint 
that would allow for customers and stakeholders to track 
its progress toward its 100% commitment. 
Renewable Energy Commitment and Siting Policy: B
Rackspace’s Global Energy Policy, adopted in 2012, 
establishes its goal to be 100% renewably powered.
189  
The policy provides a solid framework for guiding the 
company’s journey to becoming a leader in building a 
sustainable digital economy, identifying energy efficiency, renewable energy, and energy advocacy as critical pieces 
of the company’s long-term strategy. Though Rackspace 
has not begun to build its own data centers, its policy and recently adopted green leasing guidelines appear to be 
informing its most recent expansion in the UK, and the 
renewable supply of electricity it has contracted to support its growth there.
190 Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: C
With the long-term goal in place, Rackspace needs to 
identify shorter-term benchmarks on both energy efficiency 
and renewable energy. Those shorter-term benchmarks, along with greater energy transparency, should help the 
company demonstrate its improved performance and 
commitment to renewable sources of energy to investors and stakeholders as it continues expanding. Rackspace has been an early and active contributor to the Open 
Compute Project, helping to drive open-source energy 
efficiency best practices.
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: C 
Rackspace currently is able to claim it is 35% renewable 
powered.
191 While some of that claim comes from buying 
a greater supply of bundled renewable energy to meet the 
needs of its UK data centers, a significant portion of this, 
particularly among its US footprint, is through the buying of Renewable Energy Credits (RECs).
192 Rackspace has 
indicated that it hopes to sunset its REC-only purchases in 
the at some point, though it has yet to set a timeline for that 
phase-out. The company says it is currently exploring more 
innovative options for bringing about a 100% renewable 
Rackspace.

5858   
Salesforce is the biggest name in online enterprise 
software, growing at over 30% in 2013. Salesforce took 
a leadership position by committing in March 2013 to 
base its growth on renewable energy, adopting a 100% renewable policy and siting policy that puts priority on 
renewables.
193  Salesforce now needs to show clearly 
how its policy is being implemented across its operations, especially as the company rapidly expands.
Transparency: B
Salesforce has improved its transparency with the launch 
of its first ever sustainability report for the 2012 fiscal year.
194 The report discloses overall greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions, relative GHG emissions per employee and 
revenue, and efficiency metrics for rented datacenters. 
Salesforce also discloses its emissions per facility via the Carbon Disclosure Project. 
Renewable Energy Commitment and Siting Policy: B
In March 2013, Salesforce released its commitment to 
100% renewable energy, one of the first companies that 
does not own its own data centers to do so.
195 Salesforce 
also adopted a more explicit siting policy that states a preference for renewable energy, including with its 
colocation providers. It is demonstrating that policy with the announcement of its first UK data center, which will be 
100% renewably powered.
196  Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: C
Salesforce reports efficiency by comparing in-house 
hosting against Salesforce solutions and the Power Usage 
Effectiveness (PUE) of its data centers. While it recognizes the limitations of a pure PUE measurement, Salesforce 
does not yet have a clear efficiency target or action plan for 
increasing the efficiency of its data center operations. 
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: C
Salesforce made a big step forward with the renewable 
energy policy it released in March 2013, and has followed that up with a new data center in the UK that will be 100% renewably powered. But Salesforce has thus far not taken 
any steps to change its electricity supply in the U.S., 
despite its continued rapid expansion and a renewable energy mix that is significantly lower than that of many of 
its competitors.
197 Though it had been active in the past, 
Salesforce has recently been quiet in its support for climate and renewable energy policies.
 

59  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetAppendix 2
Telecity is one of the largest retail colocation providers 
in Europe, operating in 12 major markets across the 
continent and providing a European home for major online 
properties such as streaming music platform Spotify and professional social network Xing.  
Transparency: C
Telecity started reporting its overall corporate greenhouse 
gas emissions in February, 2014. However, the company’s 
disclosure does not break down emissions on a facility or even a country basis.
198 Telecity is, however, one of the few 
companies reporting Carbon Usage Effectiveness (CUE), 
and the only colocation provider to do so thus far. Telecity 
falls short of the level of transparency shown by one of its main competitors, Equinix, which provides a snapshot of 
its energy demand and discloses its electricity supply mix 
at the regional level.
Renewable Energy Commitment and Siting Policy: D
Telecity’s environment policy makes no mention of 
renewable energy.
199 Telecity has been expanding its 
data center operations without offering the public any 
information on how it intends to power that expansion with 
an increased demand for clean energy.Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: C
Telecity reports its CUE performance and is the only 
company with a target to improve its CUE on an annual 
basis until 2016. Telecity highlights on its web site that it gained a Carbon trust standard recognition for “achieving 
a 13.5 percent reduction [in carbon efficiency] over the 
assessed period, benchmarked against revenue.”
200 The 
recognition indicates that Telecity does have a plan to 
address its energy demand, but the company has not 
provided any useful information about how it will mitigate 
its expanding use of dirty energy.
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: D
The only specific information on renewable energy 
sourcing available from Telecity is a 2008 announcement 
to purchase 21% renewable energy from the French 
utility EDF for its Paris data center.201 However, a lack of 
up-to-date and comprehensive information on Telecity’s 
approach to renewable energy falls far short of sector 
leaders, and even below what Equinix is offering its customers in the European market.
202

6060   
Twitter’s public offering in 2013 marked the latest chapter 
in the growth of a company that has changed the way 
people around the world communicate. Twitter does not 
yet own any data centers of its own, instead renting from wholesale colocation facilities operated by Raging Wire 
and QTS. The microblogging platform has remained silent 
about the type and amount of electricity that is powering those data centers, despite the fact that the company’s 
new investors would benefit from knowing the potential 
risks of Twitter’s energy footprint, such as those posed by rising fossil fuel prices or future carbon policies. Twitter’s 
recent data center investments make it clear that the 
company’s footprint is expanding to accommodate its continued growth in users and data, particularly as it 
becomes more and more a platform for photo and video 
sharing.
203 As it was two years ago, Twitter remains at the 
bottom of the industry for energy transparency, disclosing 
no information about its energy footprint. Twitter lags 
behind companies like Salesforce and Box, which have shown that it is possible for those leasing data center 
space to commit to a long-term goal of being 100 % 
renewably powered. Twitter also lags behind its peer and competitor in social media, Facebook, which took steps to 
adopt clean energy soon after it went public. 
Transparency: F
Twitter remains at the bottom of the industry for its lack of 
transparency, having disclosed essentially no information 
about the company’s energy footprint. Twitter does not file 
any data with the Carbon Disclosure Project, and releases no information to its users about the platform’s energy 
demand or its energy mix. Renewable Energy Commitment and Siting Policy: D
Twitter hosts its rapidly growing data footprint by leasing 
wholesale space in data centers that it does not own. Thus far, Twitter has not shown that it is considering its energy 
footprint at all when it chooses where to make those deals. 
It continued to expand its data footprint at a Sacramento, CA
204 data center, which has a relatively cleaner electricity 
mix, but also has expanded its footprint in Atlanta, GA,205 
where it spent up to $300 million on an expansion in the 
end of 2012. The local utility in Georgia offers virtually no 
renewable energy and powers the grid almost exclusively 
with coal, gas and nuclear energy.206
Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: F
In stark contrast to competitors like Facebook, which has 
led the field with its Open Compute Project to increase 
data center efficiency sector-wide, Twitter has provided no information on efficiency or mitigation measures at 
any of its data center sites. Twitter’s lack of transparency 
makes it impossible to know what, if any, notable efficiency measures the company employs. 
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: F
Twitter has made no public effort to procure renewable 
energy for its data centers or advocate for a greater renewable energy mix with its utilities or with policymakers 
at the state or federal level. While other technology 
companies have accepted some responsibility – and recognized an opportunity to exercise their trademark 
disruption in positive ways by engaging in energy issues 
– Twitter has remained silent. As it continues to grow, it should consider the actions of peers like Facebook, 
and other data renters like Box and Salesforce, all of 
which have committed to a goal of powering with 100 % renewable energy.

61  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetAppendix 2
Verizon Terremark, formed by Verizon’s $1.4 billion 
purchase of Terremark in 2011, has emerged as one 
of the larger telecom/cloud hybrid companies, and has 
been rapidly expanding since the merger to allow it to compete with AWS and others for the business and 
government cloud markets. While the parent company 
Verizon announced in April 2013 that it plans to invest over $100 million in renewable energy across its operations, it 
is unclear the extent to which this investment has helped 
drive deployment of renewable energy for the Verizon Terremark datacenters.
207 Verizon reported over 165 MW 
of data center power consumption in 2012.208 
Transparency: C
Verizon Terremark’s parent company Verizon provides 
detailed energy and carbon reporting both from its web 
site and its CDP submission, including its total data center 
power consumption and carbon per terabyte.209 However, 
the company does not provide a distinct breakout on 
what is happening within Verizon Terremark, nor does the 
company provide carbon footprint details to its customers for their use of data center services. 
Renewable Energy Commitment and Siting Policy: D
Neither Verizon Terremark nor its parent company has 
established a goal or policy for directing their data center 
investment toward renewable sources of energy. While 
Verizon’s 2013 announcement that it plans to invest $100 million in renewable energy is significant, it is not clear that 
this is part of a longer-term commitment to increase the 
supply of renewable energy to Terremark’s data centers.Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: B
Parent company Verizon has established a mid-term goal 
to reduce carbon intensity by 50% by 2020 (from a 2009 
baseline) for the data that traverses Verizon’s networks, as 
well as a near-term goal to derive 15 MW from renewable resources by 2014 across its entire operations.
210 To help 
increase the incentive for its data center customers to improve the efficiency of their servers, Verizon Terremark 
will be shifting the pricing model for colocation customers 
to one that does not require them to pay for data center 
space they are not using, creating a model that increases 
flexibility and places the incentive to improve efficiency on the end customer.
211 
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: C
Parent company Verizon’s 2013 announced that it is 
investing $100 million in renewable energy as part of its 
plan to reduce the carbon intensity of its data by 50%.212   
Verizon should offer more concrete plans to indicate how 
its goals will be operationalized across Verizon Terremark’s 
data center operation.
 

6262   
Yahoo has been expanding its online platform via 
acquisitions such as Tumblr, and it owns a stake in 
Alibaba, the Chinese e-commerce giant. While Yahoo has 
previously been a leader in clean energy procurement, it has lost ground as others have become more innovative 
and aggressive in increasing their renewable energy 
supply. Still, Yahoo’s decision to shift more capacity to its New York State data center and increase purchasing 
of hydropower means the company maintains a high 
percentage of renewable energy in its mix. 
Transparency: C
While Yahoo has provided more detail about its energy 
footprint in its annual submission to the Carbon Disclosure 
Project than its competitors, the company’s level of 
carbon disclosure has remained largely unchanged while Facebook, Apple, Google, and eBay have significantly 
raised the bar on their energy transparency. 
Renewable Energy Commitment and Siting Policy: B
Since 2009, Yahoo has made steady progress to reduce 
the environmental footprint of its operations by focusing 
both on making its data centers highly efficient and by increasing the amount of renewable energy used to power 
them. Yahoo has a short-term commitment to reduce the 
carbon intensity of its data centers by 40% by 2014, and its recent decision to move out of its colocation space in 
fossil fuel-heavy Virginia is the latest positive step down 
that path.
213 Energy Efficiency & Mitigation: B
Yahoo has started to consolidate its data center operations 
to bring more of its global operations into its very efficient “chicken coop” design, announcing in 2013 plans to 
expand its New York State data center and reduce its 
dependence on less efficient, rented data centers.
214 
Renewable Energy Deployment & Advocacy: B
Yahoo’s data centers in New York and Washington State 
rely on clean hydropower, and Yahoo has negotiated an agreement for increasing its allotment of hydropower to power its continued expansion.
215 Yahoo has been active 
in clean energy advocacy, most recently supporting an 
extension to the US wind energy tax credit.216 



Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 17%
NATuRAl GAS -%  /  COAl -%  /  NuClEAR -%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
0.2
1
5
16
0.5
0.3Africa Total
Asia Total
Europe Total
North America Total
Oceania Total
South America Total0%
4%
22%17%
8%
41%Natural Gas Nuclear CoalAkamai’s energy consumption is spread across 1,100 data 
centers around the world, making individual tracking difficult. 
Regional demand and renewable energy data from Carbon 
Disclosure Project and information provided by company.Facility  
location
Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 15%
NATuRAl GAS 25%  /  COAl 28%  /  NuClEAR 27%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
131
17
183014
8
2uS East (Virginia)  
(10+ Data Centers)
uS West (Oregon)
uS West  
( N.California)
Eu (Ireland)
Asia Pacific (Tokyo) 
Asia Pacific 
(Singapore)
South America  
(Sao Paulo)2%
86%
30%20%10%
1%
78%17%
1%
27%54%43%80%
8%42%
8%
21%
0%2%0%
2%38%
4%
0%
25%28%
0%
2%Natural Gas Nuclear CoalAmazon Web Services does not provide data about its electricity 
demand. Greenpeace estimated data using a combination of publicly 
reported investment data and independent estimates of Amazon’s servers counts by region, found here: http://huanliu.wordpress.
com/2014/02/26/amazon-ec2-grows-62-in-2-years/
10+ facilities
2 facilities
2 facilities*
* Amazon told Greenpeace that our energy mix data for AWS 
facilities was incorrect, but refused to offer alternative data other 
than for Ireland, where it claimed a mix of 50 % renewable energy 
and 22 % coal. Amazon did not provide data on how it is achieving 
that mix, so Greenpeace has continued to use Irish national data for its facility. Using Amazon’s Ireland data would result in a 
company CEI of 19 %.Facility  
locationAppendix 3 Company Data Center  
Facilities and Estimates of Power Demand
64   

65  Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 49%
NATuRAl GAS 7%  /  COAl 25%  /  NuClEAR 16%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
70
2170277070Prineville, OR
West Coast (Colo)
Forest City,NC
East Coast (Colo)
lulea, Sweden
Altoona, IA17%38%
1%2%
100%100%12%34%
4%
17%
1%
19%0%0%
57%42%40%
6%60%
9%
38%38%
1%
45%Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
Facebook is powering its Sweden facility with 100 % 
hydropower 
Facebook has co-developed a new wind project nearby its 
Altoona data center with its utility to provide renewable energy for the first phase of this facility.Facility  
locationEstimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 100%
NATuRAl GAS O%  /  COAl O%  /  NuClEAR O%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
2
19
15
5Prineville, OR
Maiden, NC
Newark, CA
Reno, NV100%100%100%100%12%
4%
27%51%0%
57%21%15%60%38%
0%7%
Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
Apple is using Direct Access to contract wind energy for 100 % 
of the 2013 load of its Prineville facility.
Apple uses on-site solar farms and directed biogas fuel cells to 
power 100 % of the 2013 load of its Maiden facility.
Apple is using Direct Access to contract renewable energy for 
100 % of the 2013 load of its Newark facility.
Apple is partnering with its utility to provide renewable energy for 
100 % of the 2013 load of its Reno facility.Facility  
location
Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 6%
NATuRAl GAS 47%  /  COAl 24%  /  NuClEAR 14%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
8
4
12Salt lake City, uT
las Vegas, NV
Phoenix, AZ5%
11%
5%12%55%23%0%0%
29%60%
9%
38% Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
75% of Utah data center load is powered by on-site natural gas 
fuel cells, 1% on-site solar, and the rest from the local gridFacility  
location

6666   Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 48%
NATuRAl GAS 13%   /  COAl 22%  / NuClEAR 15%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
19
8484
105
84
49
36
7
8
42192411Douglas County, GA
Berkeley County, SC
lenoir, NC
Council Bluffs, IA
Dalles,OR
Pryor,OK
Eemshaven, 
Netherlands
Dublin, Ireland 
Singapore
Taiwan
Hamina, Finland
St. Ghislain,Belgium
Quilicura, Chile1%
0.4%
1%
100%
90%
100%
12%20%
1%3%
100%
12%40%33%17%
4%
19%
0.5%
25%
53%
54%80%24%13%28%21%27%
9%
57%
6%
5%
0%
4%
0%0%
17%32%54%
0%39%58%38%45%
0%
46%
24%
25%
0%
50%22%
6%
30%Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
Google has a PPA for wind energy associated with its Iowa 
facility.
Google has multiple PPAs for wind energy associated with its 
Oklahoma Facility.
Google has two PPAs for wind energy for its Hamina Facility.Facility  
location
66   

67  67  Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 15%
NATuRAl GAS 37%  /  COAl 32%  /  NuClEAR 12%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
10
121530
30
22
20
10 Wynyard, England
Atlanta  
(Alphareetta), GA
Atlanta  
(Suwanne),GA
Austin, Tx
Houston, Tx
Colorado
Tulsa,OK
Sydney, Australia100%
1%1%
15%
14%
9%0%
10%28%
33%33%20%
37%
50%
77%
20%18%27%27%22%
13%
0%0%
0%39%39%39%27%
27%
40%
23%
69%
Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
2 facilities
2 facilitiesFacility  
location

68Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 18%
NATuRAl GAS 37%  / COAl 25%  /  NuClEAR 15%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
2
2
16
2
1
1
2
2
17
44
20
664
4
6
22Bogota, Colombia
Singapore
Boulder, CO
Toronto,  
Canada
Guadalajara,  
Mexico
Hong Kong
Canada
Dublin, Ireland
Research Triangle 
Park, NC
Auckland, New 
Zealand
Ehningen, Germany
Dallas
Houston
San Jose
Seattle
Washington DC
Amsterdam
Singapore82%
1%
17%62%
16%
0%
62%
20%
1%
76%22%
9%9%
38%94%
4%
12%
1%13%80%24%10%
53%
29%
10%
54%
4%
19%14%45%45%34%
0%
19%53%80%0%0%
12%15%
3%
0%
15%
0%
57%
0%
18%
12%12%
0%4%
35%
4%0%3%0%
46%12%
12%
71%
12%
25%38%
5%
45%34%34%
9%1%
42%24%
0%
Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
5 facilitiesFacility  
location
68   

69  69  Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 29%
NATuRAl GAS 21%  /  COAl 32%  /  NuClEAR 18%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
71
372746
70
47
8
18
7
33Chicago
Dublin
San Antonio,Tx
Quincy
Boydton,VA
W Des Moines, IA 
Cheyenne, Wy
Amsterdam
Santa Clara
Reston, VA
Chicago3%
20%
100%
83%
2%
30%
17%
12%38%
2%3%17%54%37%
3%
17%
19%
12%
53%34%17%17%35%
0%
13%
2%
42%
6%
0%
4%0%
42%35%44%25%27%11%
38%
45%
60%
24%
9%
38%44%Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
Microsoft buys wind power through a long-term PPA to 
power its San Antonio facility.Facility  
location
Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 15%
NATuRAl GAS 20%  /  COAl 44%  /  NuClEAR 10%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
7
822Austin, Tx
West Jordan, uT
Colorado Springs, CO
linlithgow, uK15%17%
9%
12%20%12%50%28%22%
0%0%
18%27%60%40%39%
Natural Gas Nuclear CoalFacility  
location

7070   70   Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 27%
NATuRAl GAS 26%  /  COAl 30%  /  NuClEAR 17%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
6
12
6
3
1
0.3Chicago, Il
Dallas, Tx
london, uK
Virginia
Hong Kong
Sydney, Australia3%
9%
100%
2%
0%
10%17%
45%28%17%
29%
20%35%
12%18%42%
0%
0%44%
34%39%38%
71%
69%Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
2 facilities
3 facilitiesRackspace has arranged with its colocation provider to 
procure 100 % renewable energy for its London facility.Facility  
location
Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 28%
NATuRAl GAS 17%  /  COAl 22%  /  NuClEAR 26%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
2
333Slough, uK 
Chicago, Il
Virginia
California100%
3%2%
30%28%17%17%27%18%35%42%21%39%44%38%
0%
Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
2 facilities
2 facilitiesSalesforce is powering its UK data center, built 
by NTT, with 100 % renewable energy.Facility  
location

71  71  71  Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 21%
NATuRAl GAS 42%  /  COAl 22%  /  NuClEAR 15%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
38
30Atlanta, GA
Sacramento, CA1%
45%33%53%27%
0%39%
0%Natural Gas Nuclear CoalFacility  
location
Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 59%
NATuRAl GAS 6%  /  COAl 20%  /  NuClEAR 12%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
2323
74
21Omaha, NE
lockport,  
Ny
Avenches, 
Switzerland
Singapore
Quincy, WA5%
100%
57%
1%
83%2%
36%
2%
80%
3%29%23%31%
0%2%55%12%10%
0%
11%Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
Yahoo negotiated to expand its allotment of hydropower to 
100 % for its Lockport facility.Facility  
locationGreenpeace provided Twitter with facility power demand 
estimates to review. Twitter responded that the estimates 
were not correct, but did not provide alternative data. Using conservative calculations, Greenpeace has used the best 
information available to derive power demand. Greenpeace 
invites Twitter to be transparent and provide more accurate data 
for its facility power demands.

Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 17%
NATuRAl GAS 31%  /  COAl 25%  /  NuClEAR 19%  
CONTINuED NExT PAGE% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
38
124
65
10
18
71
3
7
261666
0
121886
14
29
2
114
212%
1%
13%
1%3%9%
20%57%
0%
12%22%10%
0%2%7%
30%
4%
2%
10%47%53%
33%36%
4%
17%
45%
54%
2%
29%
28%30%28%70%17%33%
27%
5%
21%
14%21%4%
27%26%57%
35%
12%
0%
41%
0%
18%
14%18%17%42%49%
21%
79%40%18%
0%24%39%
5%
38%
44%
34%
25%
0%
71%
39%27%39%
5%
38%11%
0%3%
35%53%30%Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
4 facilities
3 facilities6 facilities
3 facilities
6 facilities
3 facilities
5 facilities
2 facilities
3 facilities
7 facilities
4 facilitiesFacility  
location
72   Amsterdam, 
Netherlands
Atlanta, GA
Boston, MA
Charlotte, NC
Chicago, Il
Dallas, Tx
Dublin, Ireland
Geneva, Switzerland
Hong Kong
london, uK
los Angelas, CA
Manchester, uK
Miami, Fl
N Virginia
New york Metro
Oakland, CA
Paris, France
Philadelphia, PA
Phoenix, AZ
Portland, ORColocation Companies

73  CONTINuED FROM PREVIOuS PAGE
73  Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power Capacity% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
10
3017
177
30
18
6
12Sacramento, CA
San Francisco, CA
Seattle, WA
Silicon Valley, CA
Singapore
St. louis, MO
Sydney, Austrlia
Toronto, Canada45%
30%94%38%
1%
0%
10%
62%53%27%
0%
34%
80%
1%
20%
10%0%
21%
4%0%
0%
12%
0%
15%0%
0%1%9%
0%
85%69%
12%Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
2 facilities
2 facilities
2 facilities
13 facilitiesFacility  
location

74   Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 6%
NATuRAl GAS 21%  /  COAl 32%  /  NuClEAR 38%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
19
185147
34
47
47
46181448Ashburn, VA (ACC2)
Ashburn, VA (ACC3)
Ashburn, VA (ACC4)
Ashburn, VA (ACC5)Ashburn, VA (ACC6)
Ashburn, VA (CH1)
Piscataway, NJ (NJ1)
Santa Clara, CA  (SC1)
Reston, VA(VA3)
Bristow, VA (VA4)
Ashburn, VA (ACC7)-
 
under construction2%
2%2%2%
2%
3%
0%
38%
2%
2%2%17%17%17%17%
17%
17%
32%
34%17%17%17%42%42%42%42%
42%
35%
57%
0%
42%
42%42%38%38%38%38%
38%
44%
11%
9%
38%
38%38%
Natural Gas Nuclear CoalFacility  
location

75  75  Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 16%
NATuRAl GAS 29%  /  COAl 27%  /  NuClEAR 23%  
CONTINuED NExT PAGE% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
15
6538
2
13
33
11
9
2
80
0.75
121
19
3
50
18
402862
594%38%24%17%
9%
3%
1%
0%
13%
0%4%2%
78%
62%
12%12%13%57%22%
0%0%
34%37%24%
45%
17%
33%
70%36%32%21%17%
8%
10%53%
28%
5%
2%
14%98%4%0%
19%12%
12%
35%
27%
17%26%57%40%42%
2%
15%
4%
18%79%41%18%
0%1%9%7%
46%
34%
44%
39%
5%
5%
11%35%38%
2%
12%24%
39%
3%
0%
45%
0%Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
4 facilities7 facilities2 facilitiesData Source for facility power capacity: http://www.equinix.
com/#
5 facilities
3 facilities
2 facilities
10 facilities
4 facilities
7 facilities
10 facilities4 facilities
7 facilities
4 facilities
5 facilities
5 facilitiesFacility  
location
Seattle,WA
Siclicon Valley,CA
los Ageles,CA
Denver,CO
Dallas, Tx
Chicago,Il
Atlanta,GA
Miami,Fl
Boston,MA
New york
Philadelphia, PA
Washington,DC
Brazil
Toronto
Netherlands
london, uK
Paris, France
Switzerland
Germany
Dubai

76CONTINuED FROM PREVIOuS PAGE
76   Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power Capacity% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
41
104348
38Japan
Shanghai, China
Hong Kong
Singapore
Australia10%
19%
0%1%
10%43%
0%
29%80%
20%2%
2%0%0%
0%28%
79%71%
0%
69%Natural Gas Nuclear Coal
5 facilities
4 facilities
3 facilities
2 facilities
4 facilitiesFacility  
location


77  77  Estimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx NA
NATuRAl GAS NA  /  COAl NA  /  NuClEAR NA  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
25
1
27NAP Culpepper,VA
Bogota, Colombia
Sao Paulo, Brazil
Amsterdam, 
Netherlands3%
82%78%12%17%13%
8%
53%42%
0%2%4%38%
3%2%
24%Natural Gas Nuclear CoalThere is insufficient public data to evaluate Verizon Terremark’s 
energy footprint. Greenpeace encourages Verizon Terremark to release more data and will update our analysis in the future.
Facility  
locationEstimated 
Nameplate  
Power CapacityClEAN ENERGy INDEx 21%
NATuRAl GAS 26%  /  COAl 27%  /  NuClEAR 24%  
% of Clean  
Energy Supply  
to Data CenterResource Mix of local utility
11
9
95
34
5
5
10
12
3Amsterdam, 
Netherlands
Northwest Business  
Park, Dublin
Gutleutstrasse, 
Frankfurt
Helsinki, Finland
Power gate, london
House, Manchester
Milan, Italy
Condorcet, Paris 
Skondal, Stockholm
Bulgaria12%20%22%41%
12%
12%
29%
13%57%
9%53%54%14%13%
28%
28%
48%
5%
1%4%4%0%
18%32%
18%
18%
0%
79%
40%32%24%25%45%22%
39%
39%
17%
3%
1%
54%Natural Gas Nuclear CoalFacility  
location

7878   
1 http://newsroom.cisco.com/release/1197391/
2 GeSI SMARTer2020: The Role of ICT in Driving a Sustainable Future 
http://gesi.org/SMARTer2020
3 http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/publications/
Campaign-reports/Climate-Reports/How-Clean-is-Your-Cloud/4 The Cisco® Visual Networking Index (VNI) Forecast (2012-2017)  
http://newsroom.cisco.com/release/1197391/5 http://gesi.org/assets/js/lib/tinymce/jscripts/tiny_mce/plugins/
ajaxfilemanager/uploaded/SMARTer%202020%20-%20The%20
Role%20of%20ICT%20in%20Driving%20a%20Sustainable%20
Future%20-%20December%202012.pdf
6 IEA: Electricity Information (2012 Edition) http://www.iea.org/media/
training/presentations/statisticsmarch/electricityinformation.pdf
7 Data Center Dynamics 2013 Census Report: Global Data 
Center Power 2013 http://www.datacenterdynamics.com/focus/
archive/2014/01/dcd-industry-census-2013-data-center-power
8 The Cisco® Visual Networking Index (VNI) Forecast (2012-2017)
9 Sandvine Global Internet Phenomenon, 2H 2013 https://
www.sandvine.com/downloads/general/global-internet-
phenomena/2013/2h-2013-global-internet-phenomena-report.pdf
10 http://cleantechnica.com/2013/01/18/wind-power-tops-in-new-
us-generation-capacity-for-2012/
11 www.seia.org/research-resources/us-solar-market-insight
12  http://www.smartgridnews.com/artman/publish/Technologies_
DG_Renewables/Wind-penetration-crosses-10-threshold-in-nine-
states-Grid-problems-to-follow-5606.html#.Ux9IHxC-KWI
13 http://www.earth-policy.org/data_highlights/2014/highlights45
14  IEA. World Energy Outlook 2012. Executive Summary.
15 BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2012
16 http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/
wp/2012/07/31/the-decline-of-u-s-coal-in-three-charts/17 http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=11391
18 http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-04-09/shale-gas-isn-t-a-
low-emissions-fuel-yet.html19 http://emf.stanford.edu/publications/emf_26_changing_the_
game_emissions_and_market_implications_of_new_natural_gas_
supplies/
20 http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/da2a6bc6-98fa-11e3-a32f-
00144feab7de.html?siteedition=intl#axzz2tmcJXV4u21 http://www.geo-energy.org/pressReleases/2013/GEA_2013_
Expanding_Global_Growth.aspx22 https://www.apple.com/environment/renewable-energy/23 http://www.dogwoodalliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/
Forrests-not-fuelsFS_10b.pdf24 http://www.zdnet.com/cn/china-has-618m-internet-users-80-
percent-on-mobile-7000025291/25 http://thenextweb.com/asia/2013/01/07/chinese-internet-
population-expected-to-grow-to-800-million-users-in-2015/#!zq0Mm
26 http://www.forbes.com/companies/tencent-holdings/
27 http://www.datacenterdynamics.com/focus/archive/2012/08/
china-data-center-roundup-big-cloud-news-big-cloud-players
28 http://tech.idcquan.com/pro/34910.shtml
29 http://www.datacenterdynamics.com/focus/archive/2013/12/
amazon-launch-first-data-center-china
30 http://venturebeat.com/2014/01/16/ibms-latest-weapon-for-the-
cloud-fight-a-massive-15-new-data-centers/
31 http://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2014/03/05/
scott-noteboom-keynote-data-center-world-global-conference/32 http://www.businessweek.com/news/2012-03-22/china-to-
restrict-coal-demand-output-to-3-dot-9-billion-tons33  http://www.pv-tech.org/news/china_to_target_35gw_of_solar_
by_2015
34  http://start.lenovo.com/news/read/category/Technology/article/
earth_tech-ikea_stores_in_china_embrace_solar_power-ncrd
35  http://www.lenovo.com/social_responsibility/us/en/climate.html36  http://www.thegreengrid.org/~/media/WhitePapers/
Harmonizing%20Global%20Metrics%20for%20Data%20Center%20Energy%20Efficiency%202012-10-02.pdf?lang=en
37  http://tech.ebay.com/dashboard38  http://www.google.com/green/energy/use/#purchasing39  https://www.apple.com/environment/renewable-energy/40  http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2010-12-07/renewable-
energy-credits-prove-inflated-with-green-claims-seen-as-hot-air.html
41  https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/www.google.com/
en/us/green/pdf/renewable-energy-options.pdf
42 https://www.google.com/green/energy/investments/43  http://www.desmoinesregister.com/article/20140302/
BUSINESS/303020033/Iowans-weigh-distributed-energy-generation
44  Relationships noted in this infographic are intended as a sampling 
to show where some of the internet’s most popular sites and services 
are hosted – not as a comprehensive survey. Relationship data is sourced from media reports of hosting arrangements, and customer 
profiles like the ones listed here: http://aws.amazon.com/solutions/
case-studies/. 
45  https://www.facebook.com/green/app_51148828558283746  http://gigaom.com/2014/03/14/facebook-open-sources-data-
center-efficiency-code/Endnotes

79  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetEndnotes
47  https://www.rockymountainpower.net/content/dam/
pacificorp/doc/CCCom_Update/2013/April_13/RMP_UT_
ConservationReport_F_no_crops.pdf
48  http://gigaom.com/2012/06/21/ebay-to-build-huge-bloom-
energy-fuel-cell-farm-at-data-center/
49  http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/42357.wss
50  http://www.opencompute.org/
51  http://166.78.157.131/sites/default/files/P-RS-GL-SC-002%20
Global%20Energy%20Policy%20v1.0%2010.28.2012.pdf
52  http://www2.sfdcstatic.com/assets/pdf/misc/Sustainability_
Commitment.pdf
53  http://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2013/11/04/box-
commits-to-adopting-renewable-energy-for-its-data-centers/
54  http://www.economicdevelopmenthq.com/blog/midamerican-
energy-wind-generation-iowa/
55  http://www.midamericanenergy.com/wind_news.aspx 
56  http://newsroom.fb.com/News/760/Bringing-New-Wind-to-Iowa57  http://www.omaha.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20130424/
NEWS/704249913
58  http://www.triplepundit.com/2014/03/another-banner-record-
breaking-year-u-s-solar/
59  http://gigaom.com/2013/11/15/pushed-by-internet-companies-
utility-makes-progress-to-sell-clean-power-in-north-carolina/
60  https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/www.google.com/
en/us/green/pdfs/renewable-energy.pdf
61  http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2010/07/reducing-our-carbon-
footprint-with.html
62  http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2011/04/oklahoma-where-wind-
comes-sweepin-down.html
63  http://googlegreenblog.blogspot.com/2014/01/more-swedish-
wind-power-for-our-finnish.html
64  http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2012/09/more-renewable-
energy-for-our-data.html
65  http://www.google.com/green/energy/investments/66  http://www.newsobserver.com/2011/04/28/1158644/feeding-
triplets.html#ixzz1Kpxy4HIk
67  http://greenpeaceblogs.org/2013/11/18/apple-facebook-google-
team-up-to-push-nations-largest-utility-to-clean-energy-offering/
68  eBay listed as a member in ALEC documents: http://www.
commoncause.org/atf/cf/%7BFB3C17E2-CDD1-4DF6-92BE-
BD4429893665%7D/telecom&it_updated_35-day_mailing%20New%20Orleans.pdf
69  http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2013/08/15/yelp-joins-
with-advocacy-group-alec-to-fight-slapp-lawsuits.html70  http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php/Verizon_Communications
71  http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/
wp/2013/08/08/state-renewable-energy-laws-turn-out-to-be-really-
hard-to-repeal/
72  http://alec.org/docs/EEA_2013_SNPS_35_Day.pdf
73  http://alec.org/docs/EEA_2013_SNPS_35_Day.pdf74  http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-fix/wp/2013/06/20/
anatomy-of-a-washington-dinner-who-funds-the-competitive-
enterprise-institute/
75  Energy data sourced from government statistics or International 
Energy Agency 2011 statistics. IT company presence in specific 
countries sourced from company data or media reports. Data center energy demand and demand growth sourced from 
DataCenterDynamics. Ireland data center energy demand growth 
estimate from eirgrid. http://www.eirgrid.com/media/2013%20Generation%20Capacity%20Statement.pdf
76  State energy grid mixes sourced from utility web sites or Integrated 
Resource Plans filed to regulators. Renewable Energy goals sourced from the Database for State Incentives for Renewable Energy and 
Efficiency, accessible at http://www.dsireusa.org/documents/
summarymaps/RPS_map.pdf.  Texas data for grid mix and renewable energy goals sourced from ERCOT: http://www.ercot.com/news/
press_releases/show/26382 and Nodal Protocols Section 14: State 
of Texas Renewable Energy Credit Trading Program. IT company presence in specific states or regions sourced from company data or 
media reports.
77  http://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2013/01/04/
north-carolina-data-center-corridor/ 
78  http://www.duke-energy.com/north-carolina/nc-rate-case/our-
energy-mix.asp
79  http://www.duke-energy.com/north-carolina/nc-rate-case/our-
energy-mix.asp
80  http://www.duke-energy.com/pdfs/DEC_2013_IRP_10.23.2013.
pdf
81  http://www.wired.com/wiredenterprise/2012/04/duke-energy/
82  Update on Data Centers in the Northwest (Memorandum). 
Northwest Power and Conservation Council. July, 2013
83  www.oregonlive.com/mapes/index.ssf/2013/12/battle_over_
oregon_renewable_e.html
84  http://www.oregonlive.com/mapes/index.ssf/2013/12/battle_
over_oregon_renewable_e.html
85  http://www.oregonlive.com/business/index.ssf/2014/02/
lawmakers_move_toward_compromi.html
86  http://www.oregonlive.com/business/index.ssf/2014/02/
lawmakers_move_toward_compromi.html
87  https://www.dom.com/dominion-virginia-power/powering-
virginia/data-centers-and-dominion-virginia-power.jsp

8080   
88  https://www.dom.com/dominion-virginia-power/powering-
virginia/data-centers-and-dominion-virginia-power.jsp
89  See Dominion’s Integrated Resource Plan, 2013: https://www.
dom.com/about/pdf/irp/va-irp-2013.pdf
90  http://www.akamai.com/html/about/facts_figures.html
91  Provided by Akamai92  Provided by Akamai93  http://www.ceres.org/bicep/climate-declaration/climate-
declaration-full-signatory-list
94  http://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/sustainable-energy/95  http://huanliu.wordpress.com/2012/03/13/amazon-data-center-
size/
96  https://www.dom.com/dominion-virginia-power/powering-
virginia/data-centers-and-dominion-virginia-power.jsp
97  http://huanliu.wordpress.com/2012/03/13/amazon-data-center-
size/
98  See EC2 Spot Instances http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/purchasing-
options/spot-instances/
99  http://gigaom.com/2s013/11/15/how-amazon-is-building-
substations-laying-fiber-and-generally-doing-everything-to-keep-
cloud-costs-down/
100  www.oregonlive.com/mapes/index.ssf/2013/12/battle_over_
oregon_renewable_e.html
101  http://images.apple.com/environment/reports/docs/Apple_
Facilities_Report_2013.pdf
102  https://www.apple.com/environment/renewable-energy/103  http://gigaom.com/2013/07/01/apple-is-planning-a-solar-panel-
farm-for-its-data-center-in-reno/
104  http://images.apple.com/environment/reports/docs/Apple_
Facilities_Report_2013.pdf
105 http://images.apple.com/environment/reports/docs/Apple_
Facilities_Report_2013.pdf106  https://www.ceres.org/press/press-releases/apple-inc.-san-
diego-international-airport-solarcity-and-sapphire-energy-join-call-for-u.s.-action-on-climate-change
107  http://tech.ebay.com/dashboard108  See eBay’s facilities in Facilities Table Appendix.109  eBay Carbon Disclosure Project 2012 and 2013 report.110  www.ebayinc.com/system/download_links/eBaySI_Goals_
FINAL3_2.pdf?download=1
111  https://www.rockymountainpower.net/content/dam/
pacificorp/doc/CCCom_Update/2013/April_13/RMP_UT_ConservationReport_F_no_crops.pdf
112  http://green.ebay.com/greenteam/blog/eBays-Clean-Energy-
Leadership-in-Utah/8420113  http://www.ceres.org/bicep/climate-declaration/climate-
declaration-full-signatory-list
114  eBay listed as a member in ALEC documents: http://www.
commoncause.org/atf/cf/%7BFB3C17E2-CDD1-4DF6-92BE-
BD4429893665%7D/telecom&it_updated_35-day_mailing%20New%20Orleans.pdf
115  DRT Company Info, March 2014  http://investor.digitalrealty.com/
Cache/1500057391.PDF?Y=&O=PDF&D=&fid=1500057391&T=&iid=4094311
116  Greenpeace estimate based on public data center facility data 
published by DRT. See DRT in Data Center Facilities Table Annex
117  http://www.dft.com/data-centers/location-information
118  Provided by Dupont Fabros
119  Dominion’s Integrated Resource Plan indicates that the company 
does not have plans to increase its renewable energy use to significant levels. See https://www.dom.com/about/integrated-resource-
planning.jsp
120  http://www.equinix.com/company/news-and-events/
press-releases/equinix-receives-2013-frost-and-sullivan-us-retail-colocation-services-market-share-leadership-award/
121  Provided by Equinix.122  Provided by Equinix123  https://www.facebook.com/green/app_511488285582837124  www.ebayinc.com/system/download_links/eBaySI_Goals_
FINAL3_2.pdf?download=1
125  http://www.economicdevelopmenthq.com/blog/midamerican-
energy-wind-generation-iowa/
126  http://www.opencompute.org/127  https://newsroom.fb.com/News/760/Bringing-New-Wind-to-
Iowa
128  See http://www.oregonlive.com/business/index.ssf/2014/02/
lawmakers_move_toward_compromi.html. PacifiCorp is Facebook’s 
utility in Oregon.
129  http://www.desmoinesregister.com/article/20140302/
BUSINESS/303020033/Iowans-weigh-distributed-energy-generation
130  http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-fix/wp/2013/06/20/
anatomy-of-a-washington-dinner-who-funds-the-competitive-
enterprise-institute/
131  http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2013/08/15/yelp-joins-
with-advocacy-group-alec-to-fight-slapp-lawsuits.html
132  http://www.google.com/green/bigpicture/#/grid/whitepaper
133  http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2013/06/how-green-is-internet.
html
134 http://www.google.com/green/bigpicture/#/grid/whitepaper135  http://www.google.com/about/datacenters/efficiency/internal/
136  http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2013/12/10/google-scraps-plan-to-
build-hong-kong-data-center/

  81  
Greenpeace  
USAClicking Clean: 
How Companies are Creating the Green InternetEndnotes
137  http://www.google.com/about/datacenters/inside/locations/
singapore/
138  http://www.google.com/about/datacenters/inside/locations/
changhua-county/
139 http://www.google.com/about/datacenters/inside/locations/
quilicura/
140  http://googlegreenblog.blogspot.com/2013/07/pushing-our-
energy-performance-even.html
141 http://static.googleusercontent.com/external_content/
untrusted_dlcp/www.google.com/en/us/corporate/datacenter/dc-
best-practices-google.pdf
142  http://www.datacenterdynamics.com/focus/archive/2013/06/
google-buys-wind-power-finland-data-center
143  http://gigaom.com/2012/04/04/google-to-build-its-first-thermal-
storage-for-a-data-center/
144  http://www.google.com/green/bigpicture/#/
145  http://static.googleusercontent.com/external_content/
untrusted_dlcp/www.google.com/en/us/green/pdfs/renewable-
energy.pdf
146  http://www.datacenterdynamics.com/focus/archive/2013/06/
google-buys-wind-power-finland-data-center
147  http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2012/09/more-renewable-
energy-for-our-data.html
148  http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2013/04/expanding-options-
for-companies-to-buy.html
149  https://www.google.com/green/energy/investments/150  http://googlegreenblog.blogspot.com/2013/01/paving-path-to-
intelligent-energy-use.html
151  http://www.google.com/publicpolicy/transparency.html152  http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-fix/wp/2013/06/20/
anatomy-of-a-washington-dinner-who-funds-the-competitive-
enterprise-institute/
153  See HP in the Facilities Table Appendix of this report.
154  http://www8.hp.com/us/en/hp-information/environment/
operations-index.html#.UyK4VVFdXi4
155  http://h17007.www1.hp.com/us/en/enterprise/servers/
products/moonshot/index.aspx#.UyCJyxC-KWI
156  http://h20195.www2.hp.com/V2/GetPDF.aspx/c03742918.pdf157  http://www.awea.org/MediaCenter/pressrelease.
aspx?ItemNumber=4751
158  http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/01/17/us-ibm-datacenters-
idUSBREA0G05P20140117
159  http://www.ibm.com/ibm/environment/160  http://www.ibm.com/ibm/environment/climate/renewable_
energy.shtml161  http://venturebeat.com/2014/01/16/ibms-latest-weapon-for-the-
cloud-fight-a-massive-15-new-data-centers/
162  http://www.ibm.com/ibm/environment/163  http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/41310.wss164  http://www.ibm.com/ibm/environment/annual/
IBMEnvReport_2012.pdf
165  http://www.ibm.com/ibm/environment/annual/
IBMEnvReport_2012.pdf
166  http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php/ALEC_
Corporations#cite_note-105
167  http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/technology/
microsoft-pledges-to-go-carbon-neutral/2012/05/08/gIQAGVE4AU_story.html
168  http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/microsoft-
internal-carbon-fee
169  http://blogs.msdn.com/b/microsoft-green/archive/2013/09/10/
microsoft-s-carbon-offset-strategy-making-a-difference-one-project-
at-a-time.aspx
170  http://www.microsoft.com/environment/our-commitment/our-
footprint.aspx
171  www.microsoft.com/eu/PRESSRELEASE_Microsoft_cloud_
services_growth_drives_Expansion.aspx
172  See Microsoft in Facilities Table Appendix173  http://www.microsoft.com/environment/our-commitment/our-
footprint.aspx
174  http://blogs.msdn.com/b/microsoft-green/archive/2013/12/11/
creating-amp-driving-carbon-accountability-microsoft-releases-
carbon-fee-playbook.aspx
175  http://www.microsoft.com/environment/our-commitment/our-
footprint.aspx
176  http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2010-12-07/renewable-
energy-credits-prove-inflated-with-green-claims-seen-as-hot-air.html
177  http://blogs.msdn.com/b/microsoft-green/archive/2013/11/04/
microsoft-signing-long-term-deal-to-buy-wind-energy-in-texas.aspx
178  http://www.environmentalleader.com/2012/06/15/microsoft-
sprint-call-for-extension-to-wind-power-tax-credit/
179  http://www.ceres.org/bicep/climate-declaration/climate-
declaration-full-signatory-list
180  http://www.desmoinesregister.com/article/20140302/
BUSINESS/303020033/Iowans-weigh-distributed-energy-generation
181  http://allthingsd.com/20131018/arik-2/182  From Oracle’s Carbon Disclosure Project filing183  http://www.oracle.com/us/corporate/press/2054851184  Oracle Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP) 2013 submission 185  Oracle 2013 CDP submission186  Oracle 2013 CDP Submission

8282   
214  http://www.colocationamerica.com/blog/yahoo-expands-new-
york-data-center.htm
215  http://www.ydatacentersblog.com/blog/new-york/216  www.greenbiz.com/blog/2012/09/21/companies-extension-
wind-tax-credit187  See eBay in Appendix II, Company Scores Explained
188  http://responsibility.rackspace.com/planet/energy/renewables
189  http://responsibility.rackspace.com/planet/energy/renewables
190  Information provided by Rackspace
191  http://responsibility.rackspace.com/planet/energy/renewables
192  https://responsibility.rackspace.com/sites/default/files/
RECcertification.pdf
193  http://www2.sfdcstatic.com/assets/pdf/misc/Sustainability_
Commitment.pdf
194  http://www2.sfdcstatic.com/assets/pdf/misc/
SustainabilityReport.pdf
195  http://www.salesforce.com/assets/pdf/misc/Sustainability_
Commitment.pdf
196  http://www.datacenterdynamics.com/focus/archive/2013/05/
salesforcecom-officially-announces-new-uk-data-center
197  See Facebook’s Clean Energy Index in the Company Scorecard
198  http://www.telecitygroup.com/data-centres/european-data-
centres.htm
199  http://www.telecitygroup.com/Policy/Environment_Policy.pdf
200  http://www.telecitygroup.com/our-company/news/2012/
telecitygroup-first-data-centre-provider-to-achieve-recertification-for-
carbon-trust-standard-in-the-uk.htm
201  http://www.telecitygroup.com/our-company/news/2008/
telecitygroup-continues-to-develop-environmentally-sustainable-
business-by-becoming-the-first-data-centre-to-take-up-edfs-
equilibre-offer.htm
202  See Equinix in Company Scores Explained Appendix.203  See Twitter in Facilities Table Appendix.204  http://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2013/05/10/
twitter-plans-huge-data-center-expansion/
205  http://www.bizjournals.com/atlanta/blog/atlantech/2012/12/
tweet-this-twitter-takes-100k-sf-in.html?page=all
206  http://www.georgiapower.com/about-energy/energy-sources/207  http://online.wsj.com/article/BT-CO-20130430-713077.html208  From Verizon’s Carbon Disclosure Project submission209  https://www.cdproject.net/210  http://online.wsj.com/article/BT-CO-20130430-707382.html211  Information provided by Verizon Terremark212  http://online.wsj.com/article/BT-CO-20130430-713077.html
213  http://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2014/03/10/
yahoo-sublease-24-megawatts-virginia-space/

83  


8484    How Clean is Your Cloud? Greenpeace is an independent global 
campaigning organisation that acts 
to change attitudes and behaviour, 
to protect and conserve the environment and to 
promote peace.
greenpeace.orgPublished in April 2014 by 
Greenpeace Inc.
702 H Street, NWSuite 300
Washington, D.C. 20001 
United Statesgreenpeace.org