# Archivo original: conning-the-congo.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:51 -03 2025

www.greenp eace.org
 www.greenp eace.orgCONNING 
THE CONGOLOGGING 
SECTOR REVIEW

3
FALSE ACCOUNTING – 
THE DANZER GROUP’S TRICKS OF THE TRADE
The Danzer Group is owned by the German Danzer family, but based in
Switzerland. Previous Greenpeace International reports on the DanzerGroup have exposed the company’s involvement in activities includingtrading in illegal timber, bribery and dealing with a timber trader blacklistedby the United Nations Security Council for illegal arms trafficking in Liberia.Now it is the turn of the Group’s financial affairs to come under thespotlight.
Internal Danzer Group documents show in great detail the price fixing
arrangements between the Group’s Swiss-based trading arm Interholco AG and the parent firm’s logging subsidiaries in the DRC and the Republicof the Congo. The DRC-based Siforco sells its wood to Interholco at anofficial price below the true market value of the wood. The shortfall is madeup through unofficial payments into offshore bank accounts in Europe,enabling the Danzer Group to evade the payment of a variety of taxes towhich it is liable in the DRC. Greenpeace International has evidence thatthe trick has been concealed by encoding the full market prices shown onorder sheets and price lists, and by issuing official invoices that show onlythe local price while the offshore payment is invoiced internally.
Greenpeace has also obtained a 2003 PricewaterhouseCoopers audit of
the Danzer Group’s holding company ANBE AG (today Danzer AG). Thispoints out that the transfer mispricing methods outlined above may not be incompliance with the local laws applicable to Siforco and IFO respectively.
One Danzer Group document, showing internal accounting procedures,
reveals that Siforco and IFO intended to under-invoice Interholco in recentyears by an average of 35% and 13% respectively. 
A 2003 Siforco business plan shows a 2002 local (DRC) loss of ¤1 million
and offshore profit of ¤444,000 for the same year. Projected results for
2003–05 follow the same pattern – losses in the DRC, profits inSwitzerland – except that in all years the offshore profit is actually greaterthan the local loss, meaning that an overall profit was predicted. For 2005a local ‘loss’ of ¤557,000 and an offshore profit of ¤2,730,000 were
projected, giving an overall profit of ¤2,173,000 on which corporate profit
tax would have been due in the DRC had the money not been intended tobe transferred. 2
‘Illegal logging robs national and
subnational governments , forest
owners and local communities ofsignificant revenues and benefits,damages forest ecosystems, distortstimber markets and forest resourceassessments, and acts as adisincentive to sustainable forestmanagement. International trade in
illegally harvested timber, includingtransfer pricing, under-invoicing andother illegal practices, exacerbates the problem of illegal logging. ’ 
[emphasis added] G8 Action Programme on Forests1998In April 2007 Greenpeace International published an investigative report
exposing the social chaos and environmental destruction brought about by the logging sector operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo(DRC). Carving up the Congo was released at a time when all logging titles
in the DRC were beginning to be evaluated under a World Bank-sponsoredlegal review process, which is still ongoing.
This new investigative report exposes another hidden aspect of export-
driven resource extraction in the DRC and the neighbouring Republic of theCongo. Internal company documents obtained by Greenpeace Internationalshow how the German owned, Swiss-based logging multinational DanzerGroup, one of the largest players in the Congo logging sector, is using anelaborate profit-laundering system designed to move income out of Africaand into offshore bank accounts, thereby appearing to evade tax paymentsin the countries in which its companies operate.
Moreover, evidence has also been uncovered of various other questionable
means employed by the Group to minimise its tax burden in those countries1 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
©Greenpeace/Davison

5
CONCLUSIONS
In an environment of endemic corruption, logging companies inevitably
operate beyond the rule of law. In the Congo Basin, the logging industrycontinues to feed the networks of corruption that are obstacles to genuinedevelopment. Through support for an extractive industry-based model ofdevelopment, donor countries and agencies such as the World Bank areeffectively undermining their own rhetoric on establishing good governanceand alleviating poverty.
Even as the World Bank and its donors continue to pour billions of
taxpayers’ dollars into the Congo Basin countries in the name oferadicating poverty, international players in the logging industry, such as theDanzer Group, are laundering untaxed profits to offshore bank accounts –in effect stealing from the region and its people. 
If left unchecked, this unscrupulous behaviour will continue to make a
mockery of the international donor community’s poverty reduction efforts. It poses a major challenge to the World Bank’s aim of tackling corruptionwithin the logging sector and slowing the expansion of logging. In effect, in being allowed to get away with evading tax, logging companies arebeing given a financial incentive to continue expanding their operations intosome of the world’s last intact rainforests.
International donors, including the World Bank, must prevent further
fraudulent expatriation of wealth and profits from the DRC and the Republicof the Congo by companies engaged in tax evasion, capital flight andaggressive tax avoidance. To this end they must:
±demand that the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)
establish a requirement for all multinational companies to reporttheir trading activities on a country-by-country basis within theirconsolidated accounts. This approach would identify a group’sinternal and external income and costs in each country where itoperates, hence minimising the risk of transfer pricing abuseoccurring. Such a requirement on the part of the IASB would havethe status of international law, and would thus not require locallegislative consent.4
Evidence obtained by Greenpeace International estimates that the DanzerGroup’s proposed profit laundering and suspected non-compliance withtax exemption agreements may have denied the governments of the DRCand the Republic of the Congo at least ¤7.8 million in tax revenue. This
would be equivalent to any of the following at 2000 prices:
±over 80% of the DRC Government’s investment in public healthcare for
the year 2000
±the cost of vaccination for over 700,000 Congolese children under five
years of age
±50 times the DRC Ministry of Environment’s annual operating budget
There is equally a fundamental conflict between the industrial logging
model of development and protection of forest areas for climate protection.One calculation shows that the projected carbon debt from Siforco’sselective logging alone carries a potential financial liability (notional costpremium for carbon offset) between 1.5–2.5 times greater than the totalforestry and export-related taxes paid by the company in 2004. 
DANZER GROUP PRACTICES THE NORM 
NOT THE EXCEPTION
Export figures for the whole of the DRC (2002–05) and the Republic of the
Congo (2004–06) indicate that the phenomenon of tax evasion throughunder-invoicing of the sales value of exported timber from both countries isby no means restricted to the Danzer Group. The average export value forlogs in both countries is very close to the average declared (under-invoiced) export value of Siforco logs for 2004, indicating that the majorityof logs are exported at below the true market value.
Moreover, published industry-wide market prices for individual species for
the region are close to Siforco’s true export (local plus offshore) marketvalues, and much higher than the national average export prices from theDRC and the Republic of the Congo
©Greenpeace/Daniels

7
In 2006, nearly three-quarters of DRC timber exports were controlled by
just four foreign-owned logging groups: the Danzer Group (German owned,Swiss based
4), the NST Group (Portuguese owned, Liechtenstein based5),
Olam (Indian owned, Singapore based6) and Trans-M (Lebanese7). The
Danzer Group alone accounts for 40% of such exports (See Table 11).8
This latest Greenpeace International investigation exposes how the DanzerGroup – one of the largest logging companies operating in both the DRCand the neighbouring Republic of the Congo – is laundering its untaxedprofits in offshore bank accounts, and describes the internal proceduresthe Group uses to achieve this. The Danzer Group is deliberately under-invoicing its timber exports and provision of services between subsidiariesto avoid paying taxes, a practice which creates a hole in the governmentrevenues of the two countries. 
The report is based on confidential Danzer Group internal documents, all of
which are held by Greenpeace International. Quotations from documentswritten in German have been translated by Greenpeace International; theoriginal text is given in the endnotes. Quotations without such endnotes arefrom documents written in English.
While this report focuses solely on the practices used by the Danzer
Group, tax evasion by under-invoicing may be assumed to be the rulerather than the exception in the logging sector in the DRC and theRepublic of the Congo. The practice calls for immediate and tough actionby the governments of the DRC and the Republic of the Congo, the WorldBank and the IMF. 6
‘The $1 trillion or more a year of illicit
money that flows across borders … isthe most damaging economic conditionhurting the poor in developing andtransitional economies. It drains hard-currency reserves, heightens inflation,reduces tax collection, worsens incomegaps, cancels investment, hurtscompetition, and undermines trade. It leads to shortened lives for millions of people and deprived existences forbillions more.’Raymond Baker, Director, Global Financial Integrity
1The debate over how poor and heavily indebted countries with high levels
of corruption and weak governance can escape from poverty has in largepart focused on the need to increase international donor funding in order tostimulate domestic economic growth. One such heavily indebted country isthe Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), where the World Bank is byfar the largest financial donor and most influential international actor behindthe reform of the logging sector, which it sees as a key means of boostingthe country’s GDP .
In April 2007 Greenpeace International published an investigative report
exposing the social chaos and environmental destruction brought about by international logging companies operating in the DRC. Carving up the
Congo
2was released at a time when all logging titles in the DRC were
beginning to be evaluated under a World Bank-sponsored legal reviewprocess. 
However, the legal review – which is still ongoing – has not succeeded in
verifying even the very basic criteria set by the government, the mostimportant being the ‘legal validity of the titles’ (ie ensuring that they havebeen obtained in accordance with the correct procedures), establishingthat forest holdings ‘comply with boundaries as defined by the title and thetopographical map attached to the title’, and verifying ‘full payment of forestarea taxes since 2003’. In short, it only deals with the enforcement of lawsrelating to logging companies’ land holdings.
As a result of its restricted scope, the legal review will have only a limited
impact on the corruption endemic within the DRC’s logging sector. Onearea it is failing to tackle is the issue of tax evasion by logging companies.The review is looking at only one of the forms of taxation specificallyrelevant to the logging industry – the forest area tax. 
The World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the DRC
Government have yet to address the logging companies’ failure to makefull and fair payment of other taxes due on revenues they generate in thecountry, such as corporate profit tax and export-related taxes (some ofthem specific to the logging industry), and the impact of this tax evasion ondevelopment. The general development strategy has been to focus onhow money and resources flow into the DRC, rather than on how financialwealth leaks away from the country – although a report published by theIMF
3does admit that as far as corporate profit tax is concerned ‘transfer
pricing practices [see below] and the global characteristics of most timber-producing companies pose significant administrative challenge.’2 INTRODUCTION
THE WORLD BAN K


9
DEFINITIONS
Profit laundering
This term refers to the business practice of moving profit from the countryin which it was earned, and where it would incur tax, into a tax haven, withthe aim of minimising tax liability. Mechanisms for achieving this include thepractice of transfer mispricing.
16
Transfer pricing and the arm’s-length principleTransfer pricing is the process of setting the prices at which sales betweenrelated companies within a corporate group take place. Such prices haveto be set in order for there to be trade within the group.
17
In an international context, transfer pricing is considered a legitimatepractice so long as it is undertaken using the ‘arm’s-length principle’ – thatis to say, the price set should be equivalent to the open market price thatwould be charged between unrelated and independent companies.
18
Both the OECD and the United Nations have endorsed this arm’s-lengthprinciple for transfer pricing.
19
However, many corporate groups do not respect the arm’s length principleand launder their profits into tax havens through transfer mispricing. Forinstance, by charging low transfer prices from a company based in a high-tax country that is selling to a company in a low-tax country, a group canrecord a low profit in the first country and a high profit in the second.
Tax avoidance
Tax avoidance describes any action taken to minimise tax liability that doesnot involve deception or breaking the law, in contrast with tax evasion.
20
Aggressive tax avoidanceThis process occurs when people and companies exploit loopholes andflaws with tax laws in order to avoid tax (ie they abuse the spirit of the taxlaws).
21
Tax evasionTax evasion is paying less tax than you are legally obliged to through thenon-payment or underpayment of taxes, usually effected by making a falsedeclaration (eg through false accounting) or no declaration to the taxauthorities.
22
Tax havenA tax haven is a country or designated zone that has low or no taxes.
238
‘Of the $1–1.6 trillion of illicit money 
that crosses borders annually … thecommercially tax-evading component,driven primarily by falsified pricing inimports and exports, is by far thelargest, at some 60 to 65 percent of the global total.’Raymond Baker, Director, Global Financial Integrity
9According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), up to 60% of the world’s trade may take placebetween subsidiaries of the same multinational corporation.
10Transactions
across international borders between different parts of the samecorporation offer ample scope to shift profits and/or escape paying tax.
11
Such transactions are subject to what is known as ‘transfer pricing’ – so called because the price is set not by the market but internally by thecorporation, as a means of transferring ownership between differentcompanies in the same group.
12
Manipulation of transfer prices – ‘transfer mispricing’, in effect – allowscorporations to engage in capital flight, channelling billions of dollars eachyear out of developing countries and into offshore tax havens.
13The
volume of mispriced (under- or over-invoiced) trade has been estimated at more than $600 billion a year, nearly half of the illicit money that crossesinternational borders.
14UNITED NATIONS3 TRANSFERRING WEALTH OFFSHORE – 
TAX ME IF YOU CAN!
‘The difference between tax avoidance
and tax evasion is the thickness of aprison wall.’ Denis Healey, a former British chancellor
15

10 11
A company wishing to under-invoice the value of goods it is exporting can
do this by selling the goods to another company within the same group.The recipient company is almost invariably based in a tax haven.
24This
intermediate company then sells the goods on to yet another companywithin the same group, this time based in the country where the goods will be resold to the ultimate third-party customer. For the purposes of this second intra-group transaction, the goods will be priced at an arm’s-length value. 
The result of this process is that part of the profit is diverted from the tax
system of the country where the goods originated, and the value of the tax that should have been paid is fraudulently expatriated to the tax haven.This value will, of course, typically be unknown to the authorities in thecountry of origin to whom tax should have been paid on the full arm’s-length value of the goods.
25
If the goods were sold at arm’s-length value by the group member in thecountry of origin to the group member making the sale to a third-partycustomer, an appropriate split of costs and profits out of the sale proceedsmight look like this:
Note that while the profit from the country of origin is mostly shifted to thetax haven, the profit in the country of sale is unaffected. It is the country oforigin that loses out, the vast majority of its potential tax revenue havingbeen diverted to a tax haven. A small proportion of the profit in the countryof origin may be retained to give the impression that something is beingearned locally. Profits are being apportioned in this way because thecountries of origin are almost always in the developing world. Thesecountries generally have poor or completely non-existent measures tocontrol transfer pricing abuse. In contrast, the country of sale is usually in the developed world where controls on transfer pricing exist.
Group member 
(country of origin)
Costs: 
40%Profit: 
20%Profit: 10% Costs: 
30%Group member 
(country of sale)
Group member 
(country of origin)Group member 
(tax haven)
Costs: 
40%Costs: 
1%Profit: 
2%Profit: 
17%Profit: 10% Costs: 
30%Group member 
(country of sale)But if an intermediate tax haven company were introduced into thetransaction the split might be:
©Greenpeace/Davison

12 13
‘Rather than reaping short-term profits,
Danzer Group’s entrepreneurial activitiessupport social principles. For years, our work in Africa has involved largeinvestments, which have madesignificant contributions to localdevelopment. Danzer Group is one ofthe most important foreign investors in the Republic of Congo and theDemocratic Republic of Congo.’Danzer Group website
26This section illustrates how trading within the Danzer Group of timber
products from two of its African subsidiaries does not comply with thearm’s-length principle for determining transfer prices, resulting in theapparent underpayment of tax in both the DRC and the Republic of theCongo. 
The trade in question is between, on the one hand, the Danzer Group
logging companies Siforco (DRC) and IFO (Republic of the Congo) and, on the other hand, the Danzer Group timber trading subsidiary Interholco(Switzerland). 
Since Interholco is knowingly involved in setting the rates of under-invoicing
for Siforco and IFO, and even controls the offshore accounts maintained inthe names of these companies, Greenpeace International argues that thispractice also represents profit laundering.
THE EVIDENCE – 
UNDER-INVOICING FOR EXPORTS
The Danzer Group appears to have been making use of transfer mispricing
and offshore accounts since at least the late 1990s. A memo dated July1998 addressed to Ulrich Grauert,
27one of the two executive directors of
Interholco, refers to the outcome of a meeting between Mr Haag of Siforcowith Jean Calvin Kandolo, the then State Secretary to President Kabila:
‘The monetary value of exported goods does not flow back into the D.R.
Congo, instead gets transferred to a blocked account in Europe in orderto buy road building machinery, public transport buses etc .’
28
An unsigned draft contract (most likely between 2000 and 2002)29
between Interholco and Siforco shows the arrangements between the two
companies for the transfer mispricing of timber intended for export.30In it,
they agree that Siforco will sell its timber products to Interholco at aninternally fixed price which ‘ for business reasons, is set too low ’.
314 FALSE ACCOUNTING – 
THE DANZER GROUP’S TRICKS OF THE TRADE


14 15
A diagram attached to an email dated November 2002 explains in detail
the new under-invoicing procedure for the Danzer Group subsidiariesSiforco, IFO, SIFCI and Cotraco,
43covering both timber exports and
services. The comprehensive diagram shows how the Danzer Groupfinance staff issue invoices and payments to various accounts, includingthe FBH account. For example, the diagram shows that, Siforco and IFOintended to under-invoice Interholco in recent years by an average of 35%and 13% respectively. 
Interholco and its African counterparts Siforco and IFO regularly agree
internal price lists used to determine the amounts to appear on official andunofficial invoices to Interholco. The lists cover prices by species and byproduct (ie logs, sawn timber and veneers), with each one having its owndistinct rate of under-invoicing. Some products are under-invoiced as muchas 85%, whilst others are under-invoiced at around 3%.
The most recent price list held by Greenpeace International is a Siforco list
for 2007, which (although the coded pricing method is no longer used) stillmaintains the split between the fixed local price and the additional offshoreprice.
442007 invoices from Siforco to Interholco show the local price but
not the total price:45the difference between the invoiced local price and
the total price is invoiced internally via a credit note and transferred into theoffshore account.
46According to the proposed procedure, Interholco is then to pay that fixedprice ‘ direct to Siforco and a so-called excess price to an account in
Europe ’.
32 The account in question is an offshore bank account held in 
the name of Siforco, but directly managed by Interholco in Switzerland.33
Another document dated November 2002 indicates that this account isheld with French bank Credit Lyonnais, the same bank with which otherAfrican subsidiaries of the Danzer Group (including IFO and SIFCI (Côted’Ivoire) and Cotraco (DRC)) have offshore accounts.
34
The element of the overall timber price that Interholco pays to the Africansubsidiaries’ offshore accounts and which is not declared in the countryfrom which the timber originates is generally referred to as the‘Filialbuchhaltung ’ (FBH) or ‘ branch accounting ’ element.
35
In a letter dating from 2002,36Mr Schmidt of IFO complains to Ulrich
Grauert of Interholco that ‘ contracts are still being issued incorrectly .
Basically, no overt prices must be sent for IFO contracts. You know thereason: if false information gets into unauthorised hands this will certainlylead to costly consequences for IFO or for Siforco .’
37
Schmidt then explains how the ‘ codified [sic]’38total price should not be
listed directly below the local price, as otherwise ‘ even the stupidest
Norwegian will see, no doubt, that this is the real price. ’39The coded
pricing method is described in examples attached to the letter.40
Schmidt finally instructs Grauert that ‘[t] he word “prix” should vanish
altogether from the order sheet. Since all prices are in Euros, only codedprices should be there, without the Euro prefix. The less indication of pricethere is, the better .’
41The coded pricing method has been found in use on
orders placed with Siforco by Interholco in 2003.42
©Greenpeace

16 17
The Siforco internal price lists specify three different prices for each timber
species and product type (eg logs, sawn timber or veneer), their relativeproportions varying according to the species concerned:
1. Siforco invoice – the fixed local price for Siforco’s official invoices to
Interholco
2. Siforco FBH – the additional price to be paid to the offshore account 3. Total price – the sum of the fixed local price and the additional offshore
price.
Using the 2007 price list we can calculate just how much money is sent to
the offshore account in a typical timber transaction between Siforco andInterholco. Figure 1 shows the sale value of a shipment of 100 cubicmetres of sawn first- and second-grade kiln-dried wenge timber.
47
FIGURE 1: Siforco’s local vs offshore payments for a shipment of wengeFixed price in the DRC = ¤47,854
Offshore FBH account payment = ¤112,146
Total price (Switzerland) = ¤160,000
In this case, 70% of the sale value bypasses the DRC’s customs and tax
authorities. Admittedly, wenge is one of the high-value species for whichthe 2007 price list indicates that a higher proportion of the total valueshould be channelled into the offshore account. 
Nevertheless, even averaged across all species, as Table 1 shows, each
year Siforco fails to declare 20% to 40% of its true gross sales values (ieincluding both domestic and export sales), while IFO fails to declarebetween 15% and 20%. Gross sales figures given in Siforco’s and IFO’s2004–06 business plans, drawn up by the Danzer Group, indicate whatproportion of sales was invoiced or projected to be invoiced unofficially(offshore). Of course, since the gross sales figures include domestic salesthat would not have been subject to transfer mispricing, the actualpercentages by which each year’s total export sales were under-invoicedwould have been somewhat higher than shown.
48Gross sales(¤’000)Consolidated
2002Forecast 
2003Budget 
2004Budget 
2005Budget 
2006
Siforco
Local account
(export anddomestic sales) †2,077 3,209 8,467 17,964 22,996
Offshore account
(export sales) †657 2,185 3,701 4,847 5,788
Integrated (local
plus offshore) †2,734 5,394 12,168 22,811 28,785
offshore as % of
integrated ‡24% 41% 30% 21% 20%
IFO
Local account
(export anddomestic sales) †12,349 9,536 15,148 22,144 23,394
Offshore account
(export sales) †2,973 1,775 3,742 5,194 5,680
Integrated (local
plus offshore) †15,322 11,311 18,889 27,338 29,074
offshore as % of
integrated ‡19% 16% 20% 19% 20%
† original data from the Danzer Group; ‡ calculated by Greenpeace International (figures are rounded)Table 1: Estimated under-invoicing by Siforco and IFO as a percentage of their gross sales49
©Greenpeace

18 19
THE EVIDENCE – 
OTHER POSSIBLE MANIPULATEDTRANSACTIONS FOR SERVICES
Other inter-group services liable to tax deduction at source are referred to
in a detailed memorandum by Samuel Zürcher (a Danzer Group manager)about a visit to IFO which he undertook at the end of 2001.
56One section
deals with the need for Martin Cuezva to reconcile specific inter-groupbookkeeping ‘ issues not possible for “outsiders” ’. 
Zürcher lists the inter-group bookkeeping relations between IFO and the
other Danzer Group companies Siforco, Cotraco, Danzer Furnierwerke,Jura Placage SAS and Danzer Anlagen und Beteiligungs GmbH(DANBE).
57
He then explains how loans provided by DANBE to the Danzer Groupcompanies (eg Siforco and IFO) are ‘ considered under A/P [accounts
payable] affiliates in order to avoid tax at source ’.
58
He also explains how IFO avoided paying tax at source on the purchase of
an aircraft: ‘ IFO’s aircraft was purchased by Siforco. The debt was “sold” to
Jura Placage SAS [a Danzer Group company in France] , which is receiving
the repayments directly from IFO (the reason being that the [Republic of
the] Congo and France have a tax treaty, so no tax at source). ’59THE EVIDENCE – 
UNDER-INVOICING FOR SERVICES
In addition to the under-invoicing of its own exports, Siforco appears to
under-invoice for services provided to other Danzer Group companies,such as the milling or transporting of logs. 
Timber processing services supplied by Siforco to IFO are referred to in an
email dated February 2002
50from Martin Cuezva (responsible for the FBH
at Danzer Services Europe (DSE)51) to Georg Herger (then the Company
Secretary ( Prokurist ) of Interholco). 
Cuezva states: ‘ I already mentioned to you that, in order to avoid tax
deduction at source [ie the payment of a withholding tax52], we only record
in the official accounts a small proportion of Siforco payment claims forservices liable to source tax deduction. (Arthur knows about this.) ’
53Arthur
Burgener was one of four CEOs of Interholco at least until 2000. By 2007he had become the Company Secretary ( Prokurist ) of Interholco and
Danzer AG, the Danzer Group’s holding company.
54
Cuezva goes on: ‘ For this purpose the official debit notes for Siforco are
divided into two debit notes. One sum is officially recorded in the IFOaccounts, and the remainder of the Siforco payment claim is kept in asecond set of records only included in the branch [ie FBH] accounts’ . 
55
©Greenpeace/Davison

THE EVIDENCE – 
AVOIDING OR EVADING TAXES ON EXPATRIATE SALARIES?
The DRC government introduced a tax in 1969 (updated in 2002)60to
encourage companies to support locally sourced labour rather thanrecruiting expatriate personnel from outside the Congo region. TheExceptional Tax on Expatriate Remuneration ( Impôt Exceptionnel sur les
Rémunérations des Expatriés – IERE ) is levied on employers at a rate of
25% of the salaries of expatriates who are paid in local currency.
61
The IERE tax is not deductible from the employer’s taxable profits.62
The draft contract between Interholco and Siforco already mentioned63
explicitly states:
‘Siforco-related expenses which Siforco cannot pay officially (European
insurance, expatriate salaries , machine replacement parts, repatriation 
of unregistered loans etc) are settled via this [offshore] account ’
[emphasis added].64
Furthermore, the diagram in the November 2002 document mentionedabove
65shows that not only Siforco expatriates, but also expatriates
working for IFO, are being paid out of the offshore banks accounts.
In the case of Siforco, the Danzer Group is at the very least escaping taxes
on expatriate salaries by paying them offshore (ie so-called aggressive taxavoidance
66). 20 21
WHAT PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS TOLD 
THE DANZER GROUP’S BOARD OF DIRECTORS
In May 2003, PricewaterhouseCoopers presented a draft report for final
approval to the Danzer Group’s Board of Directors documenting theprincipal findings from an audit of the consolidated accounts of ANBE AG –the Group’s holding company – for the year ending 2002.
67(In July 2005,
ANBE AG changed its name to Danzer AG).68
The report discloses that financial statements for Siforco and Cotraco69
were not included in the accounts for Danzer Anlagen and BeteiligungenGmbH (intermediate holding company for Siforco and Cotraco),
70although
this was required in order to ‘ comply with local business law ’ within
Germany.71As a result of this omission, it is doubtful whether either
company’s offshore profits were included in any consolidated accountwithin the Danzer Group.
The PricewaterhouseCoopers report devotes a section to the Group’s
grounds for setting up and using ‘ branch accounts ’ (ie offshore accounts)
for its African subsidiaries Cotraco, SIFCI, Siforco and IFO. In the case ofSiforco and IFO, the auditors were unable to reconcile ‘ all the intercompany
balances ’.
PricewaterhouseCoopers states candidly that some of the Siforco’s costs
are paid outside the country of production and outside the subsidiaries’own local accounts. In particular, the PricewaterhouseCoopers auditorsquestioned the use of offshore accounts as a source of ‘ additional income
in Switzerland ’ to pay for ‘ foreign originating costs ’ such as the salaries of
expatriates, spare parts and foreign exchange. The following conclusion isrepeated for each of the African subsidiaries:
‘These transactions might not fully comply with local law. Due to the fact
that the existence and the transactions of [Cotraco, SIFCI,
72Siforco and
IFO] Branch accounts are not fully known locally (Africa), we are not in a
position to finally assess a possible risk of Danzer Group .’


22 23
‘Donors in general and international
development finance institutions inparticular should not only verbally, butalso practically recognise and rewardthe developmental potential of ourindustry.’ Olof von Gagern, Danzer Group 2006
73In September 2006, the Danzer Group joined forces with WWF to ‘ jointly
undertake long-term efforts to effectively promote prudent and responsibleforestry in the Central African forests ’, through WWF’s Global Forest and
Trade Network (GFTN).
84In 2007, IFO was accepted as a member of
GFTN, while Siforco’s membership application is subject to the outcomeof the legal review process in the DRC.
85(It is worth noting that for the
purposes of GFTN membership, WWF defines the terms ‘illegal logging’and ‘forest crime’ as including transfer pricing abuses.)
86
The Danzer Group has also been asking the German development bankKfW
87and the French development corporation Agence Française de
Développement (AFD)88to provide low interest loans to Siforco to help
meet the cost of expanding the company’s logging operations in the DRC– in effect, a public subsidy. These loans would be used by the DanzerGroup to help it meet its existing legal obligation to develop managementplans for its forest holdings in the DRC,
89as well as assisting with the cost
of forest certification for some of its operations.90Expenditure on assisting
an already profitable company to fulfil its statutory requirements, or to meetcriteria for a certification which will further increase its potential profitability,represents a questionable use of international development funding.THE DANZER GROUP’S PRACTICES – 
CLEAN-UP OR COVER-UP?
Previous Greenpeace International reports on the Danzer Group have
exposed the company’s involvement in forest crimes, including trading inillegal timber, bribery, suspected forgery of documents, and dealing with atimber trader blacklisted by the United Nations Security Council forinvolvement in illicit arms trafficking activities in Liberia.
74
Since the publication of these reports, the Danzer Group has undertakena public relations offensive in an attempt to clean up its tainted image,publishing new African timber buying policies
75while continuing to deny its
past activities.76It has also been trying to win back valuable lost business
with companies such as the Swedish furniture retailer IKEA, whose orderswere worth around ¤5 million to the Danzer Group in 2002.
77
In late 2006 the Danzer Group’s Senior Vice President for sales, wrote a
circular letter to customers stating:
‘We are pleased to inform you that discussions with representatives of
IKEA and Danzer Group arrived at the conclusions that IKEA will againaccept all companies from Danzer Group as their veneer contractorimmediately effective … As you might know, this longtime relationship wasdiscontinued because of aggressions in the range of environmentprotection against the Danzer Group .’
78
Other corporate groups that have large contracts with the Danzer Group
include the Saint-Gobain Group,79a major supplier to the construction
industry with operations in 57 countries.80In 2006 Interholco signed an
agreement with the Group to develop ‘ commercial relationships’ with two
of its timber trading subsidiaries, Point P (France) and International Timber(UK).
81
In its recent public relations material the Danzer Group tries to portray itselfas one of the more progressive logging companies in the Congo region.For instance, Group CEO Hans-Joachim Danzer proclaimed in a jointpress release with WWF: 
‘Illegal logging is a threat to serious producer companies and fair
competition on world markets, and must be stopped .’
82The Group’s
website claims its own values now include making ‘ every effort to help
underdeveloped regions … find sensible paths to the future ’.83
©Greenpeace/Reynaers

25
An unpublished 2006 report on Siforco gives the company’s own locally
declared export figures for logs, sawn timber and veneer for the three-yearperiod 2002–04.
97On the basis of these export values, and if Interholco
achieved its target rate of under-invoicing of 35% (the figure shown in theNovember 2002 diagram already referred to
98) and the same rate of taxes
mentioned above, it is possible to estimate that the Danzer Group wouldhave evaded almost ¤278,000 of export-related tax revenue in 2002–04
(see Table 2). 
Siforco’s 2006 total timber export value is provided by the DRC Direction
de la Gestion Forestière in a 2007 FAO report.
99On the basis of this, it is
possible to estimate that the Danzer Group would have evaded almost¤352,000 of export-related tax revenue in 2006 (see Table 3). As before,
this assumes that Interholco achieved its intended rate of under-invoicing of35% (the figure shown in the November 2002 diagram already referredto
100) and the same average total rate of taxes given in Table 2.24
The practices described above strongly suggest that Siforco and IFO donot declare their full turnover and profit to the relevant tax authorities in theDRC and the Republic of the Congo. Instead they appear to declare onlytheir ‘official’ invoices based on the lower fixed price, thus saving onvarious forms of tax payable within their respective countries of operation.
ESCAPING TAXES ON TIMBER EXPORTS
Setting an artificially low transfer price – as with Siforco’s and IFO’ssystematic under-invoicing of the export value of timber they sell toInterholco – helps an exporting company to reduce the level of export-related taxes it pays. 
Export taxes are levied on the declared export values of the timber and
timber products exported: in most exporting countries these are reportedas free-on-board (FOB), which includes the transaction value of the goodsand the value of services performed to deliver goods to the border of theexporting country.
91
A Danzer Group document dated February 2003 forecasts export-relatedtaxes for Siforco in that year on the basis on the following rates:
92
Ministry of the Environment93
±An export tax which goes towards the Fonds de Reconstitution 
du Capital Forestier , levied at:
±4% of FOB value on logs
±1.5% of FOB value on sawn timber and veneer
Ministry of Commerce
±An export inspection fee, the Frais de Contrôle à l’Exportation , 
levied by the Office Congolais de Contrôle94at:
±1.2% of FOB value on logs 
±0.6% of FOB value on sawn timber and veneer
Ministry of Finance
±A turnover tax, the Contribution sur le Chiffre d’Affaires (CCA),
levied by the Office des Douanes et Accises (OFIDA)95at:
±3% of FOB value on logs only
Maritime Freight Management Office96
±A freight handling tax, levied at:
±0.24% of FOB value on logs, sawn timber and veneer5 TAX IMPLICATIONS – 
SIPHONING OFF THE WEALTH
Table 2: Interholco trade with Siforco – export taxes presumed evaded in 2002–04
* Siforco 2006 report; † original data from the Danzer Group; ‡ calculated by Greenpeace International (¤) Logs Sawn timber Veneer Totals
Export value: local account * 3,851,000 7,186,000 956,000 11,993,000
Presumed % under-invoicing † 35% 35% 35% 35%
Presumed export value: integrated
(local plus offshore) ‡5,924,615 11,055,385 1,470,769 18,450,769
Presumed export value: offshoreaccount ‡2,073,615 3,869,385 514,769 6,457,769
Overall tax rates † 8.44% 2.34% 2.34% 4.3%
Total taxes presumed evaded (ie on offshore export value) ‡175,013 90,544 12,046 277,603INTERHOLCO TRADE WITH SIFORCO 
– EXPORT TAXES EVADED 
Potential total 2002–04: approx ¤278,000
Potential total 2006: approx ¤352,000

26 27
The DRC’s Office des Douanes et Accises (OFIDA) would at that time have
charged a duty of 6% on logs based on FOB values ( Droits de sortie à
l’exportation) .101This was in addition to the turnover tax (CCA) described
above.
However, the Danzer Group did not budget for these taxes in its 2003
budget102because Siforco had been exempted from them as part of a
June 2001 agreement with the Ministry of Finance (the governmentdepartment that oversees the Office des Douanes et Accises) under theDRC Investment Code. According to the PricewaterhouseCoopers report mentioned above, this
agreement was subject to Siforco investing some ¤28.8 million in capacity
improvements or new capacity during the three-year period 2000–02.
103
Under the Investment Code, a company receives exemption from export-related taxes for the investment period and a set period subsequent to it (ie goods resulting from the actual investment made are exempt from tax).So under the June 2001 agreement, the export taxes would probably havebeen exempted into 2003, as well as during 2000–02.
For the period 2000–02, the PricewaterhouseCoopers report concluded: 
‘At December 31, 2002 the investments amounted only to some ¤0.7
Mio [¤700,000, or 2.4% of the promised investment]. In the event the
[DRC] government requires full compliance with the terms of the
agreement, the company may become liable for taxes it was previouslyexempted. The local auditor estimates this amount about KEUR 472.[¤472,000].’ 
The ¤472,000 of taxes exempted for the period 2000–02 was entered into
the accounts as a tax liability in the audit adjustments at the end of thereport, showing how seriously the PricewaterhouseCoopers auditorsviewed this breach of the 2001 tax exemption agreement (‘ no compliance
with tax agreement June 7, 2001 ’).
For 2003 it is possible to estimate – on the basis of the total local export
value given in the unpublished 2006 report and the rate of under-invoicing– that Siforco’s liability for the duty would have been around ¤82,000 (see
Table 4). (¤) Logs, sawn timber and veneer
Export value: local account * 15,200,421
Presumed % under-invoicing † 35%
Presumed export value: integrated (local plus offshore) ‡ 23,385,263
Presumed export value: offshore account ‡ 8,184,842
Overall tax rates † 4.30%
Total taxes presumed evaded 
(ie on offshore export value) ‡351,948Table 3: Interholco trade with Siforco – export taxes presumed evaded in 2006
* FAO (2007); † original data from the Danzer Group; ‡ calculated by Greenpeace International 
* Siforco 2006 report; † original data from the Danzer Group; ‡ calculated by Greenpeace International 
INTERHOLCO TRADE WITH SIFORCO 
– OTHER EXPORT TAXES WAIVED ORFURTHER TAX EVASION?
Potential total 2000–02: ¤472,000
Potential total 2003: ¤82,000
(¤) Logs only
Export value: local account * 888,000
Presumed % under-invoicing † 35%
Presumed export value: offshore account ‡ 478,154
Presumed export value: integrated (local plus offshore) ‡ 1,366,154
Office of Customs and Excise export duty rate 6%
Presumed total export duty liability ‡ 81,969Table 4: Siforco’s estimated export duty liability in 2003, assuming non-compliance with 2001 tax exemption agreement©Greenpeace/Davison

28 29
In the Republic of the Congo, certain export taxes are calculated on FOB
prices and hence can again fall victim to under-invoicing. In 2005,according to a report compiled by Ernst & Young for the Republic of theCongo’s Ministry of Finance,
104IFO paid a total of FCFA 2.1 billion
(approximately ¤3.2 million105) in forestry-related taxes, of which FCFA 1.3
billion (approximately ¤1.98 million) was based on FOB values and hence
vulnerable to under-invoicing (eg harvest/cutting and export taxes). 
Given that in 2005 IFO appears to have been expecting to under-invoice
by about 19% (see Table 1), its underpayment of FOB-related taxes mayhave amounted to FCFA 305 million (about ¤470,000). 
PROFIT LAUNDERING – 
ESCAPING TAX ON CORPORATE INCOME 
In addition to reducing the level of export-related taxes paid, setting an
artificially low transfer price helps reduce, or even eliminate, the amount oftax paid on profits made in the country of origin of the timber. According tothe World Bank, tax on corporate income in the DRC is currently levied at40%
106of gross profit and in the Republic of the Congo at 38%.107
The business plans already referred to show that between 2003 and 2006neither Siforco nor IFO was projected to pay any local tax on profits, notonly because of tax exemptions (discussed below) that covered the wholeperiod (IFO) or the bulk of the period (Siforco), but also because, with theexception of a small proportion of Siforco’s projected 2006 profit, anyoverall profit made by the companies was being transferred offshore via theunder-invoicing practices described in Section 3.
The detailed plans show actual profit before and after tax for 2002,
forecast profit before and after tax for 2003 and budgeted profit before andafter tax for 2004–06.
108They contain three sets of tables detailing
incomes, expenses and profits for each part of the company’s book-keeping system: one set for ‘ local’, one for ‘ offshore ’ and one for
‘integrated ’, which as already explained combines the local and offshore
categories. In all three financial accounts, for this whole period, the ‘ profit
before tax’ is identical to the ‘ profit after tax’ , while the line labelled ‘ tax’
always remains empty (see Tables 5 and 6). In other words, it is clear thatSiforco and IFO did not expect to pay any taxes during the period2002–06.As can be seen from Table 5:
±Siforco’s local account (DRC) shows a loss for 2002 and a predicted
loss for the years 2003–05. 
±Siforco’s offshore account, into which Interholco pays the difference
between the under-invoiced price on the official invoice and the trueexport price, shows a profit for all these years. Moreover, the predictedprofits shown for the years 2003–05 exceed in each case the lossshown for the local account, resulting in an overall profit when the localand offshore accounts are integrated. Hence, in 2003–05, all potentiallytaxable profit, and in 2006 the majority of potentially taxable profit, madeby Siforco in the DRC is proposed to be transferred to an offshoreaccount managed by Interholco in Switzerland. 
±Siforco’s integrated accounting shows a projected overall potentially
taxable profit for the five-year period 2002–06 amounting to ¤5.6 million. 
INTERHOLCO TRADE WITH IFO 
– EXPORT TAXES EVADED?
Potential total 2005: approx ¤470,000 INTERHOLCO TRADE WITH SIFORCO –
CORPORATE TAXES WAIVED ORFURTHER TAX EVASION?
Potential total 2003–06: approx ¤2.2 million
¤’000110 Local accounting (DRC) Offshore accountingIntegrated accounting 
(local + offshore)
2002 (consolidated) -1,006 444 -562
2003 (forecast) -1,886 2,000 114
2004 (budget) -2,187 2,318 131
2005 (budget) -557 2,730 2,173
2006 (budget) 388 3,380 3,768Cumulative profit/loss 2002–06 -5,248 10,872 5,624Table 5: Siforco projected ‘profit before and after tax’, 2002–06109
©Greenpeace/Davison

31 30
IFO’s situation is not dissimilar, with the company benefiting from an
exemption on corporate income tax running from 1999 to 2007,115based
on an investment period during the first two years of the agreement.116
Whether IFO made the entire investment in the timeframe proposed by theagreement is not known. However, this seems unlikely given that at thetime the IFO business plan was drafted (December 2003) the companywas technically ‘insolvent’ and new investments were not being made. A memo to the Danzer Group management from René Giger of Interholcoreporting a visit to IFO in April 2003 and copied to members of the Danzerfamily, reveals considerable anxiety on the subject:
117
‘Solvency Planning: Because of the uncertain fiscal situation, planning
is very difficult. However, it is clear that with today’s FOB prices IFO is
only just keeping in the black but has not yet made anyinvestments. With the extra tax [referring to an increase in the rate of
export-related taxes in the Republic of Congo] IFO will need approx.
another EUR 2 million. We will have to check whether this can be offsetby the subsidiary-BH [ie the offshore account].’ [emphasis added]
In its December 2003 business plan, IFO planned to continue transferring
funds into its offshore account by means of its under-invoicing practices,maintaining the local account in a state of ongoing losses. By this means,the local account would be left with zero liability to taxes on profit.
The business plan does not show the carrying forward of any losses from
previous years. However, in most tax systems around the world, includingthe Republic of the Congo,
118such losses can be offset against future
profits (ie tax only becomes due when a real profit is earned after the earlierlosses have been taken into account).Whether Siforco fully realised, or indeed exceeded, its overall projected
profit for the period 2003–06 remains unclear; however, an internal DanzerGroup evaluation of the Group subsidiaries dated November 2006proclaims that ‘ the company [Siforco] is making a profit. ?
111Another
document dated February 2007 shows that for the calendar year 2006 theprofit in the Siforco offshore account amounted to ¤2.85 million
112– only a
little less than the profit budgeted for in the 2004–06 Siforco business plan(ie ¤3.38 million). 
As indicated in the previous section, Siforco has been the beneficiary of
various tax exemptions by the DRC Ministry of Finance. As part of a newagreement reached with the investment authority, Agence Nationale pour laPromotion des Investissements (ANAPI), in November 2003, Siforco wasexempted from corporate income tax for the three year period 2004–06 on any profits resulting directly from a proposed US$16.5 millioninvestment.
113
Whether Siforco made the entire investment in the timeframe proposed by the 2003 agreement (half in 2003 and half in 2004) is not fully known.However, the following observations can be made:
±The Siforco business plan for 2004–06,
114also drawn up in 2003, did
not foresee any such investments, either for 2003 or for any of thefollowing years up to 2006. 
±If indeed Siforco made no such investment, then the agreement would
have been invalid and it would have been liable for corporate incometax on all its profits. However, by means of under-invoicing, local profit inthe DRC was projected to be almost entirely eliminated for the years inquestion, as explained above and illustrated in Table 5. 
Assuming that Siforco would be liable for corporate income tax – currently
levied at 40% – on its projected profits for 2004–06, and that it had nottransferred nearly all of its taxable profit offshore, it would have had to paythe DRC Ministry of Finance some ¤2.2 million. Thus it may be that
Siforco’s systematic under-invoicing over that period enabled the DanzerGroup to evade ¤2.2 million of corporate income tax from which its
exemption would otherwise have been doubtful. INTERHOLCO TRADE WITH IFO –
CORPORATE TAXES WAIVED OR TAX LIABILITY DEFERRED?
Potential total 2002–06: approx ¤4 million
©Greenpeace/Reynaers

32 33
As can be seen from Table 6:
±IFO’s local account (Republic of the Congo) shows projected cumulative
losses for the years 2002–06 amounting to ¤17.3 million.
±IFO’s offshore account, into which Interholco pays the difference
between the under-invoiced price on the official invoice and the trueexport price, shows projected cumulative profits for the years 2002–06amounting to ¤10.6 million.
±IFO’s integrated account thus shows projected cumulative losses for the
years 2002–06 amounting to ¤6.7 million.
Even if IFO had not transferred any profits to its offshore account, and
could have carried forward the losses shown for its integrated account, itwould still not have been liable to any tax on profits for the period shown.This would remain the case even if its exemption had lapsed as a result offailure to make the agreed investments, as discussed above. This isbecause losses brought forward would probably have cancelled any taxliabilities in 2005 and 2006.
However, by proposing to transfer ¤10.6 million to the offshore account
over the period 2002–06, the company has effectively exaggerated thecumulative losses in the local account by an equivalent sum. If IFO were infuture to offset its inflated losses against its profits, the Republic of theCongo would be deprived of an estimated ¤4 million of corporate income
tax (currently levied at 38%). The profit taxes calculated above for both Siforco and IFO may have been
avoided under the terms of tax exemptions granted to the companies bythe governments of the DRC and the Republic of the Congo. It remainsvery doubtful, however, particularly in the case of Siforco, whether the twocompanies did fully comply with the terms of their respective tax exemptionagreements. If that was the case then the companies might have beenliable to corporate income tax.tax liabilities might have fallen due.
Table 7 summarises our findings as to the revenue potentially lost to the
governments of the DRC and the Republic of the Congo through theDanzer Group’s projected tax evasion (through under-invoiced tradebetween Interholco and its subsidiaries Siforco and IFO) and possible non-compliance with tax exemption agreements.
¤’000Local accounting 
(Republic of the Congo)Offshore accountingIntegrated accounting
(local + offshore)
2002 (consolidated) -1,591 325 -1,266
2003 (forecast) -5,440 5 -5,435
2004 (budget) -5,012 2,254 -2,758
2005 (budget) -2,876 3,782 906
2006 (budget) -2,385 4,268 1,883
Cumulative profit/loss 2002–06 -17,304 10,634 -6,670Table 6: IFO projected ‘profit before and after tax’, 2002–06119COUNTING THE COST OF DANZER
GROUP’S ‘CON IN THE CONGO’
Potential total tax liability 
accrured 2000 –06 approx ¤7.8 million
The Danzer Group
subsidiaryTax Tax status YearsProjected revenue 
lost ( ¤)
Interholco trade 
with Siforco Ministry of Finance 
export taxesassumed non-compliance
with tax exemption
agreement (2001)2000–02 472,000
Interholco trade with Siforco Ministry of Finance 
export taxesassumed non-compliance
with tax exemption
agreement (2001)2003 82,000
Interholco trade with Siforco Various export taxesprojected tax evasion
through under-invoicing2002–04 278,000
Interholco trade with Siforco Various export taxesprojected tax evasion
through under-invoicing2006 352,000
Interholco trade with Siforco Corporate profit taxassumed non-compliance
with tax exemption
agreement (2004–06) and
under-invoicing (2003–06)2003–06 2,200,000
Total Interholco trade with Siforco 3,384,000
Interholco trade with IFOVarious export taxesprojected tax evasion
through under-invoicing2005 470,000
Interholco trade with IFOCorporate profit taxtaxes waived or tax 
liability deferred2002–06 4,000,000
Total Interholco tradewith IFO4,470,000
Total Interholco tradewith Siforco and IFO7,854,000Table 7: Estimated tax liability accrued by the Danzer Group subsidiaries through projected tax evasion and assumednon-compliance with tax exemptions, based on data for 2000–06

34 35
THE LOGGING MODEL OF DEVELOPMENT –
BALANCING THE CONFLICT OF INTERESTS
Industrial logging is promoted as a model for development because of its
notional contribution to government funds, notably for the provision ofessential public services. It is also promoted more recently, included bythe World Bank, as a means to mitigate climate change.
120
Public health or private wealth?
The ongoing conflict in the DRC is considered the world’s deadliestdocumented conflict since World War II: some 5.4 million people havelost their lives through war-related causes in the country since 1998.
121
Although a formal peace accord was signed in December 2002,sporadic fighting has continued, and the International Rescue Committeeestimates that a further 45,000 lives are still being lost every month, andthat nearly half of those dying are children under five.
122The vast majority
die from non-violent causes such as malaria, diarrhoea, pneumonia andmalnutrition – conditions that are easily preventable and treatable so longas people have access to basic healthcare and nutritious food.
123
Against this background of extreme poverty, it is clear that themisappropriation of even relatively moderate sums, in corporate terms,will have severe implications for the state’s potential to improve thewelfare of its people. 
On the basis of the estimated tax revenues lost through the Danzer
Group’s projected tax evasion and assumed non-compliance with taxexemption agreements, as shown in Table 7, the tax revenuessuspected lost from Siforco and IFO (a minimum of ¤7.8 million) would
be equivalent to any of the following, in 2000 prices:
±over 80% of the DRC Government’s investment in public healthcare
for the year 2000
124
±the cost of vaccination for over 700,000 Congolese children under
five years of age125
±50 times the DRC Ministry of Environment’s annual operating budget126Climate protection or climate chaos?
There is a fundamental conflict between the industrial logging model of
development and protection of forest areas for climate protection. Evenso-called ‘selective logging’, as practiced in the DRC, causesconsiderable greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions through fragmentationand degradation of forest biomass. In the case of Siforco’s operations inthe DRC, the clearance for logging roads and infrastructure can cause2.5 times more emissions than the selective logging itself.
127
Table 8 shows that the projected carbon debt from Siforco’s selectivelogging alone carries a potential financial liability (notional cost premiumfor carbon offset) 1.5 times greater than the total forestry and export-related taxes paid by the company in 2004. These figures do not includeGHG emissions from logging roads and infrastructure, nor thoseassociated with the timber removed from the forest. 
If the carbon held in the timber extracted is included in the calculation,
128
a further ¤1 million of potential offsets costs would need to be added,
making it nearly 2.5 times greaterthan the total forestry and export-related taxes paid by the company in 2004.
The conclusion one can draw is that the value of DRC’s forests as a
carbon store is potentially greater than the tax revenues generated fromselective logging. International agreements to pay for protection of forestareas for climate protection, and national industry regulations and taxes,should reflect the true value of this resource.
Table 8: Siforco taxes paid vs potential offset costs of estimated
direct carbon impact of selective logging, 2004
Volume of timber extracted (m3) * 37,000
Carbon stored in vegetation damaged and left to
decompose per m3of commercial timber extracted
(tonnes C)†0.46
Total carbon stored in vegetation damaged and left todecompose (tonnes C) ‡17,020
Total emissions released from vegetation damaged(tonnes CO
2) ‡62,361
Carbon offset prices predicted by Point Carbon under Phase IIof the Kyoto Protocol, 2008–2012 ( ¤per tonne CO
2) †30
TOTAL potential offset costs of direct carbon impact of
timber extraction ( ¤) ‡1,870,838
TOTAL forestry and export-related taxes paid by Siforco
(¤) *1,213,000
* Siforco 2006 report; † Brown et al 2005; 
‡ calculated by Greenpeace International; ± Point Carbon;©Greenpeace/Davison

36 37
6 DOES THE DANZER GROUP REPRESENT 
AN ISOLATED CASE, OR IS UNDER-INVOICINGINDUSTRY-WIDE?
Here we give six separate comparisons that are a strong indication that the
phenomenon of tax evasion through under-invoicing of the sales value oftimber exported from the DRC and the Republic of the Congo is by nomeans restricted to the Danzer Group. If other timber exporters weredeclaring full FOB prices – reflecting the full market price in accordancewith the arm’s-length principle – the total value of exports would need to bemuch greater than appears to be the case. 
Comparison 1: national average log export values versus
Siforco’s local prices
According to the PricewaterhouseCoopers report to the Danzer Group’s
Board of Directors discussed above, the DRC Government sets industry-wide minimum prices for the export of timber that ‘ are below production
cost and also below market price. ’
129These minimum prices are the so-
called ‘ prix mercurials’ .130
If a large part of the timber sector in the DRC were exporting logs at below
market prices – using the prix mercurial as a basis for setting their export
values – then it should be expected that the overall average value percubic metre of logs exported would reflect such a below-market price.
Using export data published by the DRC Ministry of Environment for logs of
all species, Greenpeace International calculates an average FOB exportvalue for logs ranging from ¤131/m
3in 2002 to ¤153/m3in 2004 and
2005 (see Table 9). Assuming that the composition of the species exported by Siforco as logs
in 2004 was roughly the same as that of the species exported overall (asboth logs and sawn timber) by the company in 2003 (for which data isavailable in the form of an Interholco shipping list
132), the average declared
(under-invoiced) FOB export value of Siforco logs for 2004 can beestimated at around ¤151/m
3(see Table 10). This figure is obviously very
close to the 2004 national average FOB value of ¤153/m3given in Table 9.
The average market FOB export value of Siforco logs for 2004 can beestimated at around ¤287/m
3.
The implication is therefore that national average FOB prices do indeed
reflect widespread under-invoicing.
Year Volume exported (m3) Value of exports ( ¤000)Calculated average 
FOB value – value divided 
by volume ( ¤/m3)
2002 27,720 3,632 131
2003 58,307 7,724 132
2004 94,390 14,626 153
2005 111,243 17,009 153Table 9: Average export values of DRC logs, 2002–05131Species nameProportions of
Siforco exports
(logs and sawn
timber) 2003 †Siforco local 
FOB value for 
logs ( ¤/m3), 2004 †Proportions of
exports x local FOB
(¤/m3) ‡Siforco integrated 
FOB value for 
logs ( ¤/m3), 2004 †Proportions of
exports x 
integrated FOB  
(¤/m3) ‡
Sapele 39% 146.42 57.1 220 85.8
Tola 9% 87.74 7.9 218 19.62
Sipo 16% 177 28.3 278 44.47
Iroko 14% 162.1 22.7 231 32.34
Tiama 3% 79.38 2.9 172 5.16
Bosse 1% 153.14 1.5 334 3.34
Wenge 14% 188.22 26.4 600 84
Aniegre 1% 90 0.9 548 5.47
Doussie 0.10% 296.98 0.3 260 0.26
Khaya 3% 106.81 3.2 220 6.6
Average price
across all species(weighted by shareof species)151.2 287.08
† original data from the Danzer Group; ‡ calculated by Greenpeace InternationalTable 10: Estimated average export value of Siforco timber, 2004


38 39
Comparison 2: ITTO published prices vs Siforco’s integrated
prices
Published industry-wide FOB export prices for the region are close to
Siforco’s true market (local plus offshore) FOB values shown in Table 10.
Log export prices for Francophone West African logs (B grade, FOB), as
published by the intergovernmental International Tropical TimberOrganisation (ITTO) in April 2004,
133were as follows: sapele – ¤244/m3;
sipo – ¤259/m3; iroko – ¤309/m3.
Comparison 3: ITTO published prices vs average export value
of top traded DRC species
Using government export data available in 2006, Greenpeace International
has calculated an average FOB export value for six of the most tradedtimber products (expressed as ‘Round Wood Equivalents’ (RWE)); seeTable 11. Together these species accounted for over 90% of DRC’s timberexports by value.
134
Table 11 indicates that the average export values of sapele, sipo, iroko andtola are only slightly higher than Siforco’s local FOB value for logs in both2004 and 2007.
135These smaller differences can be attributed to the fact
that the average FOB values in Table 11 cover both logs and processedgoods, while Table 10 covers logs only. In addition, processed goods aresold at higher prices also when the calculation is based on RWE figures. Inrelation to wenge, the greater price difference is probably due to most ofthe exports being higher-valued sawn timber than unprocessed logs.
Furthermore, published industry-wide FOB log export prices for the region
indicates that the value of individual species exported (shown in Table 10)are below true market value. Log export prices for Francophone WestAfrican logs (B grade, FOB), as published by the ITTO in July 2006,
136
were as follows: sapele – ¤229/m3; sipo – ¤259/m3; iroko – ¤259/m3.Comparison 4: timber export values of the main foreign-
owned logging groups
Table 12 shows total FOB export values across for all timber products
(logs, sawn timber, veneer, etc) of the main foreign-owned logging groupsexporting from the DRC in 2006, provided by the DRC Direction de laGestion Forestière in a 2007 FAO report.
137This shows that the average
export values for the NST Group, Trans-M and Olam are actually lower thanSiforco’s average export values. 
Furthermore, they are lower than the national average FOB prices (Table 9)
and Siforco local FOB value for logs in 2004 (Table 10). This is despite thatthe figures in Table 12 include processed timber products, which shouldhave a higher value than the FOB log prices. For example, Siforco’s localFOB value (2004) for sapele logs was ¤146.42/ m
3, while sapele sawn
timber was ¤306 m3. Based on an average RWE conversion rate of 1.8 for
Africa,1381m3of sawn timber would the equivalent value of 1.8 m3 of logs
or ¤264 in RWE. Hence export values expressed as RWE, which include
sawn timber and veneers, should increase the average ¤/m3 value of
exports.Species Volume (RWE) m3 Value ( ¤000)Proportions by 
value (%) ‡Average value ( ¤/m3) ‡
Sapele 52,376 8,420 23.82 161
Wenge 29,392 7,036 19.9 239
Sipo 28,886 5,522 15.62 191
Iroko 26,566 4,603 13.02 173
Tola 23,493 2,325 6.58 99
Afrormosia 18,344 4,217 11.93 230
Other species (of which
comprise less than 3%of national exports byvalue)35,356 3,232 9.14
Total 214,413 35,356 100 165
* DGF (in Mbala 2007); † original data from the Danzer Group; ‡calculated by Greenpeace International Table 11: Estimated average export value of top traded timber species (all products), 2006
©Greenpeace/Davison

40
Comparison 5: Olam’s export vs market values 
In the case of Olam, the company’s website discloses the true market
value for logs sourced for the financial year ending 30 June 2007:139
‘Olam sourced approximately 10,000 cubic meters of logs from DRCvalued at about US$5 million. This represents about 3% (log equivalent) of the total estimated wood harvested in the country’ .
The assumed average market value would be around ¤400/m
3(RWE),
almost three times greater than the average export value in Table 12.41
Comparison 6: ITTO published national export values for
Republic of Congo
The ITTO Annual Review ‘ compiles the most up-to-date and reliable
international statistics available on global production and trade of timberwith an emphasis on the tropics .’
140The 2008 report provides the latest
timber export figures provided by the Republic of the Congo Government.The DRC Government did not provide any figures.
141
Log export figures for the Republic of the Congo (Table 13) indicate thatthe average national FOB values in 2004–06 were close to the nationalaverage FOB values in the DRC for 2004–05 (Table 8). They are alsosimilar to the average declared (under-invoiced) FOB export value ofSiforco logs for 2004 (Table 9).
Year Volume exported (m3)Value of exports 
($ 000)Average FOB value –
value divided by
volume ($/m3)Average FOB value
(¤/m3) 
2004 844,000 166,932 198 158
2005 710,000 134,139 189 151
2006 633,000 129,899 205 164Table 13: Average export values of Republic of the Congo logs, 2004–06 142
* FAO 2007 (includes all timber products – ie logs, lumber, veneer, etc); ‡calculated by Greenpeace International Group (subsidiaries)Export volume 
(RWE) m3*Overall export value 
(¤000) * Overall export value (as
% of national exports) *Average export value
(¤/RWE m3) ‡ 
The Danzer Group
(Siforco)86,754 15,200 43 175
The NST Group(Sodefor, CFT, Forabolaand Soforma)
54,728 7,143 20 130
Trans-M 26,252 3,472 10 132
OLAM 6,686 925 3 138
Other companies(below 2% of nationalexports)
39,993 8,616 24 215
Total exports 214,413 35,356 100 165Table 12: Main foreign-owned logging groups exporting from the DRC, 2006
* FAO 2007 (includes all timber products – ie logs, lumber, veneer, etc); ‡ calculated by Greenpeace International 

43
The central plank of the World Bank strategy is the ongoing legal review
process – initiated as long ago as 2005 – that aims to cancel logging titlesissued since the May 2002 moratorium prohibiting the awarding of newtitles and the extension and renewal of old ones, as well as those issuedprior to that date that are found to be non-compliant with the terms of theoriginal contract. One criterion of contract compliance is whether thelogging company has paid its forest area tax.
147
However, the legal review does not concern itself with the othereconomically important taxes to which the industry is liable, and so doesnot tackle the issue of the evasion of these taxes by the logging groupsconcerned. As documented in this report, logging companies can evadepaying tax by under-declaring the true market price of the timber theyexport and/or their full turnover and profit.
While the World Bank and its donors continue to pour billions of taxpayers’
dollars into the DRC in the name of ‘ working for a world free of poverty ’,
148
international players in the logging industry, such as the Danzer Group, are
laundering untaxed profits to offshore bank accounts. 
If left unchecked, this unscrupulous behaviour will continue to make a
mockery of the international donor community’s poverty reduction efforts. It poses a major challenge to the World Bank’s aim of tackling corruptionwithin the logging sector and ‘ slow[ing] … the expansion of logging ’.
149
In effect, in being allowed to get away with evading tax, logging companies
are being given a financial incentive to continue expanding their operationsinto some of the world’s last intact rainforests.42
‘The World Bank is not encouraging
commercial logging in DRC. Our mainadvice to the DRC Government is NOTto expand industrial logging, and NOTto allocate any new concessions untilsatisfactory standards of governanceand management are achieved inexisting concessions and the country is able to enforce laws.’ World Bank website
143The Congo rainforests of Central Africa form the second largest rainforest
block on Earth after Amazonia. They are of incalculable importance for theglobal climate and the planet’s biodiversity, as well as to the forest-dwellingcommunities who depend on them for resources and livelihoods.
Fifty million hectares of rainforests in Central Africa are controlled by the
logging sector, with the vast majority of this area being in the DRC and theRepublic of the Congo.
144As elsewhere, endemic corruption and an
absence of government control145have attracted the most unscrupulous
logging companies, providing a stimulus to further corruption. 
In an environment of endemic corruption, logging companies inevitably
operate beyond the rule of law. In the Congo Basin, the logging industrycontinues to feed the networks of corruption that are obstacles to genuinedevelopment. Through support for an extractive industry-based model ofdevelopment, donor countries and agencies such as the World Bank areeffectively undermining their own rhetoric on establishing good governanceand alleviating poverty.
Within the DRC logging sector there are international companies from all
over the world, including France, Belgium, Germany, Italy, Portugal,Switzerland, the USA, Lebanon and Singapore/India. The activities of thesecompanies have been documented in the Greenpeace International reportCarving up the Congo .
146
In a context of corruption and weak governance in the DRC, the World
Bank and its donors have so far failed in its stated objectives of controllingthe expansion of industrial logging and improving governance of the sector.In fact, some international donors are contemplating providing financialincentives to the sector to help implement their expansion plans.7 CONCLUSION – INTERNATIONAL DONORS STAND
BY WHILE THE CONGO’S WEALTH IS PLUNDERED IN THE NAME OF DEVELOPMENT

44 45
International donors, including the World Bank and the IMF, which have 
the power and resources to lead change in the DRC and the Republic ofthe Congo, must not permit these countries to repeat the dismal history of other Central African states, where reliance on the short-term economics of extractive export industries has only exacerbated political corruption and poverty. 
Indeed, it is time the donor community realised that the industrial logging
model of development does not work in a context of existing poorgovernance and does not generate the desired long-term economic, socialand environmental benefits. Good governance principles must ensure thatthe money delivers long-term economic, social and environmental benefitsand that these aims are not undermined by international companies floutingthe rule of law.
WHAT DO THE DRC GOVERNMENT AND 
THE WORLD BANK NEED TO DO?
The DRC Government and the World Bank must prevent further
expansion of industrial logging until comprehensive social andenvironmental land use planning has been conducted and basicgovernance and anti-corruption measures have been established.To this end they must:
±maintain and enforce the May 2002 moratorium on the awarding of 
new logging titles and the extension and renewal of old ones
±halt the expansion of existing or planned logging operations and
infrastructure into intact forest landscapes and other key identifiedconservation areas
±cancel all illegally awarded and non-compliant titles, including those 
in breach of the moratorium or the DRC’s Forestry Code
±impose punitive measures against companies and individuals who
undermine the rule of law in the DRC, including by abuse of the transferpricing process‘Donors cannot go to their parliaments,
to their taxpayers, and say that we wantto support nations with millions ofdollars in aid when these very nationsare losing, through poor forestmanagement and governance, billions.’ Odin Knudsen, Senior Advisor,Sustainable Development, World Bank
150WHAT DO INTERNATIONAL DONOR
GOVERNMENTS NEED TO DO?
International donor governments must prevent further fraudulent
expatriation of wealth and profits from the DRC and the Republic ofthe Congo by companies engaged in tax evasion, capital flight andaggressive tax avoidance. To this end they must:
±demand that the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)
151
establish a requirement for all multinational companies to report their
trading activities on a country-by-country basis within their consolidatedaccounts. This approach would identify a group’s internal and externalincome and costs in each country where it operates, hence minimisingthe risk of transfer pricing abuse occurring. Such a requirement on thepart of the IASB would have the status of international law, and wouldthus not require local legislative consent
1528 ACTION – 
TIME TO CRACK DOWN ON CORRUPTIONAND STOP THE PLUNDER
THE WORLD BANK
©Greenpeace/Davison

46 47
ACRONYMS
AFD – Agence Française de Développement
ANAPI – Agence Nationale pour la Promotion des Investissements
CCA – Contribution sur le Chiffre d’Affaires 
DRC – Democratic Republic of the Congo
DGF – Directeur de la Gestion Forestière
FBH – Filialbuchhaltung (branch accounting)
FOB – Free on Board
FCFA – Franc de la Communauté Financière d’Afrique
GFTN – Global Forest and Trade Network
IASB – International Accounting Standards Board
IERE – Impôt Exceptionnel sur les Rémunérations des Expatriés (Exceptional Tax on
Expatriate Remuneration)
IFO – Industrie Forestière d’Ouesso
IMF – International Monetary Fund
ITTO – International Tropical Timber Organisation
KfW – Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OFIDA – Office des Douanes et Accises 
RWE – Round Wood Equivalents. A measure of the volume of logs (roundwood)
used in the manufacture of wood-based products (including sawn timber, plywood,veneer, etc).
SIFORCO – Société Industrielle et Forestière du CongoREFERENCES
Adam T et al (2005) ‘Does the integrated management of childhood
illness cost more than routine care? Results from the United Republic ofTanzania’. Bulletin of the World Health Organization 2005:83: 369-377
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/bulletin/2005/Vol83-No5/bulletin_2005_83(5)_369-377.pdf
Baker, R (2005) ‘Capitalism’s Achilles heel: dirty money and how to
renew the free-market system’ John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New Jersey
Baker, R (2006) ‘Africa’s losses in the great capital flight’ Interview with
Raymond Baker, author of Capitalism’s Achilles Heel: Dirty Money and
How to Renew the Free-Market System, The Africa Report , No.2, 2006
www.capitalismsachillesheel.com/AfricaReportArticle.pdf
Baker, R (2007) ‘The ugliest chapter in global economic affairs since
slavery’, Global Financial Integrity www.gfip.org/index.php?option=com
_content&task=view&id=109&Itemid=74
Brown S et al. (2005) Impacts of selective logging on the carbon stocks
of tropical forest: Republic of Congo as a case study. Report submittedto USAID. Cooperative Agreement No. EEM-A-00-03-00006-00.Arlington, USA: Winrock International. 
http://carpe.umd.edu/resources/Documents/rpt_carbon_congo_3_2005_
winrock.pdf/view
CBFP (2006) ‘Les forêts du bassin du Congo: état des forêts 2006’,
Partenariat pour les Forêts du Bassin du Congo www.cbfp.org/
documents/Les_forets_du_Bassin_du_Congo_etat_2006.pdf
Chanrai (2007) ‘Group profile’ and ‘Olam’ www.chanrai.com/history and
www.chanrai.com/olam
CIRAD (2003) ‘Analyse des conditions de reprise économique du
secteur forestier en République Démocratique du Congo’ Rapport demission pour la Banque Mondiale, September 2003
Danzer Group (2006) ‘Viewpoint of an African producer and trader’
Presentation by Olof von Gagern, Danzer Groupwww.unece.org/trade/timber/docs/tc-sessions/tc-64/10_von_Gagern.pdf
Danzer Group (2007a) ‘History’ www.danzergroup.com/History.62.0.html
Danzer Group (2007b) ‘Profile: about us’
www.danzergroup.com/Profile.1619.0.html?&L=1%5C%22%20onfocus%3D%5C%22blurLink%28this%29%3B%5C%22%20onfocus%3D%5C%22blurLink%28this%29%3B%5C%22%20onfocus%3D
Danzer Group (2007c) ‘Procurement rules African timber’
www.danzergroup.com/Procurement_Rules.1608.0.html?&L=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.intel.com%3F
Danzer Group (2007d) ‘Trust in our actions – values are trail markers’
www.danzergroup.com/Values.1604.0.html?&L=1%22%20onfocus%3D%22blurLink%28this%29%3B
Danzer Group and WWF (2006) ‘Danzer Group and the WWF to
cooperate’ Press release, 11 September 2006www.danzergroup.com/fileadmin/files_group/docs/press_11092006.pdf
Diakolo, M (2007) ‘Investment opportunities in the Democratic Republic
of Congo’ Presentation by Muzungu, Economic Advisor to the DRCEmbassy, ASBA International Trade Bureau, OR Tambo InternationalAirport, 29 November 2007 www.itb.co.za/DRC%20PRESENTATION.ppt .
Dun & Bradstreet (2006) Terreich, Schweiz und Liechtenstein, NST
Group company profile as of 20 November 2006
Economist (2000) ‘Quiet flows the dosh: A piece on capital flight out of
Russia’, 7 December 2000 www.cdi.org/russia/johnson/4676.html##5
Ernst & Young (2006) ‘Rapport definitif d’audit sur la certification des
recettes forestieres’, Volume 2FAO (2007) ‘Intérer les questions de genre dans le secteur forestier en
afrique Republique Democratique du Congo (RDC)’ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/010/k0821f/k0821f00.pdfFIDAFRICA and Pricewaterhouse Coopers (2007) ‘République
Démocratique du Congo: Guide fiscal pratique 2007’ www.droit-
afrique.com/images/textes/RDC/Fidafrica/RDC%20-%20Guide%20Fidafrica%202007.pdf
G8 (1998) G8 Action Programme on Forests (section VI points 10 and
11) Finance Ministers’ and G8 Foreign Ministers’ Meetings, G8Birmingham Summit, 9 May 1998 www.library.utoronto.ca/g7/
foreign/forests.html
Global Witness (2005) ‘Extracting Transparency: The need for an
International Financial Reporting Standard for the Extractive Industries’www.publishwhatyoupay.org/ifrs/pdf/extracting_transparency.pdf
Global Witness (2007) ‘IFM in DRC: Final report’
www.globalwitness.org/media_library_detail.php/616/en/ifm_in_drc_2007_final_report
Greenpeace International (2004a) ‘Danzer involved in bribery and illegal
logging’, June 2004 www.greenpeace.org/multimedia/download/
1/510262/0/danzergroup.pdf
Greenpeace International (2004b) ‘Danzer involved in bribery and illegal
logging’ (second edition), November 2004http://activism.greenpeace.org/forests/docs/Danzer-HR.pdf
Greenpeace International (2007) Carving up the Congo
www.greenpeace.org/international/campaigns/forests/africa/congo-report
IASB (2007) International Accounting Standards Board website
www.iasb.org/Home.htm ( accessed November 21 2007)
IRC (2007) ‘Mortality in the Democratic Republic of Congo: An ongoing
crisis’, International Rescue Committee www.theirc.org/resources/2007
/2006-7_congomortalitysurvey.pdf
ITTO (2004) ‘Tropical timber market Report, 16–30 April 2004’
www.itto.or.jp/live/PageDisplayHandler?pageId=237 (with online
registration)
ITTO (2005) ‘2005 annual review data tables’www.itto.or.jp/live/Live_Server/377/E-AR05.zipITTO (2006) ‘Tropical timber market Report, 1–15 April 2006’
www.itto.or.jp/live/PageDisplayHandler?pageId=237 (with online
registration)
ITTO (2008) ‘Annual review and assessment of the world timber
situation’ www.itto.or.jp/live/Live_Server/400/E_AR_07.pdf
Kiboko, A M (2007) ‘Dans un échange avec “médias pour
l’environnement et le tourisme” l’ambassade de France en RD Congoétale sa politique environnementale’, Le Potentiel , 21 February 2007
KfW (2007) ‘Les ressources naturelles en République Démocratique du
Congo – Un potential de développement?’ KfW Entwicklungbankwww.kfw-entwicklungsbank.de/DE_Home/Service_und_Dokumentation/Online_Bibliothek/PDF-Dokumente_Diskussionsbeitraege/AMD_50_Rohstoffstudie-frz_kurz.pdf
Knudsen, O (2003) Africa Forest Law Enforcement and Governance
Ministerial Conference (AFLEG), Yaoundé, Cameroon, Statement of OdinKnudsen, Senior Advisor, Sustainable Development, 16 October 2003http://siteresources.worldbank.org/ESSDNETWORK/64158610-1111643387420/20488216/AFLEGStatementOfOdinKnudsenOctober2003.pdf
Legalnet.cd (2008) ORDONNANCE-loi 69-007 du 10 février 1969,
Contribution exceptionnelle sur les rémunérations des expatriés (mis àjour au 26 février 2002) www.leganet.cd/Legislation/Dfiscal/
OL.69.007.10.02.1969.htm
Mbala, S M (2007) ‘Aperçu sur le secteur forestier en RDC’, le Ministère
de l’Environnement, Conservation de la Nature, Eaux et Forêts(MECNEF), Septembre 2007

48 49
Ministre de L’Environnement et al (2004) ‘Arrete Interministeriel No 010
du 17 Mar 2004 portant mesures economiques pour le developpementde ‘filiere Bois’ et la gestion durable des forets’ Le Ministre deL’Environnement, Le Ministre des Transports, Le Ministre du CommerceExterior, Le Ministre de L’Industrie & PME et Le Ministre des Finances. 
Ministere des Finances (1992) ‘Code des Investissements: Loi N°008-
92 du 10 Avril 1992 http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
INTCONGOINFRENCH/Resources/code_investissement.doc
Murphy et. al (2007) Closing the Floodgates: Collecting Tax to Pay for
Development Tax Justice Network 2007 www.globalpolicy.org/nations/
launder/haven/2007/2007taxjustice.pdf
Neighbour, J (2002) ‘Transfer pricing: Keeping it at arm’s length’ OECD
Observer , April 2002 www.oecdobserver.org/news/fullstory.php/aid/
670/Transfer_pricing:_Keeping_it_at_arms_length.html
OECD (2001) Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and
Tax Administrations Paris: OECD Publishing. 
OECD (2005) ‘Articles of the model convention with respect to taxes on
income and on capital’ [as they read on 15 July 2005]http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/50/49/35363840.pdf
Accessed 30 July 2007 PricewaterhouseCoopers (2007) ‘Democratic Republic of Congo:
Opportunities abound’ http://connectingpeople.pwc.com/partnersinafrica
/downloads/drc_opportunities_abound.pdf
Saint-Gobain (2007) Annual report www.saint-gobain.com/en/html/
investisseurs/rapport/Rapport2007GB-n.pdf
Schwidrowski A and, Saji Thomas, J (2005) ‘Forestry taxation in Africa:
The case of Liberia’ IMF working paper WP/05/156, August 2005www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2005/wp05156.pdf
Tax Justice Network (2005) ‘Tax me if you can. The true story of a global
failure’ A Tax Justice Network briefing paper September 2005www.taxjustice.net/cms/upload/pdf/tuiyc_-_eng_-_web_file.pdf (also
available in Dutch, French, German, Spanish and Portuguese)
Trefon, T (2006) ‘Industrial logging in the Congo: Is a stakeholder
approach possible?’ South African Journal of International Affairs 13(2):
101–14
Tshikala, E K (2004) ‘The forest revenue system and government
expenditure on forestry in Democratic Republic of Congo’ FAO paperFSFM/WP/07, September 2004 www.fao.org/documents/advanced_s_
result.asp?FORM_C=AND&owner=D2&agrovoc=,3821
UNSD (2004) ‘International merchandise trade statistics: compilers
manual’ http://unstats.un.org/unsd/publication/SeriesF/seriesf_87e.pdf
USAID (2003) ‘Conflict timber: dimensions of the problem in Asia and
Africa’ Vol 3, May 2003, Associates in Rural Development, Inc.www.usaid.gov/our_work/cross-cutting_programs/transition_initiatives/pubs/vol3afr.pdf
WHO (2008) ‘Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI)’
Programme description www.who.int/child-adolescent-health/integr.htm
WWF (2004) ‘Responsible purchasing of forest products’ Global Forest
and Trade Network, WWF International, February 2004http://assets.panda.org/downloads/finalrpg.pdfENDNOTES
1 Baker (2007)2 Greenpeace International (2007)3 Schwidrowski and Thomas (2005): p84 Danzer Group (2007a)5 Dun & Bradstreet (2006)6 Chanrai Group (2007)7 eg Greenpeace International (2007)8 FAO (2007): p459 Baker (2007)10 Neighbour (2002)11 Economist (2000)12 eg Murphy et al (2007)13 Baker (2006)14 Mispricing and abusive transfer pricing represents between $500
and $750 per annum. $600 represents the mean average.Source: Baker (2005): Table 4.4, p172
15 eg www.economist.com/research/
Economics/alphabetic.cfm?letter=T
16 eg Tax Justice Network (2005)17 Murphy et al (2007)18 OECD (2001)19 OECD (2005)20 Tax Justice Network (2005): eg p6721 Tax Justice Network (2005): eg p25,5822 eg Tax Justice Network (2005): eg p6723 Tax Justice Network (2005): eg p6724 Murphy et al (2007)25 Murphy et al (2007)26 Danzer Group (2007b)27 Internal memo to Ulrich Grauert on the potential purchase of
concessions in the DRC, 13 July 1998
28 German original: ‘Es geht nun darum, dass der Geldwert der
Ware, welche aus der R.D. Congo exportiert warden, nicht insLand hineinfliesst, sondem auf ein Sperrkonto in Europaüberwiesen wird und mit diesem Geld z.B. nötige Maschinen zumStrassenbau, Verkehrsbusse, etc. gekauft warden.’
29 By 2002 the current under-invoicing system was in place30 Draft contract (unsigned) between Siforco and Interholco detailing
trade relationship between the two companies. Copy held byGreenpeace International
31 German original: ‘welche aus geschäftlichen Gründen zu tief
angesetzt ist.’
32 German original: ‘direkt an die Siforco und einen sogenannten
Überpreis auf ein Konto in Europa.’
33 Draft contract (unsigned) between Siforco and Interholco detailing
trade relationship between the two companies. Copy held byGreenpeace International
34 Memorandum from Giger to von Gagern, Herger and Cuezva,
November 2002, on new procedures for Filialbuchhaltung. Copyheld by Greenpeace International
35 Memorandum from Giger to von Gagern, Herger and Cuezva,
November 2002, on new procedures for Filialbuchhaltung. Copyheld by Greenpeace International36 Letter from Schmidt (IFO) to Grauert (IHC) on the practice of using
sales prices on contracts (January 2002). Copy held byGreenpeace International.
37 German original: ‘... denn weiterhin werden die Verträge nicht
korrekt ausgestellt. Grundsätzlich dürfen keine offenen Preise fürIFO – Verträge geschickt werden. Den Grund kenne Sie, wennfalsche Informationen in unbefugte Händer kommen, dann hat dasmit Sicherheit kostenträchtige Konsequenzen für die IFO, bzw. fürdie Siforco.’
38 German original: ‘codifizierter.’ 39 German original: ‘... denn dann wird wohl auch der dümmste
Norweger erkennen, daß es sich hierbei um den echten Preishandelt.’
40 Examples of coded prices used on invoices (attachment to the
2002 letter from Schmidt (IFO) to Grauert (IHC)). Copy held byGreenpeace International
41 German original: ‘Das Wort “Prix” sollte aus dem Auftragsblatt
komplett verschwinden. Da alle Preise in Euro sind, sollten nurjeweils verschlüsselte Preis[sic] stehen, ohne Euro davor zuschreiben. Je weniger auf einen Preis hindeutet, um so besser.’
42 Order – ‘Commande’ – from Interholco to Siforco and IFO, where
coded pricing method is used, as explained in 2002 letter fromSchmidt (IFO). Copy held by Greenpeace International
43 Memorandum from Giger to von Gagern, Herger and Cuezva,
November 2002, on new procedures for Filialbuchhaltung. Copyheld by Greenpeace International
44 Internal price list for the trade of timber products between Siforco
and Interholco (2007). Copy held by Greenpeace International
45 Interholco invoice (“commande”) to Siforco, charging the local,
fixed price, March 2007
46 Memorandum from Giger to von Gagern, Herger and Cuezva,
November 2002, on new procedures for Filialbuchhaltung. Copy
held by Greenpeace International
47 Internal price list for the trade of timber products between Siforco
and Interholco (2007). Copy held by Greenpeace International
48 Business plan for the years 2004 to 2006 drawn up by the Danzer
Group for Siforco in 2003. Copy held by Greenpeace International
Business plan for the years 2004 to 2006 drawn up by the Danzer
Group for IFO in 2003. Copy held by Greenpeace International
49 Business plan for the years 2004 to 2006 drawn up by the Danzer
Group for Siforco in 2003. Copy held by Greenpeace International
Business plan for the years 2004 to 2006 drawn up by the Danzer
Group for IFO in 2003. Copy held by Greenpeace International
50 E-mail from Cuezva (DSE) to Herger (IHC) on the reconciliation
between the African Danzer subsidiaries (2002). Copy held byGreenpeace International
51 A Danzer Group company based in Reutlingen, Germany. Owned
fully by Danzer Anlagen und Beteiligungen GmbH. Providesadministrative services to the group. Source: Creditreformcompany profile 2004
52 According to PricewaterhouseCoopers (2007), withholding tax in
the DRC relates to the repatriation of profits including tax oninvestment income, interest paid on loans and dividends toshareholders 
53 German original: ‘Ich habe Dir gegenüber bereits erwähnt, daß wir
um Quellensteuer zu vermeiden, die Forderungen der SIFORCOaus quellensteuerpflichtigen Service-Leistungen nur zum kleinenTeil in der offiziellen Buchhaltung verbucht haben (Arthur isthierrüber informiert).’
54 Handelsregisteramt des Kantons Zug (Switzerland), 31 August
2007

50 51
55 German original: ‘Dazu wurden die offiziellen Debit-Noten der
Siforco in zwei Debit-Noten aufgeteilt. Ein Betrag wird offiziell in derBuchhaltung der IFO erfaßt, die Differenz zur Forderung derSIFORCO in einem zweiten Beleg, der nur in der Filialbuchhaltungerfaßt wird.’
56 Samuel Zurcher, Memorandum the Management of the ANBE AG,
4 January 2002, untitled. This memorandum summarizes theresults of a visit by Zurcher to IFO in the Republic of Congo, 23pages
57 Samuel Zurcher, Memorandum the Management of the ANBE AG,
4 January 2002, untitled. This memorandum summarises theresults of a visit by Zurcher to IFO in the Republic of Congo, 23pages
58 Samuel Zurcher, Memorandum the Management of the ANBE AG,
4 January 2002, untitled. This memorandum summarises theresults of a visit by Zurcher to IFO in the Republic of Congo, 23pages
59 Samuel Zurcher, Memorandum the Management of the ANBE AG,
4 January 2002, untitled. This memorandum summarises theresults of a visit by Zurcher to IFO in the Republic of Congo, 23pages
60 Legalnet.cd (2008) 61 FIDAFRICA and Pricewaterhouse Coopers (2007); Diakolo (2007)62 FIDAFRICA and Pricewaterhouse Coopers (2007)63 Draft contract (unsigned) between Siforco and Interholco detailing
trade relationship between the two companies. Copy held byGreenpeace International
64 German original: ‘Über dieses Konto werden Aufwände, die
SIFORCO betreffend, welche durch die SIFORCO offiziell nichtbezahlt werden können, beglichen (z.B. EuropäischeVersicherungen, Saläre von Expatriates, Ersatzteile von Maschinen,Rückführung von nicht registrierten Darlehen usw.)’
65 Memorandum from Giger to von Gagern, Herger and Cuezva,
November 2002, on new procedures for Filialbuchhaltung. Copyheld by Greenpeace International
66 Tax Justice Network (2005): eg p25,5867 Pricewaterhouse report to the Danzer Group Board of Directors,
year ended 31 December 2002. Copy held by GreenpeaceInternational
68 Creditreform Deutschland, Company profile Danzer AG, 9 May
2007
69 Danzer Group subsidiary, Cotraco, is a logistics company in the
DRC
70 Confidential May 2006 report on Siforco (2006). Copy held by
Greenpeace International
71 Pricewaterhouse report to the Danzer Group Board of Directors,
year ended 31 December 2002. Copy held by GreenpeaceInternational
72 Danzer Group subsidiary, SIFCI, is a logging and timber
processing company in the Ivory Coast
73 Danzer Group (2006)74 Greenpeace International (2004a); Greenpeace International
(2004b)
75 Danzer Group (2007c)76 eg Danzer Group (2007c), (2007d)77 Turnover IKEA-Group. Copy held by Greenpeace International  78 Customer letter from the Danzer Group’s Senior Vice President for
sales (late 2006)
79 Copy of invoice from Saint-Gobain to Interholco AG, March 2007.
Copy held by Greenpeace International 80 Saint Gobain (2007): p4
81 Copy of invoice from Saint-Gobain to Interholco AG, March 2007.
Copy held by Greenpeace International
82 Danzer Group and WWF (2006)83 Danzer Group (2007d)84 Danzer Group and WWF (2006)85 Pers comm. Elie Hakizumwami, Regional Forest Officer, WWF-
Central Africa Regional Programme (CARPO). May 2007
86 WWF (2004)87 Confidential May 2006 report on Siforco (2006). Copy held by
Greenpeace International
88 Kiboko (2007)89 DRC Forest Code Article 7190 KfW (2007): p6691 FAO. faostat.fao.org/site/379/default.aspx citing UNSD. 2004.92 Budget Siforco 2003 New, 11 February 2003. Copy held by
Greenpeace International 
93 The Ministry of the Environment approves the export contract,
which is required to obtain the export licence and the authorisationfor export which is issued by the Ministry of Commerce. Source:USAID (2003): p36
94 The Office Congolais de Contrôle inspects the cargo to be
exported and issues a report which is needed to obtain the exportlicence and the authorisation for export by the Ministry ofCommerce. Source: USAID (2003): p36
95 The Office des Douanes et Accises oversees payment of export
duties and control of the export parcel prior to loading. Source:USAID (2003): p36
96 The Maritime Freight Management Office oversees vessels
entering and leaving the port of Matadi
97 Confidential May 2006 report on Siforco (2006). Copy held by
Greenpeace International
98 Memorandum from Giger to von Gagern, Herger and Cuezva,
November 2002, on new procedures for Filialbuchhaltung. Copyheld by Greenpeace International
99 FAO (2007): p45100 Memorandum from Giger to von Gagern, Herger and Cuezva,
November 2002, on new procedures for Filialbuchhaltung. Copyheld by Greenpeace International
101 Ministre de L’Environnement et al (2004); CIRAD (2003)102 Budget Siforco 2003 New, February 11 2003103 Pricewaterhouse report to the Danzer Group Board of Directors,
year ended 31 December 2002. .Copy held by GreenpeaceInternational.
104 Ernst & Young (2006)105 In 2004, the average exchange rate has been FCFA 656 to 1 Euro
(exchangerate.com)
106 World Bank/IFC hosted website
www.doingbusiness.org/ExploreTopics/PayingTaxes/Details.aspx?economyid=48
107 World Bank/IFC hosted website www.doingbusiness.org/Explore
Topics/PayingTaxes/Details.aspx?economyid=49
108 Business plan for the years 2004 to 2006 drawn up by the Danzer
Group for Siforco in 2003. Copy held by Greenpeace International
109 Business plan for the years 2004 to 2006 drawn up by the Danzer
Group for Siforco in 2003. Copy held by Greenpeace International110 All Euro figures quoted direct from the original Danzer Group
documents. These are minor discrepancies in 2005 and 2006 forthe integrated accounts (ie figures round down)
111 German original: ‘Die Firma erzielt Gewinn und die
Nettoforderungen sind gedeckt mit Gegenwert (Holzlager).’Source: Protocol on the evaluation of the Danzer Group’sstakeholdings and accounts receivable (2006). Copy held byGreenpeace International
112 Printout from the Siforco Filialbuchhaltung income statement
(2007). Copy held by Greenpeace International
113 Arrete Interministeriel No. 13/CAB/MIN/PLAN/2003 et No.
12/CAB/MIN/FIN/2003 du 19 Feb 2004 portant approbation del’arragement du projet d’investissment de la Societe Industrielle etForestiere du Congo ‘Siforco scarl’
114 Business plan for the years 2004 to 2006 drawn up by the Danzer
Group for Siforco in 2003. Copy held by Greenpeace International
115 Samuel Zurcher, Memorandum the Management of the ANBE AG,
4 January 2002, untitled. This memorandum summarises theresults of a visit by Zurcher to IFO in the Republic of Congo, 23pages 
116 Ministere des Finances (1992)117 Danzer Group Travel Report April 2003. Copy held by Greenpeace
International
118 Article 76, Code Général des Impôts (2008)119 Business plan for the years 2004 to 2006 drawn up by the Danzer
Group for IFO in 2003. Copy held by Greenpeace International
120 Knudsen (2003)121 IRC (2007)122 IRC (2007)123 IRC (2007)124 The DRC Ministry of Health spent around about $9.2 million in
2000, ten times more than in 1999. Source: Tshikala (2004): p23
125 In many countries across Africa, the World Health Organization
promotes an Integrated Management of Childhood Illnessprogramme to combat a range of potentially fatal childhoodillnesses (Source: WHO 2008). For Tanzania, the cost ofhealthcare vaccination in 1999 was around $11 for a child underfive years of age (Source: Adam et al. 2005). Assuming a similarcost for the DRC and the Republic of the Congo, ¤7.8 million
would vaccinate 700,000 children
126 The operating budget for the Ministry of Ministry for Land Affairs,
the Environment, Fishing and Forestry was around $156,000 in2000. Source: Tshikala (2004): p23
127 Greenpeace International (2007): p71128 Using a conversion factor of 0.27t C/m3. Source: Brown et al
(2005)
129 PricewaterhouseCoopers report to the Danzer Group Board of
Directors, year ended 31 December 2002. Copy held byGreenpeace International
130 MECNEF website
www.mecnef.cd/etatlieuxenviron_forets_mercuriale.htm
131 MECNEF website
www.mecnef.cd/etatlieuxenviron_forets_statistique.htm; exportvolumes correspond with DGF figures in Mbala (2007)
132 Interholco shipping list for the year 2003133 ITTO (2004)134 DGF (in Mbala 2007)135 Internal price list for the trade of timber products between Siforco
and Interholco (2007). Copy held by Greenpeace International136 ITTO (2006)
137 FAO (2007): p45138 ITTO data adapted (Source: globaltimber.org.uk/RWE-ITTO-
UCBD.xls)
139 Olam website www.olamonline.com/htmlDocs/bd_tm.html#drc
(accessed 11 June 2008)
140 www.itto.or.jp/live/PageDisplayHandler?pageId=199141 ITTO (2008): Table 2, p3142 ITTO (2008): p89 & p105; data for 2004 export values taken from
ITTO (2005);Exchange rate US$1 = ¤0.8 (source:
www.oanda.com/convert/fxhistory)
143 World Bank online Q&A http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/
EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/AFRICAEXT/CONGODEMOCRATICEXTN/0,,contentMDK:20779255~menuPK:2114031~pagePK:141137~piPK:141127~theSitePK:349466,00.html
144 CBFP (2006)145 eg Trefon (2006); Global Witness (2007)146 Greenpeace International (2007) 147 See Greenpeace International (2007)148 eg www.worldbank.org homepage149 World Bank online Q&A http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/
EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/AFRICAEXT/CONGODEMOCRATICEXTN/0,,contentMDK:20779255~menuPK:2114031~pagePK:141137~piPK:141127~theSitePK:349466,00.html
150 Knudsen (2003)151 IASB (2007)152 See Global Witness (2005)

JULY 2008
Published by Greenpeace International
Ottho Heldringstraat 51066 AZ AmsterdamThe Netherlands
enquiries@int.greenpeace.orgwww.greenpeace.org/forestsGreenpeace is an independent global campaigning
organisation that acts to change attitudes andbehaviour, to protect and conserve the environment and to promote peace.
Greenpeace is committed to stopping climate change.We campaign to protect the world’s remaining ancient
forests and the plants, animals and peoples that dependon them.
We investigate, expose and confront the trade in
products causing forest destruction and climate change.
We challenge governments and industry to end their 
role in forest destruction and climate change.
We support the rights of forest peoples.
Cover: ©Greenpeace/Beltra. Back cover: ©Greenpeace/Reynaers