# Archivo original: cool-it-leaderboard-v3-april.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:01 -03 2025

1
62
28
53
36
33
41
42
27
31
22
14
22
18
16
22CISCO
DELL
ERICSSON
FUJITSU
GOOGLE
HP
IBM
INTEL
MICROSOFT
NOKIA
PANASONIC
SAP
SHARP
SONY
TOSHIBA
The Cool IT leaderboard evaluates 
top IT companies on their efforts to provide economy-wide climate 
solutions, reduce emissions from 
their own operations, and lobby for science-based climate and energy policies.
www.greenpeace.org/coolit
SOLUTIONS
FOOTPRINTADVOCACY
COOL IT
LEADERBOARD
VERSION 3: April 2010

Greenpeace’s Cool IT Challenge calls on leading Information Technology (IT) companies to be champions in the fight 
to stop climate change. The IT sector possesses the innovative spirit, technological know-how, and political influence 
to bring about a rapid clean energy revolution. The IT industry must boldly step out in front of older, entrenched energy 
companies to develop a robust business model that helps the world achieve critical emissions reductions — a win-win for 
the IT industry as it pioneers a global shift to a clean energy economy.
Companies such as Google, IBM and Microsoft have already redefined many parts of the global economy with business 
that emphasizes rapid innovation, iteration and unprecedented gains in productivity. These companies must now 
apply their strengths to offer cutting edge, technological solutions that can rapidly achieve the significant reductions in 
global warming pollution that scientists tell us are needed in order to avoid the worst effects of climate change, while 
simultaneously boosting economic prosperity.
The Cool IT Leaderboard evaluates global IT companies on their leadership toward fulfilling the significant potential of 
IT-enabled emissions reductions across the rest of the economy, as quantified by Smart 2020: Enabling the Low Carbon 
Economy in the Information Age , a 2008 report. In addition to measuring case studies and metrics associated with these 
IT-enabled solutions offerings, the Leaderboard examines companies’ performance in two other key climate leadership 
areas: management of their operational footprint, and climate and energy related policy advocacy.
The current version of the Leaderboard is Greenpeace’s third evaluation of the IT sector’s climate leadership. Companies 
have been and will be added or removed from the Leaderboard in accordance with their leadership performance. The 
Leaderboard includes a cross-section of the most significant and influential companies in the sector, and those which 
have previously demonstrated their ability to drive innovative change.  In this third version of the Leaderboard, two 
companies have been added - SAP and Ericsson.  Sun Microsystems, previously included in the Leaderboard, will be 
replaced in Version 4 by Oracle, which bought the company last year.
Based on new analysis from Leaderboard companies, the greenhouse gas reduction potential of their current IT solutions 
appears much stronger in this assessment.  However, there is significant room for companies to further demonstrate 
climate solutions and provide specific metrics for new solutions development. Companies such as Cisco and Ericsson, 
which have provided more informative case studies, have witnessed an improvement to their scores. Many companies 
have yet to demonstrate meaningful examples of IT climate solutions.
Across the board, companies must remain attentive to their growing carbon footprint and demonstrate plans to 
measure and limit overall emissions. The recently released Greenpeace report, Make IT Green: Cloud Computing and 
its Contributions to Climate Change , outlines the threat of increasing energy usage associated with cloud computing, a 
rapidly expanding IT business model. IT companies will need to rectify an inevitable increase in their demand for electricity 
to fuel the “cloud” by proactively advocating for policies that increase the supply of renewable energy. The next version of 
the Leaderboard (Version 4, Fall 2010) will be expanded to include criteria that captures the leadership of companies in 
managing the carbon impacts of their data centers.
Each of the companies evaluated must additionally go further in their advocacy efforts. Some Leaderboard companies 
participated in the international climate negotiations in Copenhagen in December 2009 for the first time. However, both 
in Copenhagen and back in national capitols, there has been little improvement to the comprehensiveness and depth of 
advocacy regarding carbon regulation, renewable energy deployment, or other climate policy positions amongst leading IT 
companies.INTRODUCTION  TO THE COOL IT LEADERBOARD
COOL IT LEADERBOARD: VERSION 3 
2

The Cool IT Leaderboard is updated regularly to track the climate leadership of the most influential IT brands in three key 
areas: 
• Efforts to offer economy-wide technological climate solutions that contribute to global greenhouse gas reductions;
• Initiatives to reduce their own global warming emissions; 
• Active engagement in political advocacy and support for science-based climate and energy policies. 
The implementation of ICT solutions in five sectors - buildings, transport, manufacturing, power, and 
‘dematerialization’ of services - has the potential to cut 7.8 metric GtCO2 by 2020 - 15 percent of today’s emissions . 
(McKinsey Quarterly Report, Oct. 2008)
IT has had a major impact on the way society communicates and produces goods and services. The sector must now rise 
to the opportunity and challenge of helping to solve the climate crisis by focusing new innovation on IT technologies such 
as smart grids, zero emissions buildings, and more efficient transport systems. These IT-enabled solutions are central to a 
clean energy economy. 
IT technologies make it possible to measure energy use and emissions in real time, which will ultimately allow energy 
consumers to better manage and reduce their usage. State-of-the-art IT solutions can make societies more efficient and 
maximize energy savings across sectors. Energy savings also spur significant cost savings, thus IT solutions are a win-win 
for the climate and the economy. In economic terms, IT-enabled energy efficiency translates into approximately US$646.5 
billion1 of cost savings.
Half of all points (50/100) that companies can earn on the Cool IT Leaderboard are based on the transparent 
demonstration of existing solutions offerings and the precision with which companies measure the actual net greenhouse 
gas emissions reductions of those solutions. Additionally, points are earned by companies that set economy-wide 
emissions reduction targets for their solutions.
Climate Solutions criteria represent 50 out of 100 points,  
divided as follows:
•	25 points: 	Company makes public the calculations of current net GHG emissions savings provided by IT 
solution(s) to other parts of the economy via case study data. 
•	15 points: 	Company makes public the explanation of metrics and assumptions used to calculate the net GHG 
emissions savings of their solutions.
•	10 points: 	Company sets ambitious short-term targets for growth of their net GHG emissions savings from IT 
solutions. 
Note: points listed above represent the maximum number of points for given criteria.
In this third version of the Leaderboard, scoring results signified improvements to the development and quantification 
of the energy savings and greenhouse gas reductions potential of IT solutions. Cisco and Ericsson stand out for their 
reporting of methodologies used to determine the impacts of their technologies. IBM and Fujitsu also score well on these 
criteria, although their performance shows little improvement over the previous Leaderboard evaluation.
Stronger quantification of solutions by IT companies can drive efficiency standards and send policy signals needed to 
push investments that further deploy IT solution technologies under complimentary market conditions.
1 Climate Group and the Global e-Sustainability Initiative (GeSI). SMART 2020: Enabling the low carbon economy in the information age, 2008.LEADERBOARD SCORING CRITERIA
IT-ENABLED SOLUTIONS
3

The IT industry is one of the most rapidly growing emitters of greenhouse gas pollution and industrial consumers of 
electricity. Without a significant increase in the use of renewable energy, the IT sector’s carbon footprint will continue 
to grow at a concerning rate, increasing the demand for electricity produced from coal and other forms of dirty energy. 
Given the projected growth of the IT sector, companies must effectively tackle their own operational emissions and those 
associated with their products by setting goals to reduce absolute greenhouse gas emissions on a well-defined timeline.
In this Leaderboard, many companies that had previously established aggressive greenhouse gas reduction goals have 
demonstrated steady progress toward meeting them. Cisco, HP , and IBM are examples of companies that have continued 
to set more rigorous targets for their operational emissions footprints.
Certain companies have prioritized the purchasing of renewable energy credits and offsets as a means of achieving their 
greenhouse gas reduction goals. Intel and Dell are two of the largest purchasers of renewable energy credits in the United 
States2. In future versions of the Leaderboard, however, greater credit will be granted to companies that attempt to directly 
purchase renewable energy for their operations and take direct responsibility for their environmental performance. 
Company Footprint represent 15 out of 100 points, 
divided as follows:
• 10 points: Company makes commitment to reduce absolute greenhouse gas emissions of its own operations 
on a defined timeline. Maximum points awarded to companies with absolute reduction goals of at least 20 
percent by 2012 using a 2008 or earlier baseline. 
• 5 points:  Amount of renewable energy used as proportion of total electricity use in own operation. Maximum 
awarded to renewable use greater than 25 percent of total, or has a target in excess of 25 percent by 2012.
Note: points listed above represent the maximum number of points for given criteria.
Companies that transparently report and measure their progress toward an absolute greenhouse gas reduction target 
receive higher credit in the operational footprint category. Google claims to be a carbon neutral company, but does 
not share either its emissions footprint or an overall emissions reduction target. Similarly, Microsoft has not established 
an absolute reduction target, despite greater transparency than Google in sharing its greenhouse gas emissions 
measurements.
Target-setting and disclosure are becoming increasingly important as companies like Google and Microsoft expand their 
operations to build data centers and increase electricity consumption, often increasing the demand for coal-fired power. 
Carbon neutrality can still result in higher pollution overall as the industry grows its net greenhouse gas pollution. 
Greenpeace’s report, Make IT Green: Cloud Computing and its Contribution to Climate Change3, illustrates growth in 
the IT sector’s electricity consumption — expected to more than triple by 2020 — largely due to the expansion of cloud-
based computing. Cloud computing, which relies on centralized data storage infrastructure to deliver real-time information 
from the internet, is quickly becoming a predominant IT business model. 
All IT companies, but particularly IBM, Microsoft, Google and other major players in the cloud computing market, must 
set strong greenhouse gas reduction targets to ensure that, as their appetite for energy increases, so does their use of 
renewable sources. 
2 Environmental Protection Agency, Green Power Partnership: National Top 50, January 2010. http://www.epa.gov/greenpower/toplists/top50.htm.
3 http://www.greenpeace.org/international/press/reports/make-it-green-cloud-computingIT’S CARBON FOOTPRINT
4

As the world struggles to define a pathway forward for addressing the climate crisis, the IT sector has a 
transformational role to play. IT companies must advocate for policies that create beneficial market conditions for 
IT-enabled climate solutions, thereby catalyzing a clean energy economy as they secure long-term profitability for 
their products and services. The implementation of these goods and services will require policy support and financing 
mechanisms in order to maximize their potential, and IT companies must apply their considerable political influence 
toward achieving these conditions.
The shift to an IT-enabled clean energy economy will not happen without a fight. Fossil fuel energy companies 
have benefited enormously from the status quo and are positioned to fight policies that would reduce demand for 
their primary products (i.e. oil and coal). Electric utilities are, at best, interested in a slow transition that maximizes 
profits without requiring costly changes to their infrastructure. If we hope to avert the worst social and economic 
repercussions of runaway climate change, IT companies must break away from these entrenched positions to deliver 
cutting edge solutions and bold advocacy leadership on a local, national, and international level.
The IT industry can drive fast progress toward both a profitable business model and a clean energy economy by 
aligning itself with lobbying efforts that support scientifically established greenhouse gas reduction targets as well as 
renewable energy and energy efficiency mandates and incentives programs.
Political Advocacy represents 35 out of 100 points, divided as follows:
• 10 points:  Political Position: Public speech, preferably by the CEO, that references the need for science-
based, mandatory greenhouse gas reduction cuts made to a relevant national or international audience.
• 15 points:  Political Advocacy: Demonstrated lobby for science-based, mandatory greenhouse gas reduction 
cuts at the national or international level. 
• 10 points:  Repetition Bonus: Measures the the repetition of positive speech and advocacy. 
Note: points listed above represent the maximum number of points for given criteria.
In the lead-up to Copenhagen, IT leaders, such as Ericsson, Dell, Microsoft, and Nokia, strengthened their 
engagement in the climate policy debate. IT companies arrived at the UN climate summit eager to highlight the 
potential of IT technologies to reduce emissions. However, IT companies failed to express a clear definition of specific 
policy goals and global reduction targets, which they must do if they truly hope to catalyze a market shift towards 
carbon-cutting technologies.
The Leaderboard rates companies on the depth, strength and quantity of positive advocacy work in pushing for strong 
global emissions reduction targets, energy efficiency and renewable energy deployment. Overall, Version 3 scores 
show some increased frequency in policy advocacy activity from the IT brands, most notably around the UN Climate 
Summit in Copenhagen. However, there has been little improvement in the quality of advocacy leadership, expressing 
a need for more robust policy positioning across the sector. POLITICAL POLICY AND ADVOCACY
5

CISCOCOMPETITOR COMPARISON
IBM
HP
Cisco replaces its parter and competitor IBM at the top of the Leaderboard in version three, propelled to the front on the 
basis of its thoroughness in documenting the impact of its solutions offerings, which reduce energy consumption in areas 
such as building design and energy management, telecommunting, and smart grid deployment.
Cisco is aggressively positioning itself as a central player in the development of a global smart grid. Though Cisco does 
not have the same brand profile as IBM or an elaborate “Smart Planet” marketing campaign to peddle its green tech 
solutions offerings, Cisco is rapidly developing a full suite of smart grid products and services that can empower its 
business partners and customers to become more effective energy managers. Much in the same way it played a critical 
role in the development of the standards and equipment that now constitute the backbone of the internet, Cisco hopes 
to play a role in the creation of an energy “network”, which will leverage the massive volume of data to be generated by 
smart meters, censors, and other devices that will eventually make up the smart grid.
Cisco is also one of the most active companies in demonstrating leadership on climate and energy policy advocacy — 
particularly in the EU — and CEO John Chambers appears to appreciate the importance of the issue and the role that 
Cisco and others need to play in informing the policy debate.  Hopefully we will see a similar jump in Cisco’s advocacy 
leadership as we review their solutions leadership for Version 4 of the Cool IT Leaderboard.
Cisco is the top scoring company for offering IT solutions to curb greenhouse gas emissions, offering a number of solution 
services. The company provides various calculators , which explain the metrics and assumptions as well as calculations 
of emissions savings in regards to the use of Cisco services, ranging from the company’s telepresence to connected 
buildings and workplace.
Cisco has an aggressive absolute emission reduction targets  of 25 percent by 2012, from a 2007 baseline. The company 
also powered 37 percent of its electricity via a combination of onsite renewables and renewable energy credits.
Cisco’s advocacy score rises, mainly due to its repetition score, from its advocacy during last year’s Copenhagen climate 
meetings. Cisco also gains points from it’s public speech  on climate policy, and CEO Chambers’ post Copenhagen Op-Ed  
was among the best in capturing the fact that market opportunities and cost savings for businesses will only come with 
policies to reduce emissions and drive clean energy solutions, and corporations need to start making themselves vocal 
and politically relevant in order to push governments to take action.
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 32/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 15/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 15/35SUMMARY+
x=-62/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 19                 31
62
42
4132
23
1915
12
1015
07
12
6

53
22
6230
01
3210
15
1513
06
15ERICSSONCOMPETITOR COMPARISON
NOKIA
CISCO
Ericsson is one of the world’s largest telecommunications equipment companies, providing a significant part of the 
backbone for the explosive growth of mobile voice and data transmission.   Ericsson makes a strong debut on the Cool IT 
Leaderboard, coming in second overall, largely on the strength of its solutions case studies and thorough methodology for 
measuring net emission reductions from mobile solutions.  
Outgoing CEO Carl-Henric Svanberg was among the strongest corporate voices calling for governments to act in the 
lead-up to Copenhagen, and this position will hopefully be retained under Ericsson’s new CEO Hans Vestberg.   Ericsson 
is well positioned to leverage its mobile communication technologies to provide transformative lower-carbon business 
models across a number of other sectors, and more specific engagement in the policy arena by Ericsson is needed to 
make these reductions real.
Ericsson scores very strongly on the solutions criteria, right behind Cisco and ahead of Fujitsu. It has rigorous Life Cycle 
Assessments (LCAs)  of its equipment and solutions and strong public methodology, which also accounts for the type of 
power  communications equipment it utilizes in different locations. 
Ericsson scores top marks for a target of 40 percent emissions reductions by 2012 . Ericsson does not have a public 
renewable energy target.
Ericsson’s CEO was the boldest CEO of all the tech companies before  and during  the Copenhagen Climate Summit, 
emphasizing the role of IT solutions in reducing emissions in a clean and prosperous economy. Ericsson could improve by 
providing more specific evidence of how it is pushing for stronger climate regulation with politicians.
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 30/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 10/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 13/35SUMMARY+
x=-53/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 -                      -
7

62321515IBMCOMPETITOR COMPARISON
FUJITSU
CISCO
Home of the ubiquitous “Smarter Planet” marketing strategy, IBM continues to demonstrate climate leadership through 
its delivery of IT solutions to reduce emissions  on a large scale, as evidenced most clearly by city-level solution projects. 
Despite high-level political access, particularly to the Obama Administration in the U.S., neither CEO Sam Palmisano 
nor IBM’s lobbying machine has put Big Blue’s weight behind pushing the policy solutions that are needed to drive the 
economy-wide transformation that would further drive IBM’s solutions business model.
IBM has been one of the sector leaders in demonstrating the ability and benefits of achieving significant reductions in GHG 
emissions from its own operations. But with IBM’s stated investment plans to ramp up cloud computing investments, 
and the associated increase in electricity consumption that that will bring, how the IBM cloud is built will become an 
increasingly important factor in subsequent Leaderboard evaluations of their continued leadership in managing their 
own carbon footprint. With a much stronger submission by partner / rival Cisco and the addition of Ericsson, both of 
which scored above IBM even in the solutions category, IBM has dropped to third place in this Leaderboard. We hope 
to see much more policy advocacy from IBM and an even stronger submission for its solutions work for the Fall 2010 
Leaderboard.
IBM offers a wide range of climate solutions as part of its ‘Smarter Planet’ program and provides some case studies of 
savings achieved. IBM also provided case studies for traffic reduction in Stockholm and Smart Grid data . While savings 
figures were provided, IBM needs to give more details on additional case studies with net emissions savings and solutions.
IBM has a proven track record of reducing its GHG emissions and provides very strong absolute emissions reductions 
targets . IBM has achieved 8.6 percent renewable energy use  by 2008, but it has not set a target to increase use by 2012.
IBM is weak on taking a progressive position in the political debate on climate legislation. The best example is its letter to 
Australian Prime Minister  before Copenhagen.
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 23/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 12/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 07/35SUMMARY+
x=-42/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 29             433628010742231207
8

42231207HPCOMPETITOR COMPARISON
CISCO
IBM
As the largest PC manufacturer in the world, HP has been slowly and steadily building its branding and positioning as a 
solutions company that is concerned about the threat posed by climate change and the need for government action to 
reduce emissions. It has also taken notable measures to reduce its own greenhouse gas footprint. However, while HP is 
able to point to several examples of product and service solutions offerings that reduce emissions, it is a much smaller 
part of the HP business profile than some contemporaries in the sector, most notably IBM, which has established strong 
brand identity and a much more substantive product and service offerings to reduce emissions in other sectors.
HP’s policy advocacy on climate and energy has been relatively frequent, though often muted, more typically lending its 
name to joint communiques or collaborative lobbying efforts, far below the volume and level of ambition that we would 
expect the #1 Company in Newsweek’s Green Ranking  to demonstrate.
HP has information on climate solutions including Halo virtual meeting, print on demand and building energy management. 
HP is also working on accounting for Embedded Energy  used during production of hardware required for solutions. This 
will provide more accurate estimations of emissions  reductions over the entire lifecycle of a solution.
HP nearly scores top marks for its commitment to reduce the GHG emissions of HP-owned and HP-leased facilities 20 
percent below 2005 levels by 2013 on an absolute basis. Voluntary renewable energy purchases (including credits and 
energy generated on-site) represented 3.6 percent of HP’s electricity use in 2009 in addition to the renewable energy in 
the power grid. In 2008 HP set a goal to increase its purchases of electricity from renewable sources to 8 percent of total 
electricity usage by 2012. HP could improve by setting a more ambitious target.
HP slightly improved its score by participating  in the Copenhagen Climate summit. It also have signed onto multiple 
climate advocacy letters  and groups . However, to score more points, more prescriptive, detailed and engaged advocacy 
is needed, especially from the CEO, Mark Hurd.
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 19/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 10/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 12/35SUMMARY+
x=-41/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 13              426232151541191012
9

36
42
2228
23
1901
12
0307
07
0FUJITSUCOMPETITOR COMPARISON
IBM
TOSHIBA
Fujitsu is now the third largest IT solutions company in the world, and the largest in Japan.  Fujitsu has begun to 
operationalize the findings of the Smart2020 analysis through its Green Policy Innovation division that specifically focuses 
on IT services  to reduce emissions in other areas of the economy.  The company showcases data from multiple case 
studies  on the application of its solutions offerings but more detailed information is needed to analyze the assumptions 
and metrics used in these calculations.  Fujitsu should be lauded as one of the first companies to announce a global 
target for emissions savings through IT solutions.  Given this goal, and the understanding that business ‘possibilities are 
infinite’ for growth in IT climate solutions, Fujitsu needs to more aggressively articulate and advocate this message in the 
policy arena. This is especially the case in Japan where there is a strong need to counter the fossil fuel industry, which is 
lobbying against Prime Minister’s Hatoyama’s target of 25% reduction in greenhouse gases from 1990 levels by 2020.
Fujitsu has a comprehensive system to measure the before-and-after impacts  of its solutions. It also provides the metric 
for emissions savings, including the energy consumption of these solutions. To improve its score, Fujitsu also needs to 
include emissions generated throughout the complete lifecycle of its products, especially those from manufacturing. 
Fujitsu is the only company to have a credible target for carbon savings  provided to customers; the goal of 12 million 
metric tons from 2009 to 2012 needs further clarification as to how it will be achieved. 
Fujitsu has a relative emissions reduction target  and no global target for renewables purchasing . Fujitsu should follow the 
lead of IBM and HP and commit to absolute emission reduction targets.
Fujitsu provided limited examples of climate advocacy in Japan and globally by joining the Japanese Climate Leaders 
Partnership  and signing the Copenhagen Communique  but the company could be far more active on both a national and 
international scale.
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 28/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 01/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 07/35SUMMARY+
x=-36/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 18               33
10

33
31
4207
14
2301
05
1225
12
07GOOGLECOMPETITOR COMPARISON
MICROSOFT
IBM
Google is one of the largest “cloud” based IT companies. Its business model is to put all of the world’s information online, 
an endeavor requiring large and energy voracious data centers. With the self-chosen motto, “Don’t Be Evil,” Google 
knows it has a huge carbon problem if the current electricity grid remains heavily dependent on fossil fuels. Google 
continues to be among the strongest of the IT companies in advocating government policy changes  to drive low carbon 
sources of electricity, including support for national renewable electricity and energy efficiency standards. Google has also 
shown recent leadership in calling for the need for consumer access to information on their energy consumption , such as 
the data to be generated from smart meters.  
However, Google has steadfastly refused to release any meaningful data on its own energy use or carbon emissions, 
citing concerns over disclosing information that could be used by its competitors, even though its arch-rival Microsoft 
is transparent on this issue.  Google’s explosive growth through Gmail, YouTube, and its soon-to-be online library are 
ultimately driving emissions higher, not lower, and creating a greater demand for coal and other fossil fuels.  While it has 
been one of the most thoughtful policy advocates among IT companies, Google’s advocacy would be much more credible 
if it admitted that it has a carbon problem and made policy changes to solve it. 
Google’s solutions offering remains unchanged since the October 2009 version. PowerMeter provides real-time data 
to better manage home energy use but to date Google has not released any significant case studies on how this can 
reduce overall GHG emissions. In-depth analysis of possible savings from plug-in hybrids under the Recharge IT program 
provides a good example of how to measure actual overall impacts of climate solutions. Google can improve its score by 
applying a rigorous methodology to future case studies on the impact of PowerMeter.
Google has no emission reduction targets  and does not release or disclose its own emissions. This lack of transparency 
puts Google significantly out of step with most other technology companies. Google claims to be carbon neutral, buying 
offset credits to compensate. Carbon neutral or not, the lack of transparency and the fact that its current investments in 
infrastructure are changing energy policy in the communities where they are built threaten to undermine the company’s 
credibility as a climate leader. Google scores one out of five for investments in renewable energy research . It does not, 
however, have an overall target to increase renewables use.
Google remains the top scoring company on political advocacy thanks to a clear political position. Google’s CEO Eric 
Schmidt  spoke at length in November 2008 about the failure of the current political system and the need to get the right 
policies to drive transformative investment in clean energy technologies. Such technologies will create long-term economic 
growth while drastically reducing GHG emissions and dependence on foreign oil, as well as help to avoid the dangerous 
distractions of so-called clean coal and nuclear power, which take funding away from true renewables. 
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 07/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 01/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 25/35SUMMARY+
x=-33/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 -               32
11

42231207MICROSOFTCOMPETITOR COMPARISON
IBM
GOOGLE
As the largest software company in the world, Microsoft has unparalleled reach into homes, businesses, and 
governments. Microsoft has only recently begun to show an interest in leveraging this reach to empower significant 
energy savings beyond the operational footprint of the PC. While Microsoft has traditionally had a lower greenhouse 
footprint than others in the sector due to its focus on software development, the rapid shift Microsoft is making to 
“cloud” based software solutions, in competition with Google, will fundamentally change its emissions profile and is 
likely a significant reason behind its refusal to adopt an absolute emissions reduction target. 
Microsoft has become one of the largest contributors  to political campaigns over the last 10 years, and has averaged 
nearly US$9 million in lobbying expenses each year since 2003 . Despite its significant political influence and access, 
Microsoft has not demonstrated regular leadership in calling for policymakers to adopt the policies necessary to reduce 
emissions and drive deployment of renewable energy solutions or energy efficiency technologies. Microsoft did take a 
small step forward in advance of the UN Climate negotiations in Copenhagen last year, supporting a call to President 
Obama to reach a deal in Copenhagen that would have resulted in a legally  binding agreement . 
Microsoft has case studies  on the net lifecycle emissions reductions of its digital music and digital software distribution. 
Recently, more information  has been provided on how Microsoft’s Holm energy management software will empower 
electric vehicle owners to better manage their electric vehicle charging.
Microsoft has set a goal to reduce its carbon emissions per unit of revenue at least 30 percent below 2008 levels by 2012. 
However, there is no commitment to absolute emissions cuts. Microsoft receives four points for providing 24 percent of its 
electricity via renewable energy .
Microsoft’s policy statement on climate needs strengthening, but it was notable that Microsoft was active at the 
Copenhagen Climate conference and in writing to President Obama in support of a global deal.  Despite former CEO Bill 
Gates recently coming forward to speak forcefully in favor of a transformation to our energy system, Steve Ballmer has, 
thus far, failed to effectively articulate the importance of climate protection and clean energy transformation, or the need 
for strong government policy to drive this transformation.
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 14/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 05/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 12/35SUMMARY+
x=-31/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 07             233331
0714
0105
2512
12

COMPETITOR COMPARISON
28
41
3602
19
2815
10
0111
12
07DELL
HP
FUJITSU
As one of the largest sellers of personal and enterprise servers and computers, Dell has invested resources in managing 
its own operational footprint, participating in pilot projects to reduce emissions along the long tail of the electronics supply 
chain, and investing in renewable energy.  In terms of climate solutions potential, Dell’s lack of portfolio diversity leaves the 
company playing catch up to competitors such as HP and front-runners like IBM. Dell’s attempt to diversify its portfolio 
with the acquisition  of Perot Systems, a company mainly focused on government and health care consultancy services, 
could be a harbinger that the company aims to expand its IT climate solutions offering. Despite its current lack of climate 
solutions, Dell still participates in climate and energy policy advocacy, but mainly in the form of signing onto other joint 
letters of support . The company is often muted in its specific prescriptions for policy change. Michael Dell should continue 
to use his substantial bully pulpit to become a champion for stronger national and international clean energy, energy 
efficiency and climate legislation, just as Eric Schmidt has done at Google.
Dell lists a large number of technology solutions , but does not release any information on actual emission savings, making 
it difficult to gauge how effective it may be in reducing greenhouse gas emissions in other sectors of the economy.
Dell scores full points for its ambitious greenhouse gas emission reduction target  40 percent by 2015 from a 2007 
baseline.  Dell also has a strong commitment to sourcing renewable energy, with 26 percent of its electricity coming from 
renewable sources .
In December, prior to the Copenhagen climate meetings, Michael Dell wrote a timely opinion  piece in Forbes that focused 
on the need for governments and businesses to act urgently with science-based, climate policies to reduce emissions.   
Dell has signed onto industry letters of climate  support. The company needs to increase both the substance and volume 
of its climate advocacy to earn more points.
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 02/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 15/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 11/35SUMMARY+
x=-28/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 21               23
13

27071505 INTELCOMPETITOR COMPARISON
Though it does not sell solutions directly, as one of the largest chip manufacturers in the world, Intel has significant 
business opportunities associated with green IT technologies that address climate change. Significant investment in a 
new generation of computer chip technology is required to integrate and transform appliances, buildings, sensors and 
other devices and wire them into “smart” devices, which will allow us to more efficiently and dynamically manage our 
energy use.
Intel has taken management of its carbon footprint seriously. As the operator of a significant number of data centers, it 
has made some direct investments in renewable electricity generation, and has been the largest purchaser of renewable 
electricity in the U.S. for the past two years. Unfortunately, this same commitment has not been seen in its engagement 
approach to climate and energy policy development. This is quite surprising from a company that has built its brand 
identify around an ability to drive innovation. Strong domestic climate and energy policy is what is needed to spur 
innovation and drive demand for IT energy solutions in the U.S.
Intel scores for publishing one of the few detailed comparison studies on the overall energy savings of digital music 
delivery in place of traditional music distribution. More examples like this are needed to highlight the benefits of specific 
solutions.
Intel is strong on reducing its carbon footprint with the top score for emissions reduction and renewables use  and is the 
largest purchaser of renewable electricity in the U.S. 
Intel provides few examples of how it is effectively advocating for stronger climate policy. In fact, one of the few recent 
examples isolated Intel as the sole IT company to join a letter  to key U.S. Senators along with large carbon intensive 
companies in pushing for a significant weakening of U.S. climate legislation by allowing more international “offsets” into the 
carbon trading system. 
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 07/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 15/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 05/35SUMMARY+
x=-27/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 18             28NO DIRECT COMPETITORS IN THE LEADERBOARD
14

53301013NOKIACOMPETITOR COMPARISON
ERICSSON
As the world’s largest mobile phone manufacturer, Nokia has excelled in producing efficient  mobile devices, reducing its 
operational greenhouse gas emissions and disclosing  the emissions of its products’ lifecycle. Considering this leading 
work on climate change issues, it’s surprising to see Nokia lag behind in the Cool IT Leaderboard. Nokia needs to be 
far more prescriptive in specifying the type of science-based reduction targets needed in international and national 
climate agreements. Nokia is expanding its core business to include more cloud services  that will allow its Ovi software 
to better compete with Apple, Microsoft, Google and others. The company will need to ensure that the expansion of 
data centers will be met with a commitment to drive more renewable energy into the electricity grid.
Nokia has provided some very simple calculations on the potential emissions-saving benefits  of its mobile technology, but 
no actual case studies.  Nokia needs to show how its products and services create measurable reductions in greenhouse 
gas emissions, much in way that Ericsson has done.
Nokia scores full marks for its emissions reduction targets  of 18 percent from 2006 levels by 2010. The company gets 25 
percent of its energy from renewable  sources with plans to expand  to 50 percent by 2010.
Nokia’s CEO Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo published an opinion piece  prior to the Copenhagen climate meetings commenting on 
the role that IT can play in reducing emissions and stating that “the cost of doing nothing to mitigate climate change is too 
high”. Nokia is also a member of WWF’s Climate Savers program.
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 01/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 15/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 06/35SUMMARY+
x=-22/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 16             2022011506
15

22
4206
2306
1210
07 IBM
ORACLESAPCOMPETITOR COMPARISON
  TO BE ADDED IN VERSION 4
SAP’s customer base provides it incredibly broad reach into some of the worlds largest corporations, as it offers 
enterprise-scale platforms to deliver increasingly granular levels of information on the operational systems of medium-
size to multi-national businesses.  Given its reach and relationships with such a broad swath of corporations around the 
world, SAP is well positioned to help its clients manage their energy and carbon footprint at an enterprise-wide level, 
and to help unlock areas of significant reduction potential. While SAPs leadership has seemingly recognized both the 
environmental threat and the business opportunities at stake in the climate debate, the company needs to aggressively 
covert its corporate client base into new customers for its climate related enterprise management software and show 
case studies of how this helps major customers cut emissions.
SAP scores for an overview  of its climate solutions on its websites and for case studies of actual implementation, but the 
company’s case studies are much less detailed than those provided by other companies.
SAP scores six points for progress on cutting its own emissions and having a 51 percent emissions reduction target  from 
2007 levels by 2020.  SAP could improve its score by setting a strong 2012 reduction target. SAP has no public target for 
boosting additional renewable energy use.
SAP , like many IT companies, signed on to the Copenhagen Communique . Former SAP CEO Léo Apotheker made 
several speeches  and interviews before and after Copenhagen, but SAP’s new corporate leadership needs to show 
stronger company-wide support for climate regulation.
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 06/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 06/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 10/35SUMMARY+
x=-22/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 -                     -
16

1822
0819
0203
080 TOSHIBACOMPETITOR COMPARISON
SHARP
PANASONIC
As a conglomerate with diversified product and services ranging from consumer electronics and household appliances 
to energy management systems and social management infrastructure, Toshiba has potential to offer a number of 
emissions-reducing solutions to businesses, governments and consumers. Toshiba is currently light on the details of 
its solution offerings, and there is a need for clearer case study data from the company to showcase that it is providing 
real emissions savings now. Toshiba cannot claim to be a climate leader while it continues to produce components 
for nuclear power generators and a new ABWR  plant design, pushing aggressively for a nuclear renaissance, which 
is a dangerous and costly distraction from real solutions to climate change. Toshiba has claimed that it supports the 
Japanese government’s national greenhouse gas reduction goals of 25 percent from 1990 levels by 2020. This support 
is crucial and needs to be visible, vocal and repeated.
Toshiba has a number of interesting solutions, including Feminity , a power management device, a burgeoning solar 
panel systems division  and the promise of Toshiba’s first smartgrid  project on Miyako Island in Japan. Toshiba also 
provides basic case studies  and research  around its participation in life cycle assessment standards in Japan.  
However, for the company to score more points, it must provide more detail on the methodology and projected CO2 
savings of its solutions.
Toshiba scores three points for pledging to peak  its greenhouse gas emissions by 2012, after a decade-long rise.  
Stronger absolute emissions reductions are needed from Toshiba.
Toshiba has not provided details of any positive climate or energy advocacy, in Japan or elsewhere.
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 19/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 03/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 0/35SUMMARY+
x=-22/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 02              2114070502
17

14
2207
1905
0302
0SHARPCOMPETITOR COMPARISON
PANASONIC
TOSHIBA
A leader in electronics manufacturing from LCD panels to household appliances, Sharp has invested in producing 
energy efficient  products. Sharp is also one of the world’s largest manufacturers of solar photovoltaic cells. Under its 
‘Super Green Strategy’  Sharp has goals for expanding the emissions savings it can provide to society, mainly in the 
form of increased solar use. As it is keenly aware of the business opportunities for technological solutions to climate 
change, Sharp should be at the forefront of strong climate advocacy in Japan, buttressing arguments that Sharp -- and 
Japan -- can prosper from implementing science-based climate and clean energy policies.
Sharp scores points for publicly detailing  the environmental impact of its solar panel production, including lifecycle analysis 
and estimates of resources used during manufacturing. To improve its score Sharp should provide more details on the 
figures used to generate these estimated savings, or other solar case studies . Additionally, Sharp is beginning to engage 
in smart grid pilot projects ; and should supply the emissions savings in these projects.
Sharp possesses a relative greenhouse gas emission reduction, rather than an absolute reduction target. However, the 
company scores points for an absolute reduction  in 2008 from 2007 baseline. Sharp has made some improvements in its 
renewable energy supply, with some European and US sites utilizing over 80 percent, but the global percentage is still too 
low to score the company any points.
Sharp has made statements  cautiously supporting Prime Minister Hatoyama’s plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
25 percent below 1990 levels by 2020. To continue to score these points and more, Sharp needs to provide more 
evidence that it continue to be an active supporter of strong climate and energy policies.
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 08/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 02/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 08/35SUMMARY+
x=-18/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 05              1818080208
18

1601204 SONYCOMPETITOR COMPARISON
DELL
As one of the largest consumer electronics companies in the world, Sony’s strongest evidence of leadership has 
been the way in which it invested in reducing its own considerable greenhouse gas footprint. The company’s recent 
announcement to increase its absolute greenhouse reduction target raises the bar for other Japanese manufacturers.  
Additionally, Sony is the largest renewable energy purchaser  in Japan. Sony has unfortunately not developed climate 
solutions as part of its portfolio mix. Sony has branched out into modest climate advocacy outside of Japan in ways 
that other Japanese companies should emulate and exceed. Sony should point to its own work to reduce its footprint 
as a demonstration that Japan can implement Prime Minister Hatoyama’s greenhouse gas reduction goals of 25 
percent from 1990 levels by 2020. 
Sony submitted no information on its IT solutions for climate change.
Sony has met its greenhouse gas emissions target early and has set as an updated goal of 30 percent reductions in 
emissions from operations by 2016 from a fiscal year 2000 baseline. Additionally, Sony recently announced other targets  
for efficiency gains in water usage, product efficiency, and chemicals use. Sony obtains approximately 8 percent of its 
electricity from renewable sources.
Sony is a member of the Digital Energy Solutions Campaign (DESC), which wrote to the United States Senate  to push 
for efficiency measures in a number of energy related legislation. Sony also has participated in various Climate Savers 
advocacy . For more points, Sony needs to be more prescriptive about the types of climate and energy policies it supports. 
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 0/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 12/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 04/35SUMMARY+
x=-16/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 07              1028021511
19

14
182207
081905
020302
080PANASONICCOMPETITOR COMPARISON
TOSHIBA
SHARP
With a diversified product portfolio ranging from televisions to household appliances, Panasonic’s focus on climate 
change has concentrated on reducing its own footprint and producing energy efficient products. With the acquisition 
of Sanyo, Panasonic is positioned to expand its solar solutions and reduce greenhouse gases in other sectors of the 
economy. Panasonic has several opportunities to increase its Leaderboard score. It needs to be clearer about the 
solutions it offers beyond energy efficient products, and offer case study data for its solutions offerings. Panasonic 
needs to show leadership via proactive advocacy within Japan and abroad for strong climate and energy policies.
Panasonic is looking at solutions in a number of areas, including building energy management  and smart appliances. 
Panasonic needs to make public any case study data that showcases the emissions savings of these solutions.
Panasonic has achieved a 7 percent reduction  in greenhouse gas emissions from a 2007 baseline, with plans to further 
reduce its emissions in fiscal years 2010 and 2011. Panasonic only lists its renewable energy use in Japan, not globally, 
and does not list it as a percentage of overall electricity use.
Panasonic professes to support  Prime Minister Hatoyama’s greenhouse gas reduction targets of 25 percent from 1990 
levels by 2020, but this support needs to extend beyond words on its website.
SOLUTIONSGreenpeace evaluates companies on the IT solutions they 
offer to reduce emissions in other parts of the economy. 07/50
FOOTPRINTGreenpeace evaluates companies on reducing 
their greenhouse gas footprint.
 05/15
ADVOCACYGreenpeace evaluates companies on their advocacy 
for strong climate and energy policy.
 02/35SUMMARY+
x=-14/100
PREVIOUS SCORES:  v 1           v 2 -               08
20