# Archivo original: cut-and-run-2.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:41:41 -03 2025

Kimberly-Clark’s legacy of 
environmental devastation 
and social conflict in the 
Kenogami ForestCut & Run 
www.greenpeace.ca

PUBLISHED BY GREENPEACE CANADA  
April 2008 
ISBN : 978-0-9732337-7-3
AUTHOR
Christy Ferguson  
DESIGN AND LAYOUT
Brigitte Binet
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Thank you to Richard Brooks, Rolf Skar, and others 
for providing valuable feedback and contributions 
throughout the preparation of this report, and to 
Global Forest Watch Canada for providing maps 
and analysis.
Printed on 100 per cent post-consumer recycled, chlorine-free  
paper that is manufactured with wind-generated energy. Photos credits: J Henry Fair, Andrew Male, Taylor Daniel J. Cox/NaturalExposures.com

TABLE OF CONTENTS
 2 Executive Summary
 4 Introduction
 6 The Kenogami Forest
 8 Kimberly-Clark and Kenogami
 12 Environmental Devastation
 
 26 Social Conflict
30 Conclusion

Kimberly-Clark holds itself up as an exemplary corporate citizen, a company doing its utmost to 
protect the environment and benefit communities. But Cut and Run reveals that the company’s 
policies and practices have caused severe environmental damage and social conflict in Canada’s 
Boreal Forest. 
Based on government documents, independent audits, satellite mapping, and public records, this 
case study looks at the past, present, and future of the Kenogami Forest, a 2,000,000 hectare 
(4,940,000 acre) expanse in northern Ontario. Kenogami is a forest that Kimberly-Clark directly 
managed for decades, and a forest that remains one of its primary sources of tree pulp today. 
Years of excessive clearcut logging, bad planning, failed regeneration, weak compliance with 
regulations, and lack of meaningful consultation with First Nations and workers have taken a serious 
toll on the Kenogami Forest. Since Kimberly-Clark started logging there in 1937, intact and old-
growth forests have been lost, threatened species have disappeared, and local communities have 
become embroiled in conflict with industry, frustrated after years of being shut out of the planning, 
management, and economic benefits of the logging happening on their land. 
If current plans are followed through, this situation will only get worse: clearcuts will degrade what 
remains of the forest’s intact areas, logging will target what remains of its old-growth, and the 
threatened woodland caribou will die-off in the area, unable to survive in Kenogami’s fragmented 
landscape.
The case of the Kenogami Forest sheds light on the stark contrast between Kimberly-Clark’s claims 
to sustainability and the reality of its operations on the ground. It shows that Kimberly-Clark has 
violated its long-held policy commitment not to use “environmentally significant” old-growth fibre 
in any of its consumer products. It shows that the company’s executives have made repeated, 
misleading statements by claiming, for example, that the Boreal Forest fibre used in Kimberly-Clark’s  
products comes primarily from “waste.” And it shows that the company’s current fibre procurement 
policy permits the purchase of fibre from intact and old-growth forests, including threatened species 
habitat and areas logged without the prior and informed consent of the Aboriginal communities 
whose territories are affected. 
Because Kimberly-Clark continues to purchase the majority of the pulp produced at the Terrace 
Bay pulp mill—the mill that acts as the primary driver of logging in the Kenogami Forest—the 
company retains significant influence over the forest’s management. By increasing the amount of 
recycled content across its full line of products, the company could reduce the pressure on forests 
like Kenogami. And by adopting a policy that prohibits the use of fibre from endangered forests; 
that makes meaningful commitments to fibre certified by the Forest Stewardship Council; and that 
prohibits the use of fibre from areas logged without the prior and informed consent of local First 
Nations, it could ensure that the forestry operations it sourced from were truly sustainable ones.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  CUT & RUN    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

KEY FINDINGS
 Kimberly-Clark uses h undreds of thousands of tonnes of tree fibre from the Kenogami 
Forest every year to produce disposable tissue products, including Kleenex. 
 Kimberly-Clark directly managed and logged the Kenogami Forest for 71 years, from 1937 
to 2004.
 Since Kimberly-Clark started logging there, 71 per cent of the Kenogami Forest has been 
fragmented. Woodland caribou have been driven out of 67 per cent of the forest, and 
wolverines have completely disappeared from within its boundaries. 
 Individual clearcuts stretch across as many as 10,807 hectares (26,693 acres). 
 Between 2001 and 2006 alone, 220,500 hectares (544,635 acres) of intact forest was 
fragmented—an area more than twice the size of Dallas. 
 Caribou are predicted to die-off in 95 per cent of the forest within the next 20 years, due 
to the logging that has already been done. Eighty per cent of the monitored species in the 
forest are predicted to decline substantially within the next 100 years.
 Many of the remaining intact and old-growth forest areas in Kenogami, including critical 
threatened species habitat, are slated to be cut under the 2005–2010 and draft 2010–
2011 plans.
 Old-growth is projected to decline by as much as 50 per cent in the next eighty years.
 Ninety-seven per cent of the stands scheduled to cut between 2005 and 2010 are 80 
years old or older; 83 per cent are 100 years old or older; 61 per cent are 120 years old or 
older; 34 per cent are 140 years old or older; and 12 per cent are 160 years old or older. 
8,457 hectares (20,888 acres) of 160-200 year-old trees are scheduled to be cut in this 
five year period alone. Draft plans for 2010–2011 show a similar trend.
 Only 3.2 per cent of Kenogami’s landbase is protected by legislation, compared to a 
provincial average of 12 per cent.
 Eighty-two per cent of the Kenogami Forest has been classified as inadequately 
protected, and 78 per cent as high priority for conservation.
 Workers from the Terrace Bay pulp mill and the logging operations that feed it have been 
on strike since 2006. None of the companies involved will agree to talks with the workers. 
 Nine First Nations have an outstanding legal case against the Ontario government and the 
companies managing the Kenogami Forest. These Aboriginal communities have been left 
out of the forest’s planning, management, and economic benefits, despite treaty rights.
  Greenpeace

Introduction   CUT & RUN    INTRODUCTION

“We have an ever-increasing responsibility to our customers—and to the people who use 
our products—to source the materials and services for the products we manufacture in an 
environmentally and socially responsible manner .” — Thomas  Falk, Chief Executive Officer and  
Chairman of the Board, in Kimberly-Clark’s Guide for Suppliers (2007)
Kimberly-Clark is the world’s largest producer of tissue products. A multinational company valued  
at US$26 billion, it manufactures facial tissue, toilet paper, napkins, and other disposable products  
sold around the world under brand names such as Kleenex, Viva, Scott, Cottonelle, Andrex,  
Scottex, and Hakle.
Year after year, the company’s public statements and sustainability reports paint a picture of 
environmental responsibility: careful stewardship of natural resources, strict standards for the people 
and lands involved in production, positive programs to ensure the health and viability of forests and 
communities. But a closer look at Kimberly-Clark’s actual operations tells a different story. 
In 2006, a Greenpeace report revealed that Kimberly-Clark had been lying for years by buying fibre 
from coastal temperate rainforests while assuring its customers, its shareholders, and the public that no 
Kimberly-Clark product contained virgin rainforest fibre1. This new case study casts further doubt on the 
integrity of the company’s claims. 
Based on government documents, independent audits, satellite mapping, and public records, this 
report looks at the past, present, and future of the Kenogami Forest—an area that the company directly 
managed for decades and that remains one of its primary sources of pulp—and in so doing details the 
devastating on-the-ground impacts of Kimberly-Clark’s products and policies.
KIMBERLY-CLARK’S FIBRE PROCUREMENT POLICY:  
FAILING FORESTS, FAILING COMMUNITIES
It is the intent of this policy to promote: 
Sustainable forest management practices by 
the Corporation’s wood fibre suppliers that are 
economically viable, environmentally responsible 
and socially beneficial by considering supplier 
performance in the selection process.”
— Kimberly-Clark Fibre Procurement Policy (2007)
Kimberly- Clark executives speak proudly of the 
company’s fibre procurement policy, holding it up as 
evidence of the company’s unwavering commitment 
to communities and the environment. Unfortunately, 
as this report shows, what happens on the ground is 
very different from what happens on paper. 
Kimberly-Clark’s fibre sourcing policy talks about 
environmental responsibility—yet the company 
continues to source massive amounts of pulp 
from intact and old-growth forest areas essential 
for conserving biodiversity and mitigating global 
warming. The policy talks about endangered 
species—yet the company continues to source 
from the habitat of the threatened woodland 
caribou, a species known to be highly sensitive to logging and roads. The policy talks about forest 
areas requiring protection—yet the company 
continues to source from an area that has been 
identified by a government-initiated taskforce as 
inadequately protected. The policy talks about social 
responsibility—yet the company continues to source 
from a mill that is the focal point of multiple ongoing 
conflicts with local Aboriginal communities and 
forestry workers.
For all its broad claims about people, wildlife, 
and forests, the details of Kimberly-Clark’s fibre 
procurement policy allow for incredibly destructive 
practices. If the company increased its use of 
recycled fibre across its entire range of products, it 
could dramatically reduce its reliance on virgin tree 
pulp. And if it adopted a more rigorous and credible 
policy, one that prohibited the use of fibre from 
Endangered Forests2 (including intact forests and 
threatened species habitat) and made a meaningful 
commitment to wood certified by the Forest 
Stewardship Council3, Kimberly-Clark could ensure 
that virgin fibre it did use in its products came from 
well-managed forests.  
  Greenpeace

The  
Kenogami 
Forest   CUT & RUN   THE KENOGAMI FOREST

The Kenogami Forest is the largest forest management unit4 in Ontario, covering nearly 20,000 
square kilometers (km2), or 2,000,000 hectares (4,940,000 acres)—an area nearly twice the size of 
Jamaica. Located approximately 200 km northeast of Thunder Bay, it borders Lake Superior to the 
south, and a vast area of undeveloped intact forest to the north. 
Kenogami is home to a number of communities. The towns of Terrace Bay, Schreiber, Rossport, 
Longlac, Geraldton, and Nakina are all located within the forest’s boundaries, as are the Long Lake #58 
First Nation, Ginoogaming First Nation, Aroland First Nation, and Pays Plat First Nation. In addition, the 
Eabametoong, Constance Lake, Neskantaga, Marten Falls, Webequie and Nibbinamik First Nations all 
have reserves adjacent to the forest. All the First Nations either in or adjacent to the forest have treaty 
rights, including rights to harvest, hunt, fish, and trap in the Kenogami Forest and beyond. 
Kenogami provides habitat to numerous species, including moose, snowshoe hare, white-tailed deer, 
and great grey owl. Species at risk including the woodland caribou, the marten, the eastern cougar, 
the bald eagle, and the American white pelican all depend on the Kenogami Forest for their survival. 
The Kenogami Forest forms part of Canada’s immense Boreal Forest, which stretches from the 
Yukon to Labrador and covers 53 per cent of Canada’s total landmass. The Boreal has evolved for 
over 10,000 years into a diverse and awe-inspiring landscape of pine, spruce, fir, aspen, and poplar 
forests interspersed with granite outcrops, lakes, rivers, and marshes. Numerous wildlife species 
live in its vast expanses, and at least three billion birds, including eagles, hawks, owls, and geese 
and accounting for 30 per cent of North America’s songbirds and 40 per cent of its waterfowl, nest 
in its forested areas and wetlands. Canada’s Boreal Forest also plays an essential role in regulating 
the global climate, storing an estimated 186 billion tonnes of carbon in its trees and soils5. 
The Kenogami Forest
0 150 300 450 600 750 75kmData Sources:
Global Forest Watch Canada; Government of Canada,
Natural Resources Canada / Earth Sciences Sector /
Canada Centre for Remote Sensing; Global Land
Cover Facility (2000), www.landcover.org; Canadian
Boreal Inititive (CBI), Canada's Boreal Region
(2003). www.borealcanada.ca.Projection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Note: Large Intact Boreal Forests Landscapes
represents a contiguous mosaic of natural ecosystems
greater than 50,000 hectares in the Boreal Forest
landscape, essentially undisturbed by human
influence. This map was generated through the use of
Landsat imagery acquired during the approximate
epochs of 1990 and 2000.Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.0Produced by Global Forest Watch Canada, November, 2007.The Kenogami Forest
Large Intact Forest Landscapes
Fragmented Forest Land
Tree Cover < 10% 
Provinces and TerritoriesLegend
0 150 300 450 600 750 75kmData Sources:
Global Forest Watch Canada; Government of Canada,
Natural Resources Canada / Earth Sciences Sector /
Canada Centre for Remote Sensing; Global Land
Cover Facility (2000), www.landcover.org; Canadian
Boreal Inititive (CBI), Canada's Boreal Region
(2003). www.borealcanada.ca.Projection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Note: Large Intact Boreal Forests Landscapes
represents a contiguous mosaic of natural ecosystems
greater than 50,000 hectares in the Boreal Forest
landscape, essentially undisturbed by human
influence. This map was generated through the use of
Landsat imagery acquired during the approximate
epochs of 1990 and 2000.Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.0Produced by Global Forest Watch Canada, November, 2007.The Kenogami Forest
Large Intact Forest Landscapes
Fragmented Forest Land
Tree Cover < 10% 
Provinces and TerritoriesLegend
  Greenpeace

Kimberly-Clark 
and 
Kenogami    
   CUT & RUN   KIMBERLY-CLARCK AND KENOGAMI

“We’ve been responsibly managing the economic, environmental and social aspects of 
our business for decades.”   — Thomas Falk, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board, in 
Kimberly-Clark’s Sustainability Report (2003)
Kimberly-Clark has a 71-year-long history in the Kenogami Forest. Soon after establishing the 
first industrial logging operations in the area in 1937, the company extended its presence there 
by building a large pulp mill at Terrace Bay, and a town by the same name to service it6. For 
the decades that followed, Kimberly-Clark ran the forestry operations on Kenogami and held 
the license for its management7.
As the license holder for the forest, Kimberly-Clark was directly responsible for drafting 
and implementing the plans that dictated how much of the forest would be cut, how fast it 
would be cut, what kind of logging practices would be used, and how the forest would be 
regenerated8. While almost all of Kenogami is publicly owned and falls under the jurisdiction 
of Ontario’s Ministry of Natural Resources, it is Kimberly-Clark that has managed the area 
for almost all of its time under industrial influence. For this reason, the company bears direct 
responsibility for the state of the forest today. 
In 2004, Kimberly-Clark spun off the Terrace Bay mill and its associated forestry operations  
to an independent company called Neenah Paper. Two years later, Neenah Paper sold the 
mill to Buchanan Forest Products Ltd., which established it as a subsidiary called Terrace  
Bay Pulp Inc. 
While the forest license and the mill have changed hands multiple times between 2004 and 
2008, Kimberly-Clark’s ties with the Kenogami Forest and the Terrace Bay pulp mill remain 
strong: the company continues to buy more than half of the pulp produced at Terrace Bay. 
And because the Terrace Bay pulp mill is the central driver of logging in the Kenogami Forest, 
Kimberly-Clark retains significant influence over the forest through its purchasing contracts. 
According to Kenogami’s current management plan, “the forest resources harvested on the 
[Kenogami] License Area are mainly intended to provide a supply of fibre to [the] processing 
mill located in Terrace Bay, Ontario”9.
As of 2008, Kimberly-Clark purchases 55 per cent of the 420,000 metric tonnes (462,970 tons) 
of pulp produced at Terrace Bay each year10—an amount equal to the weight of over 1150 
jumbo jets—using it to produce Kleenex brand tissue products. This one mill provides the 
company with approximately seven per cent of its massive 3.1 million tonnes-per-year  
(3.4 million tons) global supply of virgin pulp. In the recent past, these numbers have been 
even higher. Until it spun off the Terrace Bay mill in 2004, Kimberly-Clark was using up to 
95 per cent of the pulp the mill produced for its own products. At that time, Terrace Bay 
accounted for an extraordinary 20 per cent of the company’s entire global supply of virgin fibre.
“KIMBERLY-CLARK HAS DIRECTLY 
MANAGED THE KENOGAMI FOREST 
FOR ALMOST ALL OF ITS TIME 
UNDER INDUSTRIAL INFLUENCE.”
  Greenpeace

“The vast majority of the fibre we purchase comes 
from residual waste—the sawdust and chips. The 
trees were not cut down for fibre”.  — Kimberly-Clark 
spokesperson Dave Dickson (2005)11
In recent years, Kimberly-Clark has attempted to deflect 
criticism by claiming that the virgin Boreal Forest fibre 
in its products comes from waste wood—chips and 
sawdust left over by the lumber industry—and not from 
forests logged for the purpose of producing pulp and 
paper. As the company’s 2004 sustainability report 
states, for example, “The vast majority of fibre we 
purchase from the Canadian Boreal Forest comes from 
residual waste, sawdust and chips from the lumber-
production process”12. The company and its executives 
have made this type of claim repeatedly, both in public 
documents and in media interviews. 
The claim that the “vast majority” of Kimberly-Clark’s 
Boreal fibre supply comes from lumber waste flies in the 
face of the facts, as does Dave Dickson’s claim that the 
trees in its products “were not cut down for fibre.” As this 
report details, Kimberly-Clark itself logged the Kenogami 
Forest to produce pulp for its own products until 2004. 
Today, the company continues to buy nearly 50 per 
cent of its Boreal Forest fibre from the Terrace Bay pulp mill—the mill that acts as the main driver of logging in the 
Kenogami Forest. The forest’s official management plan 
states this in clear terms: “The forest resources harvested 
on the [Kenogami] License Area are mainly intended to 
provide a supply of fibre to [the] processing mill located in 
Terrace Bay, Ontario”13. 
Further, Kenogami’s 2005–2010 management plan 
documents that 48 per cent of the softwood fibre supplied 
to the mill arrives in the form of whole logs14. These logs are 
turned directly into pulp for Kleenex and other disposable 
products. The remaining 52 per cent of the fibre arrives 
in the form of chips, purchased from sawmills in the 
area15. But even these chips are not a “waste product,” 
as Kimberly-Clark claims. Wood chips are a valuable 
commodity produced and sold by sawmills. In fact, the 
revenue from the sale of these chips is so important to the 
economy of area sawmills that without it, many of these 
mills would be forced to shut down.
While Kimberly-Clark continues to imply that its purchase 
of pulp from the Boreal Forest plays little or no role in 
driving destructive logging, government documents make it 
clear that the pulp it purchases from Terrace Bay  has driven 
and continues to drive logging in the Kenogami Forest. KIMBERLY-CLARK PRODUCTS ARE NOT MADE FROM “WASTE” 10  CUT & RUN   KIMBERLY-CLARCK AND KENOGAMI

“KIMBERLY-CLARK CLAIMS THAT 
ITS PRODUCTS ARE MADE FROM 
SAWDUST AND CHIPS. BUT THE 
SPRAWLING LOG PILES OUTSIDE 
THE TERRACE BAY PULP MILL 
SHOW OTHERWISE.”
11  Greenpeace

Environmental 
Devastation 1  CUT & RUN    ENVIRONMENTAL DEVASTATION 

Seventy years of industrial logging has taken a severe toll on the Kenogami Forest. Most of 
its landbase has been severely fragmented, and much of its old-growth has been seriously 
compromised. At least one threatened species has already been driven out of the area, and 
others are in rapid decline. If current plans are followed through, the situation will only get 
worse: what remains of intact and old-growth forests will be lost, and more species will be 
driven out of the region.
While the causes of Kenogami’s decline are multiple and complex, they all relate back to 
several key problems: a lack of protected areas, excessive clearcut logging, unsuccessful 
regeneration of forests, bad planning, and weak compliance with regulations.
LOSS OF INTACT FORESTS
“Kimberly-Clark has practiced sustainable forestry on its own forestlands for more than 
60 years and, although it no longer owns or manages any forestlands in North America, 
it remains committed to the promotion of sustainable forestry and only sources from 
suppliers that practice sustainable forestry management.”   — Kimberly-Clark Proxy 
Statement (2006)
When Kimberly-Clark started logging Kenogami in 1937, most of the landbase of nearly two 
million hectares (4,940,000 acres) was intact. Today, only 27.6 per cent remains so—the 
rest has been degraded by large-scale clearcutting16. And still, the destruction of Kenogami’s 
remaining intact areas continues apace. Satellite imagery shows that between 2001 and 
2006, 28.9 per cent of the large intact forest landscapes left in the Kenogami Forest were lost, 
mainly due to clearcut and salvage logging and associated road building17 (see maps). In other 
words, 220,500 hectares (544,635 acres) of intact forest in the Kenogami Forest alone was 
fragmented by logging in just five years. That’s an area more than twice the size of Dallas. 
And because only 3.2 per cent of the landbase is protected from development, those last 
remaining intact areas of the Kenogami Forest are at risk of being destroyed in the coming 
years. In fact, under the 2005–2010 Kenogami forest management plan and the draft  
2010–2011 plan, many of these areas are slated to be cut18, 19.
This is important because large intact forest areas—areas that remain in their natural 
states—are crucial to maintaining biodiversity and mitigating global warming. In general, only 
forest areas of 500 km2 (123,552 acres) and greater that are unfragmented by roads, logging 
operations, powerlines, or other imposed infrastructure are large enough to maintain the 
ecological integrity of an area, and to sustain healthy animal and bird populations20. These 
areas help to mitigate global warming and its impacts by storing massive amounts of carbon 
and giving trees, plants, and animals the best chances of surviving in a changing climate21,22. 
For these reasons, intactness is designated as a high conservation value needing special 
management and protection under the Forest Stewardship Council Boreal Forest standard, 
and classifies a forest as ‘endangered’ under the internationally-recognized Endangered 
Forests definition23. 
Unfortunately, as logging in Canada’s Boreal Forest continues to push north, intact areas are 
becoming more and more rare: 41 per cent of the treed area of the Boreal Forest has already 
been fragmented by logging and other industrial development, and 45 per cent has been 
allocated for logging24. This fragmentation not only threatens species survival and reduces 
biodiversity, but it exacerbates global warming as well. Research shows that logging in intact 
areas of Canada’s Boreal Forest causes greenhouse gas emissions, eliminates carbon 
storage, and makes the forest more vulnerable to global warming impacts like insect outbreaks 
and forest fires—impacts which themselves cause further greenhouse gas emissions25. 
Public records and satellite imagery prove that Kimberly-Clark logged over a million hectares 
of intact forest in Kenogami over its seventy years there—forest that was critical species 
habitat, forest that was helping to mitigate global warming, and forest that was classifiable as 
both high conservation value and endangered under internationally-recognized definitions . 
1  Greenpeace

Large intact areas in the Kenogami Forest, 2001
Kenogami Forest Management Unit
Large Intact Forest Landscapes (2001)
Water
Projection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.00 10 20 30 40 50 5kmKenogami Forest Management Unit
Large Intact Forest Landscapes (2001)
Water
Projection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.00 10 20 30 40 50 5kmKenogami Forest Management Unit
Large Intact Forest Landscapes (2001)
Water
Projection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.00 10 20 30 40 50 5km1  CUT & RUN    ENVIRONMENTAL DEVASTATION 

Large intact areas in the Kenogami Forest, 2006
0 10 20 30 40 50 5kmKenogami Forest Management Unit
Large Intact Forest Landscapes (2006)
Water
Projection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.00 10 20 30 40 50 5kmKenogami Forest Management Unit
Large Intact Forest Landscapes (2006)
Water
Projection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.00 10 20 30 40 50 5kmKenogami Forest Management Unit
Large Intact Forest Landscapes (2006)
Water
Projection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.0 1  Greenpeace

1  CUT & RUN    ENVIRONMENTAL DEVASTATION 

 “PUBLIC RECORDS AND 
SATELLITE IMAGERY PROVE 
THAT KIMBERLY-CLARK LOGGED 
OVER A MILLION HECTARES OF 
INTACT FOREST IN KENOGAMI.”
1  Greenpeace

LOSS OF OLD-GROWTH FORESTS
“[Kimberly-Clark’s environmental] policy prohibits the use of fibre from any rainforest or 
from environmentally significant, old-growth forest areas in any Kimberly-Clark consumer 
product.”   — Kimberly-Clark Environmental Report (2002)
Like intact forests, old-growth forests are critical for the survival of many species, including the 
threatened woodland caribou and marten. Unfortunately, the Kenogami Forest is experiencing 
a significant decline in old-growth as the result of past management decisions that have 
taken years to manifest themselves on the forest. This holds true even when “old-growth” is 
assessed using a generous definition of any stand 90 years old or older26. 
Even if no further cutting takes place, the amount of old-growth in Kenogami is predicted to 
drop by 32 per cent over the next 80 years. If current logging plans are followed through, 
this drop will be even steeper: 49.6 per cent over the same time period27. While it’s natural 
for the amount of older forest in any one local area to rise and fall due to forest fires and 
other disturbances, the loss of old-growth forest on a larger scale happens as the result of 
human activity. 
The fact that old-growth in Kenogami is on a trajectory toward collapse suggests that during its 
long tenure in Kenogami, Kimberly-Clark logged significant amounts of old-growth, did not set-
aside old-growth areas for protection, and did not adequately regenerate the forest to provide 
for future old-growth. Further, according to the 2005–2010 management plan, 97 per cent of 
the stands scheduled to be cut over the five year period are 80 years old or older; 83 per cent 
are 100 years old or older; 61 per cent are 120 years old or older; 34 per cent are 140 years 
old or older; and 12 per cent are 160 years old or older. 8,457 hectares (20,888 acres) of 
160-200 year-old trees are scheduled to be cut in this five year period alone.
Since the trees logged in the Kenogami Forest are used to make Kleenex products, this 
suggests that Kimberly-Clark violated the environmental policy it adopted in 1992 and applied 
until 2007. The policy prohibited the use of  “environmentally significant” 28 old-growth fibre in 
any Kimberly-Clark consumer product. This breach is especially egregious because until very 
recently, Kimberly-Clark’s commitment not to source old-growth has been a centerpiece of 
its commitment to sustainability. Statements like the one quoted above appear in customer 
and shareholder communications, public statements, proxy materials, sustainability reports, 
and submissions to the United States Securities and Exchange Commission. While the 
caveat “environmentally significant” or “ecologically significant” almost always appears in these 
statements, the fact that the old-growth stands in Kenogami serve as critical, threatened 
species habitat (see “Wildlife at risk,” below) certainly qualifies them as environmentally or 
ecologically significant. Interestingly, the updated fibre procurement policy adopted by the 
company in 2007 makes no mention of old-growth forests. It appears, then, that Kimberly-
Clark violated its own policy over a number of years by sourcing old-growth, and then 
weakened its policy to allow this practice to continue. 
A few large swaths of older forest do remain in Kenogami, mainly in areas that have 
been difficult for loggers to access. But while this presents an excellent opportunity for 
conservation, Kenogami’s 2005–2010 management plan includes building roads into these 
pockets of old-growth in order to facilitate their logging over the next ten years29. According  
to the draft forest management plan for 2010–2011, 95 per cent of the stands scheduled  
to be cut are 80 years old or older; 76 per cent are 100 years or older; and 57 per cent are 
120 years old or older. Thousands of hectares of 160-180 year-old trees are scheduled to  
be cut in this one year alone.1  CUT & RUN    ENVIRONMENTAL DEVASTATION 

 “IT APPEARS THAT KIMBERLY-CLARK 
VIOLATED ITS POLICY FOR YEARS BY 
USING OLD-GROWTH FIBRE, THEN 
WEAKENED ITS POLICY TO ALLOW 
THIS PRACTICE TO CONTINUE.”
1  Greenpeace

WILDLIFE AT RISK
“We make it our business to care for the air, land, water and all living beings that come into contact 
with our manufacturing facilities.” — Kimberly-Clark Environmental Report (2001)
Research and surveys show that human development, including logging, has already caused the threatened 
wolverine to vanish from the Kenogami Forest, is driving the rapid decline of the threatened woodland 
caribou, and is having negative impacts on multiple other wildlife species as well. 
Historically, the wolverine ranged across all of Ontario. By 1955, its range had receded substantially to the 
north, but wolverines still occupied a significant portion of the upper Kenogami Forest30. Today wolverines 
have largely disappeared from Kenogami31, with only occasional individuals wandering into the area32. 
This dramatic drop-off can be traced back to the forest’s fragmentation. Wolverines, provincially listed as a 
threatened species, have an extremely low tolerance for human activity and require a large range of intact 
forest in order to survive.
Woodland caribou remain in the area, but are in rapid decline. As late as 1950, woodland caribou ranged 
across the entire Kenogami Forest. Today, the threatened species inhabits only 33–49 per cent of the 
area33. In just 58 years, woodland caribou have been wiped out of up to 67 per cent of the Kenogami 
Forest. And the damage already sustained is likely even more severe than these numbers indicate: recent 
research shows that there is a lag time of up to two decades between when caribou habitat is disturbed 
and when caribou populations die off in the affected area34. An analysis of satellite imagery that applied this 
research to the Kenogami Forest found that the damage that has already  been done to Kenogami has the 
potential to cause caribou to be extirpated from 95 per cent of the forest35 (see map).
Potential caribou range recession 
0 10 20 30 40 50 5kmKenogami Forest Management Unit
Potential Woodland Caribou Recession (2006) 
Water
Projection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.0
0 10 20 30 40 50 5kmKenogami Forest Management Unit
Potential Woodland Caribou Recession (2006) 
Water
Projection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.0Woodland caribou are projected to 
die off in 95 per cent of the Kenogami 
Forest within the next 20 years, as a 
consequence of the damage that has 
already been done.0  CUT & RUN    ENVIRONMENTAL DEVASTATION 0  Greenpeace

The steep decline of this iconic species is largely attributable to the clearcut logging that has wiped out the 
large areas of mature conifer forest that caribou need in order to survive. While the woodland caribou is in 
decline across Ontario, its extirpation from the Kenogami Forest is particularly bad for the species. This is 
because of the forest’s particular location: it overlaps four of the five caribou recovery zones identified by the 
Ontario government, and has an influence on the fifth, as caribou that calve in the fifth recovery zone winter in 
the Kenogami Forest36. 
The critical importance of the Kenogami Forest for species survival extends to numerous other species as well. 
Because the forest sits adjacent to the cut line—the parallel above which industrial logging is not permitted—
its northern-most intact areas form part of a large, contiguous stretch of forest that is critical habitat for caribou, 
wolverine, marten, and numerous other species. Unfortunately, under the 2005–2010 forest management plan 
and the draft 2010–2011 management plan, many of these areas are slated to be cut. 
Sadly, the outlook does not look bright for many of the species living in the Kenogami Forest. The 2005 
independent forest audit for Kenogami37 predicts that 80 per cent of the area’s 17 monitored species, 
including the threatened marten, will decline substantially in the next 100 years38. The current forest 
management plan, written by Kimberly-Clark spin-off Neenah Paper, forecasts a similar trend, predicting that 
14 of 20 species habitat types will decline over the same time period39.
The health and diversity of wildlife species are critical measures of the health of a forest. Research shows 
that the logging that Kimberly-Clark carried out for almost seventy years, and the logging that it continues to 
support today, have severely depleted Kenogami’s animal populations. 
0 10 20 30 40 50 5kmKenogami Forest Management Unit
Potential Woodland Caribou Recession (2006) 
Water
Projection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.0
1  Greenpeace

INADEQUATE PROTECTION
“Kimberly-Clark will not knowingly use wood fibre sourced from Forest Areas Requiring 
Protection.”   — Kimberly-Clark Fibre Procurement Policy (2007)
 
Only 3.2 per cent of Kenogami’s landbase is protected by legislation, compared to a provincial average 
of 12 per cent40. And the protected areas that have been established within the unit are small: the 
smallest is only 0.02 km2 (4.9 acres), while the largest is only 182 km2 (44,973 acres)—substantially 
smaller than the 500 km2 (123,552 acre) area of intactness necessary to maintain ecological integrity, 
maximize carbon storage, and mitigate global warming impacts. What’s worse, these small protected 
areas often do not overlap the ecologically valuable intact areas left within the unit (see map). 
Because of this, the Kenogami Forest has been identified as a high priority for additional protected 
areas in northern Ontario41. In December 2001, a government-appointed task force, which included 
representatives from the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, the forest industry, and environmental 
organizations, evaluated the current status of protected areas in Kenogami. It classified 82 per cent of 
the Kenogami Forest as inadequately protected, and 78 per cent as high priority for conservation42. 
Despite this assessment, Kimberly-Clark continues purchase fibre from the Kenogami Forest, even while 
its fibre procurement policy explicitly prohibits the use of fibre from “Forest Areas Requiring Protection.” 
It is able to do this because in drafting the policy, the company defined the term “Forest Areas Requiring 
Protection” in extremely narrow terms that amount to little, if anything, on the ground. Intact forest areas, 
old-growth forest areas, and critical endangered species habitat, for example, do not qualify as forest 
areas requiring protection under Kimberly-Clark’s definition. By drafting its policy this way, Kimberly-Clark 
set itself up to tell customers, shareholders, and the public that it was not sourcing from forest areas 
requiring protection, while continuing to source massive amounts of fibre from intact forests, old-growth 
forests, and threatened species habitats. 
Protected areas within the Kenogami Forest
Kenogami Forest Management Unit
Large Intact Forest Landscapes (2006)
Protected Areas
Water
0 10 20 30 40 50 5kmProjection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.0Kenogami Forest Management Unit
Large Intact Forest Landscapes (2006)
Protected Areas
Water
0 10 20 30 40 50 5kmProjection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.0The protected areas in 
Kenogami are small, and often 
do not overlap the intact areas 
left within the forest.  CUT & RUN    ENVIRONMENTAL DEVASTATION 

EXCESSIVE CLEARCUT LOGGING
“The failure of pulp suppliers to follow sustainable forestry practices will result in the 
cancellation of purchasing agreements.”  — Ken Strassner, Kimberly-Clark Vice President 
of Global Environment in a letter to Greenpeace dated June 6, 2003. 
While the protected areas in Kenogami are small, the cuts are massive. Over the last 15 
years, an average of 2,320 hectares (5,730 acres) has been logged each year43, mainly in 
large clearcuts. In the last five years, that average rose to 2,492 hectares (6,155 acres) per 
year44. In some areas, sites cut over a number of years have resulted in massive individual 
clearcuts stretching across as many as 10,807 hectares (26,693 acres)45.
The rate of logging in the Kenogami Forest, combined with a lack of adequate protection, 
explains the rapid loss of intact and old-growth forest areas described above, and 
the decline of the numerous species that depend upon those areas for their survival. 
In Kenogami’s 2005–2010 management plans, the size and rate of cuts remain high. 
Planned clearcuts average 483 hectares (1193 acres) in size—substantially larger than the 
maximum size of 260 hectares (642 acres) laid out in government forestry guidelines46, and 
substantially larger than many of the protected areas within the unit. 
The rapid and destructive clearcutting that has dominated logging in the Kenogami Forest 
runs starkly counter to Kimberly-Clark’s public commitments to sustainability—all the more 
so since Kimberly-Clark itself planned and carried out this cutting for decades. 
THE KENOGAMI FOREST: THEN AND NOW
1937 2008
With the exception of two rail lines, the forest was 
almost entirely intact. Seventy-one per cent of the forest is fragmented. 
The forest had a natural level of old-growth stands. The amount of old-growth in the forest is projected to decline by as much 
as 50 per cent in coming years, due to logging that has already been 
done.
Woodland caribou ranged across the entire forest. Woodland caribou range across only 33-49 per cent of the forest. 
Scientists project that they will disappear from 95 per cent of the forest 
within the next 20 years, due to the damage that has already been done.
Wolverines inhabited a significant portion of the 
forest’s northern reaches. Wolverines have disappeared from the Kenogami Forest.
 Kenogami Forest Management Unit
Large Intact Forest Landscapes (2006)
Protected Areas
Water
0 10 20 30 40 50 5kmProjection:
Lambert Conformal Conic
False Easting: 0.0
False Northing: 0.0Central Meridian: -95.0
Standard Parallel 1: 49.0
Standard Parallel 2: 77.0
Latitude of Origin: 49.0
  Greenpeace

UNSUCCESSFUL REGENERATION
“The small percentage of Boreal fibre we use is harvested responsibly and promptly reforested...” 
— Kimberly-Clark Sustainable Forestry Practices Fact Sheet (2008)
Once a forest is logged, no amount of replanting or restoration can bring it back to its natural state: research 
shows that second-growth forests have significantly lower levels of biodiversity than intact forests, and that 
they are less resilient in the face of global warming impacts like fires and insect outbreaks47,48,49. Because 
of this, Kimberly-Clark’s oft-stated claim that the areas of Boreal Forest it purchases from are “promptly 
reforested” is a dubious one. But in the case of the Kenogami Forest, Kimberly-Clark and its successors  
have failed even to restore the land they logged to viable second-growth conifer forest. 
Logging companies operating in Ontario are legally required to regenerate the forests they cut. But a 2005 
independent forest audit classified 17 per cent of the productive landbase in the Kenogami Forest as “barren 
and scattered” and “not satisfactorily regenerated”50—an increase of 460 per cent above 1990 levels51.
One of the consequences of this failed regeneration is an imbalance in the age class structure of the forest. 
Because of past problems, there is an unusually low number of young conifer trees within the forest. Not only 
does this weaken the health and resilience of the forest, but it also threatens the long-term fibre supply of the 
pulp mill. With a shortage of younger trees ready to mature to a commercially valuable age, there will be less 
wood available to supply the forest industry in the area over the next 70 years. Companies will either face a 
fibre supply shortage, or move further and further north, fragmenting more and more pristine forests to feed 
their mills.
BAD PLANNING
“The Corporation shall practice sustainable forestry on its own and managed lands through 
establishment of a land stewardship ethic that integrates the ongoing management of these lands as a 
continuing source of fibre for Corporate products with appropriate consideration of soil, air and water 
quality, biological diversity, wildlife and aquatic habitat, recreation and aesthetics.” — Kimberly-Clark 
Environmental Policy (1992)
Many of the problems existing on the Kenogami Forest can be traced back to bad planning. An 
independent audit, for example, found that Kenogami’s 2000–2005 management plans made inaccurately 
high assumptions about how fast the forest would grow, and therefore overestimated how much forest 
would be available to be cut52. As a result, the plans assigned more area to be logged than they would 
have given more accurate inputs. This mistake led to at least five years during which the area logged 
exceeded what would otherwise have been allowed.
This and other problems with Kenogami’s forest management plans are underpinned by the  planners’ reliance 
on a flawed model called the Strategic Forest Management Model (SFMM). The SFMM’s heavy reliance on 
assumptions can lead to inappropriate and sometimes damaging management prescriptions53. Planners using 
the SFMM believe they can estimate, for example, how fast the forest would grow under natural conditions 
and how often it would be affected by fires. They use these estimates to create a hypothetical picture of how 
the forest would have worked in the absence of human intervention, and then make plans on that basis. 
Because this hypothetical picture reflects only one possible state of the forest without any variation to account 
for a range of possible local conditions, it can produce very inaccurate results. The five-year over-cutting 
documented above is just one example of the problems this model can produce. 
Higher standards such as those set by the Forest Stewardship Council, by comparison, require intensive 
analyses of pre-industrial conditions. These take into account historical records, fire surveys, pollen 
analyses, and other information that allows planners to determine what the forest composition actually was 
historically—rather than what it might have been, theoretically—and to project forward accordingly. If these 
types of analysis were combined with ecosystem-based management54, the planning regime applied to the 
Kenogami Forest could ensure true sustainability. If instead the forest continues to be managed the way it 
has been in the past, intact forest areas, old-growth forest areas, and species will continue to be lost.  CUT & RUN    ENVIRONMENTAL DEVASTATION   Greenpeace  Greenpeace

LACK OF COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS
“At the very least, we expect our suppliers to comply with all applicable environmental laws and 
regulations where they operate.” — Kimberly-Clark Guide for Suppliers (2007)
In addition to years of poor planning, close examination of Kenogami’s plans and audits reveals a lack of 
compliance with government-imposed regulations. During field visits in 2005, for example, the Ministry 
of Natural Resources found that Neenah Paper had failed to complete 50 per cent of its inspection 
reports55. Completion of these inspection reports is mandatory under provincial compliance guidelines. 
When a company fails to comply with reporting requirements, it is impossible for the government or the 
public to know if the logging happening in an area is being carried out as planned, or if any problems 
have arisen. In this particular case, one of the problems revealed in Kenogami’s 2005 audit was that 
significant amounts of wood had been cut and then left unused on the side of the road: “There were five 
field sites on the audit where greater than 100 pieces of merchantable conifer tree lengths or processed 
logs in 2.5 metre or 5.1 metre [8.2 or 16.7 foot] lengths were noted. As well, poplar butts, large tops, or 
tree lengths were found at four field sites”56. None of this was ever documented by Neenah Paper. Both 
this incredibly wasteful practice and the company’s failure to report it are breaches of legal requirements 
and compliance guidelines in the province of Ontario. 
Further, the audit revealed that Neenah Paper had followed through on only 15 of the 23 
recommendations made in the independent forest audit performed five years earlier57. The 
recommendations that had not been implemented included collecting better information about the  
winter habitat of caribou, improving water crossings, and reducing the amount of area lost to slash . 
This lack of compliance with government regulations contravenes Ontario provincial law and breaches 
Kimberly-Clark’s stated commitment to source only from suppliers that comply fully with local laws  
and regulations. 
“ONCE A FOREST IS LOGGED, 
NO AMOUNT OF REPLANTING 
OR RESTORATION CAN BRING IT 
BACK TO ITS NATURAL STATE.”
  Greenpeace

Social Conflict  CUT & RUN    SOCIAL CONFLICT  Greenpeace  Greenpeace  Greenpeace

For years, First Nations in Kenogami have been struggling to assert their rights over the 
land, and workers have been pushing for more job security. These communities’ frustration 
over their lack of consultation and control reached a head in 2006, when Neenah Paper’s 
relinquishment of ownership and control in the area created an opportunity for change: 
workers and First Nations could have been integral to the decision-making process about 
what the future of the Kenogami Forest would look like. But instead, Neenah Paper, 
Buchanan Forest Products, and the Ontario government struck a deal behind closed doors, 
and communities were left out once again. Blockade threats, legal action, and labour 
pickets ensued—all of which continue today amidst unresolved problems. 
FIRST NATIONS CHALLENGES
“It is the intent of this policy to: Recognize human rights on a global basis and 
encourage the abolition of discriminatory laws and practices.” — Kimberly-Clark  
Human Rights Policy (2008)
“The lands of the Kenogami Forest have been used by our Aboriginal people for 
generations and are recognized in both the 1850 Robinson Superior Treaty and  
Treaty 9. These Aboriginal rights are not being respected today within the  
Kenogami Forest.”  — Veronica Waboose, Chief of Long Lake #58 First Nation (May 2006)
The Kenogami Forest lies within the treaty lands of a number of First Nations. But these 
First Nations have largely been left out of the planning and management of the land, and 
deprived of the economic benefits of the industrial activity happening there. While these 
problems are longstanding and deeply rooted, recent changes to the forest’s management 
have prompted these communities to assert their rights and jurisdiction more strongly. 
Since 2006 when the Kenogami forest management license was last flipped, two separate 
actions have been launched by First Nations against the Ontario government and the 
companies operating in Kenogami.  
On December 13, 2006, Chief Sam Kashkeesh of Aroland First Nation issued a petition 
to the Ontario government to cease and desist all cutting in the Kenogami Forest, and 
announced that his community was prepared to stop all operations in Kenogami if its 
concerns were not addressed. According to Kashkeesh, Aroland’s continued requests 
to be included in Kenogami’s forestry planning have been ignored, culminating in the 
community’s exclusion from the discussions between the Ministry of Natural Resources 
and industry over the transfer of the Kenogami management license from Neenah Paper 
to Terrace Bay Pulp (Buchanan) and exacerbated by Buchanan’s employment of out-
of-province workers rather than Aroland members. “This is not just a matter of respect, 
mutual prosperity and regional collaboration, but also an issue of legal duty and equality 
for Aboriginal people in forestry management,” said Kashkeesh in a December 2006 press 
release58. “The non-cooperation from the government and industry is insulting and in very, 
very bad taste.” 
Then, in March 2007, Aroland and the eight other communities that make up the Matawa 
First Nations filed a legal case against the Ontario government, Neenah Paper, and 
Buchanan over the way the Kenogami Forest was being managed. The Matawa First 
Nations (Aroland, Eabametoong, Constance Lake, Neskantaga, Ginoogaming, Marten 
Falls, Nibinamik, Longlake #58, and Webequie) all have reserves either in or adjacent to the 
Kenogami Forest and therefore have treaty rights, including rights to harvest, hunt, fish, and 
trap in the Kenogami Forest and beyond. 
  Greenpeace

Matawa’s law case seeks two ends: first, to nullify the Ministry of Natural Resources’ amendment of 
the management license and its transfer from Neenah to Terrace Bay Pulp/Buchanan on the basis that 
the people of Matawa were consulted neither about either the transfer nor the terms of the transferred 
license; and second, to obtain orders from the court requiring the Minister of Natural Resources to fulfill 
the ministry’s obligations under Term and Condition 34 of the Class Environmental Assessment Order, 
and to ensure that the forestry company fulfils its obligations to the First Nations under the terms of 
the license59. Term and Condition 34 requires the ministry to undertake measures to provide Aboriginal 
people with a more equal share of the benefits provided by forest management planning, including more 
equal management and decision-making capacity, as well as employment, and business, economic, 
or financial benefits. The lawsuit also names Terrace Bay Pulp Inc. and the Neenah Paper Company of 
Canada as respondents. “So far, little has been done to honour or implement these legal requirements,” 
said Chief Veronica Waboose in the press release announcing Matawa’s legal action. According to the 
press release, “the non-cooperation and disregard for regional collaboration from both government and 
industry has left the Matawa First Nations with no other options to be heard”60.
Kimberly-Clark continues to purchase from the Kenogami Forest despite the multiple ongoing conflicts 
between the companies operating there and the local First Nations. And no matter what claims it makes  to 
social responsibility, no company that sources from areas logged without the prior and informed consent 
of local Aboriginal communities is a socially responsible one. As Tara Scurr of Amnesty International said 
recently, “the province of Ontario and private companies can’t hide behind out-dated forest management 
laws that fail to respect and uphold the rights of consultation, accommodation and consent”61.
LABOUR CONFLICTS
“Social responsibility—Kimberly-Clark’s duty to our employees, customers, consumers, and the 
communities in which we operate, and the global community in general—is a fundamental value  
of our company.” — Kimberly-Clark Sustainability Report (2003)
“We have seen this government, in an attempt to help the forest industry, transfer a license to a 
company that does not care about how the forest is harvested. They do not care about providing 
stable, year-round, long-term employment that ensures a future for the forest workers and the 
communities that depend on the forest industry jobs… The government is supportive of the 
destruction being allowed on our crown forest, at the price of the communities.” — Joe Hanlon, 
President, United Steelworkers Union Local 2693
At the same time as First Nations were more actively starting to oppose their exclusion, the Steelworkers 
Union was challenging the treatment of workers in the Kenogami Forest. In January 2006, the woodlands 
workers employed by Neenah Paper (then holder of the Kenogami management license and owner of the 
Terrace Bay pulp mill) went on strike. The strike was a reaction to several concessions sought by Neenah, 
including a 6.4–per cent wage cut, elimination of the defined pension plan, and other cuts  
to benefits. 
The 240 striking workers were mainly loggers and truck drivers, some of whom had been working for 
Kimberly-Clark or Neenah Paper for almost 40 years. Instead of resolving the dispute, Neenah Paper 
closed the Terrace Bay mill and its associated woodlands operations and sold them to Buchanan, leaving 
hundreds of workers still out on strike, and now without jobs. “Put yourselves in the workers’ shoes,” 
said Steelworkers local president Joe Hanlon before a government committee. “Just imagine what these 
workers and their families are thinking each and every day. Imagine the stress they must feel. If it’s not job 
losses, then maybe it’s major concessions or drastic changes to the way the work is performed”62.
Newly in charge, Buchanan sought the same concessions as Neenah, plus additional ones including as 
much as a 50–per cent wage rollback. When the workers continued to resist by staying out on strike, 
Buchanan reacted by denying any obligation to Neenah’s former workers, and contracting workers from 
outside the region—a move opposed by both the Steelworkers and the Matawa First Nations.   CUT & RUN    SOCIAL CONFLICT

With the dispute still unresolved a year later, workers demonstrated in front of Buchanan Forest 
Products’ Thunder Bay office, with the aim of bringing attention to their issues and pressuring 
Buchanan to sit down with them to negotiate a collective agreement. The workers asserted that 
their strike was a legal one, and that Buchanan Forest Products, as the new owner of the Terrace 
Bay mill, had a legal duty to negotiate an agreement with them. But instead of sitting down to talk, 
Buchanan stated bluntly that it had no obligation to the workers whatsoever. Still on the picket 
line another year later, 75 workers gathered outside of the Ministry of Natural Resources office in 
Thunder Bay in January 2008. Once again, they decried the companies for shutting them out, and 
denounced the government for allowing them to do so. With the strike now stretching on beyond 
two years, none of the companies involved has agreed to sit down with the workers. 
Because Kimberly-Clark built the Terrace Bay pulp mill and established the town of Terrace Bay 
to staff it, the company bears a special responsibility toward the workers there. But the company 
has washed its hands of any responsibility for their well-being whatsoever. Today, Kimberly-Clark 
continues to buy hundreds of thousands of tonnes of pulp from the Terrace Bay mill every year, 
even as workers who served the company for decades are forced into unemployment and protests 
on the picket line. This is not consistent with the image of community care the company promotes.
Annual revenue: US $16.7 billion
Annual profit:  US $5.7 billion
Market capitalization:  US $27.5 billion
Major brands:  Kleenex, Viva, Scott, Cottonelle, Andrex, Scottex, Hakle
Number of countries where Kimberly-Clark has operations:  37
Numbers of countries where Kimberly-Clark products are sold:  over 150
Number of employees:  55,000
Number of employees laid off since 2005:  6000 
Amount of virgin tree pulp used annually:  3.1 million metric tonnes (3.4 million tons)
Per cent of total fibre used in Kimberly-Clark products sold in North America that comes from recycled sources:  18
Per cent of total  fibre used in Kimberly-Clark consumer brands sold in North America that comes from  
recycled sources:  Less than 1
Amount of virgin tree pulp purchased from the Terrace Bay pulp mill annually:  210,000 tonnes (231,485 tons)
Per cent of Kimberly-Clark’s global virgin fibre supply purchased from the Terrace Bay pulp mill: 7
Per cent of the Terrace Bay pulp mill’s total output purchased by Kimberly-Clark: 55
Chief E xecutive Officer and President of the Board:   
Thomas Falk
972-281-1308
thomas.falk@kcc.com
Vice President, Global Environment: 
Ken Strassner
770-587-8634
ken.stassner@kcc.com
Kimberly-Clark customer service:
1-888-525-8388KIMBERLY-CLARK AT A GLANCE
  Greenpeace

Conclusion0  CUT & RUN    CONCLUSION0  Greenpeace0  Greenpeace0  Greenpeace

In just 70 years, the Kenogami Forest has been turned from a vast expanse of healthy, near-
pristine forest, to a severely damaged landscape rife with social and environmental problems. 
The fact that Kimberly-Clark planned and implemented the destructive logging that caused 
these problems while at the same assuring its customers, its shareholders, and the public 
that all its operations were environmentally sustainable and socially beneficial speaks to the 
company’s lack of integrity—a lack of integrity that appears to be endemic within the company. 
In 2006, a reporter confronted Kimberly-Clark spokesperson Dave Dickson about his company’s 
broken promise not to purchase fibre from virgin rainforests. He responded, simply, that “some 
of our recent public statements have reflected a higher standard than this policy requires and 
have overstated our actual practices”63. In light of the findings of this report, it seems that 
Kimberly-Clark’s policies and public statements overstate the company’s actual practices with 
alarming consistency.
There is no way for Kimberly-Clark to undo what it has already done to the Kenogami Forest—
sadly, most of the damage is irreversible. But it can use its purchasing power to ensure that 
Kenogami’s future is brighter than its past. By adopting a policy that prohibits the use of 
fibre from Endangered Forests, including intact forests and threatened species habitat; that 
makes a meaningful commitment to fibre certified by the Forest Stewardship Council; and that 
prohibits the use of fibre from areas logged without the prior and informed consent of local First 
Nations, Kimberly-Clark can ensure that it is supporting only the best types of forestry. And 
by setting time-bound targets for increasing the amount of recycled content across its full line 
of products, the company can dramatically reduce its reliance on virgin fibre over the coming 
years. Given Kimberly-Clark’s poor record on compliance, it must also enact clear rules for 
policy implementation, including regular third-party auditing and appropriate mechanisms for 
monitoring, reporting, and enforcement.  
These new policies and practices are crucial for the future of all the forests across Canada 
and around the world from which Kimberly-Clark purchases fibre: the Kenogami Forest is 
just one example of the damage being wrought for the production of Kleenex and other 
disposable tissue products. For the sake of communities and ecosystems across the 
globe, Kimberly-Clark  needs to stop hiding behind ineffective policies and deceptive public 
statements, and start working with First Nations, workers, and environmental groups to 
implement practices that make a difference for people and for the environment.  
“THERE IS NO WAY FOR KIMBERLY-
CLARK TO UNDO WHAT IT HAS 
ALREADY DONE TO THE KENOGAMI 
FOREST—SADLY, MOST OF THE 
DAMAGE IS IRREVERSIBLE.”
1  Greenpeace

1 Greenpeace. 2006. Chain of Lies: The Truth About Kimberly-Clark’s Use of Ancient 
Rainforests for Tissue Products.
2 As defined by Ecological Components of Endangered Forests . Forest Ethics, Greenpeace, 
Natural Resources Defense Council, and Rainforest Action Network, April 2006.
3 The Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) is an independent body that certifies forests that 
are being managed according to standards of responsible management. The standards 
set by the FSC are the strictest and most credible currently available and include a 
robust chain of custody that allows companies to properly track the source of their pulp, 
paper and lumber. It is the only body of standards supported by most conservation 
organizations, and the only one that recognizes cultural values and indigenous rights. 
4 A forest management unit (FMU) is a parcel of forest land that is harvested, regenerated, 
and managed as a single entity. In Ontario, the location, shape, and management of FMUs 
are determined by the provincial government. 
5 Apps, MJ, WA Kurz, RJ Luxmoore, LO Nilsson, RA Sedjo, R Schmidt, LG Simpson, and 
TS Vinson. 1993. Boreal forests and tundra. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution  70, 39-53.
6 Through the years, the Terrace Bay pulp mill and its associated forestry operations were 
held by various Kimberly-Clark subsidiaries and by the Kimberly-Clark Corporation itself. 
7 The Kenogami forest management unit is an amalgamation of three former management 
units: the Longlac forest management unit, the Nakina forest management unit, and the 
Geraldton company management unit. At the time of their amalgamation in 1997, all these 
units were licensed to Kimberly-Clark. 
8 Between 1952 and 1997, the responsibility for forest regeneration shifted a number of 
times between the forest industry and the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources. Until 
1963, license holders were responsible for the regeneration of Crown forest lands. From 
1963 to 1984, the government took over, in part because companies were not fulfilling 
their responsibilities. Starting in 1985, companies implemented reforestation using 
government funds, and then, in 1997, responsibility for all reforestation and regeneration 
shifted back to industry through the Sustainable Forest License system. 
9 2005–2010 Forest Management Plan for the Kenogami Forest. Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Nipigon District, Northwest Region and Neenah Paper Company of Canada, 
SFL No.542256.
10 2010–2011 Contingency Plan for the Kenogami Forest. Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Nipigon District, Northwest Region and Terrace Bay Pulp Inc., SFL No.542256.
11 Quoted in Briony Smith. 2005. Battle for the Boreal.  The Martlet . November 3, 2005. 
12 Kimberly-Clark. 2004. Sustaining Our World: Health, Hygiene and Kimberly-Clark. 
Kimberly-Clark’s 2004 Sustainability Report.
13 2005–2010 Forest Management Plan for the Kenogami Forest. Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Nipigon District, Northwest Region and Neenah Paper Company of Canada, 
SFL No.542256.
14 Ibid.
15 The Terrace Bay pulp mill is set up to produce both softwood and hardwood high quality 
bleached kraft pulp. Currently, however, the mill is producing 100 per cent softwood pulp. 
For this reason, only softwood is accounted for in this analysis of fibre sources. 
16 Lee, P . 2007. Recent Anthropogenic Changes within the Boreal Forests of Ontario and 
Their Potential Impacts on Woodland Caribou.  (A Global Forest Watch Canada Report). 
Edmonton, Alberta: Global Forest Watch Canada. 51 pp.
17 Ibid.
18 2005–2010 Forest Management Plan for the Kenogami Forest. Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Nipigon District, Northwest Region and Neenah Paper Company of Canada, 
SFL No.542256.
19 2010–2011 Contingency Plan for the Kenogami Forest. Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Nipigon District, Northwest Region and Terrace Bay Pulp Inc., SFL 
No.542256.
20 Greenpeace. 2006. Roadmap to Recovery: The World’s Last Intact Forest Landscape s.
21 Noss RF . 2001. Beyond Kyoto: Forest management in a time of rapid climate change. 
Conservation Biology 15, 578-590.
22 Jump AS, and J Penuelas. 2005. Running to stand still: Adaptation and the response of 
plants to rapid climate change. Ecology Letters  8, 1010 -1020.
23 Forest Ethics, Greenpeace, Natural Resources Defense Council, and Rainforest Action 
Network. 2006. Ecological Components of Endangered Forests .
24 Analysis produced by Global Forest Watch Canada, 2008.
25 Ferguson C, EA Nelson, and GG Sherman. 2008. Turning Up the Heat: Global Warming 
and the Degradation of Canada’s Boreal Forest . Toronto: Greenpeace Canada.  
26 According to the document “Old Growth Definitions for Ontario”, 90 years is the youngest 
age at which old-growth characteristics occur for dominant tree species in the eastern 
Boreal Forest like poplar, birch, and jack pine. For other tree species, the age of onset for 
old-growth characteristics is significantly higher—up to 160 years for the lowland black 
spruce, for example. For other species less common to the region, the age of onset can 
be lower—balsam fir and red maple start to exhibit old-growth characteristics at 70 and 80 
years, respectively. For the purposes of this analysis, we have defined “old-growth” as stands 
90 years and older, across all tree species. Given that many species will not exhibit old-
growth traits until they are significantly older than 90 years, this definition is a generous one 
that likely over-estimates the amount of old-growth forest in Kenogami. (P Uhlig, A Harris, G 
Craig, C Bowling, B Chambers, B Naylor, and G Beemer. 2001. “Old growth forest definitions 
for Ontario.” Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources. Toronto: Queen’s Printer for Ontario.)
27 2005–2010 Forest Management Plan for the Kenogami Forest. Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Nipigon District, Northwest Region and Neenah Paper Company of Canada, 
SFL No.542256.
28 Some iterations of this policy have referred to “ecologically significant” rather than 
“environmentally significant” old-growth forests. 
29 2005–2010 Forest Management Plan for the Kenogami Forest. Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Nipigon District, Northwest Region and Neenah Paper Company of Canada, 
SFL No.542256.30 Dawson, FN. 2000. Report on the status of the wolverine (Gulo gulo) in Ontario. 
Species status report for the Committee on the Status of Species at Risk in 
Ontario (COSSARO). Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, Thunder Bay, 
Ontario, Canada. 39 pp. 
31 Ibid.
32 Ontario Wolverine Project, unpublished data.
33 Kenogami’s forest management plan (based on the Strategic Forest Management 
Model—see section “Bad planning”) only considers caribou in 33 per cent of 
the unit, which indicates that managers conclude that caribou are not a factor in 
the rest of the unit. An analysis by Ontario Nature indicates that they may still be 
present in 49 per cent of the unit. (Conservation Priorities on the Kenogami Forest. 
Prepared by Julee Boan, Ontario Nature, June 2006.)
34 Vors, LS, JA Schaefer, BA Pond, AR Rodgers, and BR Patterson. 2007. Woodland 
caribou extirpation and anthropogenic landscape disturbance in Ontario. Journal of 
Wildlife Management  71(4).
35 Lee, P . 2007. Recent Anthropogenic Changes within the Boreal Forests of Ontario 
and Their Potential Impacts on Woodland Caribou . (A Global Forest Watch Canada 
Report.) Edmonton, Alberta: Global Forest Watch Canada.
36 Ontario woodland caribou recovery team. 2005. Recovery strategy for forest 
dwelling woodland caribou (Rangifer tarandus caribou) in Ontario (Draft) . Species at 
Risk Unit, Biodiversity Section, Fish and Wildlife Branch, Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Peterborough, Ontario.
37 Regular independent, third-party audits are required under Ontario forest 
management planning regulations. Once these audits are submitted to the 
provincial legislature, they become part of the public record. 
38 Kenogami Forest Independent Forest Audit 2000–2005. Prepared by KBM Forestry 
Consultants Inc, Thunder Bay, Ontario. 
39 2005–2010 Forest Management Plan for the Kenogami Forest. Ontario Ministry 
of Natural Resources, Nipigon District, Northwest Region and Neenah Paper 
Company of Canada, SFL No.542256.
40 Twelve per cent of the landbase allocated for logging within Ontario is protected by 
legislation. 
41 Room to Grow Task Group. December 2001. Methodology for identifying and 
assessing candidate sites for completing the system of representation in the Ontario 
Living Legacy planning area. Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources. 
42 Ibid.
43 2005–2010 Forest Management Plan for the Kenogami Forest. Ontario Ministry 
of Natural Resources, Nipigon District, Northwest Region and Neenah Paper 
Company of Canada, SFL No.542256.
44 Ibid.
45 2005–2010 Forest Management Plan for the Kenogami Forest. Ontario Ministry 
of Natural Resources, Nipigon District, Northwest Region and Neenah Paper 
Company of Canada, SFL No.542256.
46 While the guidelines do allow cuts larger than 260 hectares, each one needs 
to be reported and validated as an exception. (Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources. 2002. Forest Management Guide for Natural Disturbance Pattern 
Emulation Guidelines.  Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources Toronto: Queen’s 
Printer for Ontario.)
47 Noss, RF . 2001. Beyond Kyoto: Forest management in a time of rapid climate 
change. Conservation Biology  15, 578-590.
48 Frelich LE, and PB Reich. 2003. Perspectives on development of definitions and 
values related to old -growth forests.  Environmental Reviews  11, S9–S22.
49 Jump AS, and J Penuelas. 2005. Running to stand still: Adaptation and the 
response of plants to rapid climate change. Ecology Letters  8, 1010–1020.
50 Kenogami Forest Independent Forest Audit 2000–2005. Prepared by KBM Forestry 
Consultants Inc, Thunder Bay, Ontario. 2006.
51 While the audit noted that upcoming regeneration surveys were expected to 
reduce the amount of land labeled as “barren and scattered” and “not satisfactorily 
regenerated,” but also acknowledged that these surveys needed to be improved.
52 Kenogami Forest Independent Forest Audit 2000–2005. Prepared by KBM Forestry 
Consultants Inc, Thunder Bay, Ontario. 2006.
53 See, e.g., Wildlands League. 2007. “Ontario’s Timber Harvesting Levels: Science or 
Wishful Thinking?”
54 Ecosystem-based management is a type of forest management which determines 
how much of a forest can be logged only after ecological values are preserved and 
protected.
55 Kenogami Forest Independent Forest Audit 2000–2005. Prepared by KBM Forestry 
Consultants Inc, Thunder Bay, Ontario. 2006.
56 Ibid.
57 Ibid.
58 Press release, December 13, 2006. “Aroland First Nation prepares to stop access 
and operations in Kenogami Forest.”
59 Press release, March 13, 2007. “First Nations file to protect rights in Kenogami 
Forest.” Released by Matawa First Nations tribal council. 
60 Ibid.
61 Press release, February 29, 2008. “Grassy Narrows: Paper company sets an 
example for the Province of Ontario to follow.”
62 Legislative Assembly of Ontario. Committee Transcripts: Standing Committee on 
Finance and Economic Affairs, January 23, 2007—Pre-budget consultations. 
63 Quoted in Marc Gunther. 2006. “Are Kleenex tissues wiping out forests?” Fortune . 
September 27, 2006.ENDNOTES  CUT & RUN    ENDNOTES



Greenpeac e Can ada
250 Dundas Street West, Suite 605, Toronto , Ontario, M5T 2Z5  
454, avenue Laurier Est, 3e étage, Montréal  (Québec),  H2J 1E7  
1726 Commercial Drive, Vancouver , British Columbia, V5N 4A3  
6238 - 104 Street NW, Edmonton , Alberta, T6H 2K9
1 800 320-7183www.greenpeace.caPrinted on 100 per cent post-consumer recycled, chlorine-free paper that is manufactured with wind-generated energy.