# Archivo original: cutting-edge-contamination-a.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:41 -03 2025

CUTTING EDGE
CONT AMINA TION
A STUD Y OF ENVIRONMEN TAL POL LUTION DU RING 
THE MANUFACTURE OF ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS        

2
AUTHORS: Brigden, K., Labunska, I., Santillo, D., Walters, A.
Greenpeace Research Laboratories
Department of Biological Sciences,University of Exeter , Exeter EX4 4PS, UK
Published by Greenpeace International
Ottho Heldringstraat 5
1066 AZ Amsterdam
The Netherlands
February 2007
JN 043 ::Technical Note 01/2007A boy stands on the riverbed contaminated by the outflow of the
Compeq factory in the Guangdong Province, China. October 2006 
© GREENPEACE COVER PHOTOS
Right:Treated wastewater being
discharged to public canal from acombined wastewater treatment plantof Nav anakorn Industrial Estate.
Pathumthan i,Thailand
© GREENPEACE / SA TAPORN THONGMA
Left: Image sho ws the i nside of a
laptop and the components pr oduced
and assembled in the factories that are
highlighted in this report.
©GREENPEACE/ROSE

3CONTENTS
Executive Summary 4
1 Introduction 14
2 Sampling Program 18
2.1 Printed wiring board (PWB) manufacture; China & Thailand 19
2.1.1 China 19
2.1.2 Thailand 21
2.2 Semiconductor chip manufacture; Philippines and Mexico 24
2.3 Component assembly; Mexico 26
3 Methodology 29
4 Results and discussion 30
4.1 Printed wiring board (PWB) manufacture; China & Thailand 30
4.1.1 Facilities in China 30
4.1.2 Facilities in Thailand 35
4.1.3 Discussion 42
4.2 Semiconductor chip manufacture; Philippines & Mexico 53
4.2.1 Facilities in Philippines 53
4.2.2 Facilities in Me xico; Kemet 59
4.2.3 Discussion 59
4.3. Component assembly; Mexico 65
4.3.1 Facilities in Mexico 65
4.3.2 Discussion 68
5 Conclusions 72
6 References 74

4CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
THE USE OF ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT IS WIDESPREAD WITHIN SOCIETY. CONSUMER GOODS, FROM MOBILE PHONES TO DESKTOP AND LAPTOP
COMPUTERS, ARE PART OF DAILY LIFE FOR MANY PEOPLE.THESE PRODUCTS HAVE A VERY CLEAN IMAGE COMPARED WITH MANY OTHERCONSUMER GOODS.THE REALITY, HOWEVER, CAN BE SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT.
© GREENPEACEAs the sun sets the farmer
waters his plants near the
Compeq Factory in the
Guangdong Province,
China. October 2006

5©GREENPEACE/RIZMAN
In recent years, concerns have grown over the use of hazardous
chemicals and materials in these products. Attention has tended tofocus on the impacts on human health and the environment due to suchchemicals, through the use and ultimate disposal or recycling of theseproducts. Less consideration has been paid to the potentialenvironmental impacts that result from their manufacture.Thisindustry has high resource intensity, in terms of chemicals, energy andwater demands.This is especially the case for printed wiring board
(PWBs) and semiconductor chip manufacture. Processes used in both
sectors are highly complex and chemically intensive; many of thechemicals employed do not form part of the final product (e.g.
solvents). Substantial concerns exist for many chemicals used in thisindustry, both for potential exposure in the workplace and the possible
environmental consequences of their release in waste streams.Electronic devices such as computers are incredibly complex
constructions, consisting of a wide range of diverse components.The manufacture of an individual product can be a truly global process, with individual components manufactured at numerousspecialised facilities in many different countries, before assembly into the final product.
This study was undertaken to highlight environmental contamination
resulting from the manufacture of electronic equipment such as
computers. It is not intended to be an exhaustive investigation of theelectronics manufacturing industry, but rather an attempt to gain
understanding of chemical wastes released to the environment by
certain sectors of th is industry, by providing some ‘snap-shot’ case
studies in three major sectors of this industry. For each sector , many
manufacturing facilities and Industrial Estates housing such facilities
were investigated in four countries, as given in the table below 
FACILITIES
Compeq
Fortune
Elec & Eltek (EETH)
Navanakorn IEBangpa-in IE; CKL Electronics
Hi-Tech IE; KCE
Rojana IE; PCTT
Gateway Busi ness P ark (mixed ac tivity IE)
On Sem icon (Also kno wn as ‘On Sem iconduc tor’)
Cavite Expor t Processi ng Zone , CEPZA; mixed activity IE
Kemet
Sanyo Video,Tijuana
Sony,Tijuana
Parque Integ ral (Fle xtronics), Guadalajara
Jabil,Guadalajar a
Solec tron,Guadalajar a
Sanm ina-SCI plant 3, Guadalajar a
HP , Guadalajara
IBM Site, GuadalajaraMANUFACTURING SECTOR
PWB manufacture
PWB manufacturePWB manufacturePWB manufacturePWB manufacturePWB manufacturePWB manufacture
Semiconduc tor ch ip manufac ture
Semiconduc tor ch ip manufac ture
Semiconduc tor ch ip manufac ture
Semiconduc tor ch ip manufac ture
Assembly (TV & LCD)
Assembly (TV & LCD)
Component ass embly
Component ass embly
Component ass embly
Component ass embly
Assembly (PC & other components)
Assembly (PC & other components)COUNTRIES
China
China
Thailand
ThailandThailandThailandThailandPhilippinesPhilippinesPhilippinesMexicoMexicoMexicoMexicoMexicoMexicoMexico
Mexico
Mexicotable 1.1 :: Facilities/Sites and Industrial Estates (IEs) investigated, the country in which they are based and the manufacturing sector to 
which they belong.An inside look into the
printing wiring board
(PWB)

6CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
The use of electronic equipment is widespread within society.
Consumer goods, from mobile phones to desktop and laptop computers,are part of daily life for many people.These products have a very cleanimage compared with many other consumer goods.The reality, however ,can be somewhat different.
A number of different types of samples were analysed from the various
sites, though it was not possible to collect all types of sample for each
of the facilities. Discharged wastewaters and sediments from discharge
pipes/channels were analysed for some locations, mainly from PWBfacilities, though also from one component assembly facility. At some
industrial estates, wastewaters are sent from many individual facilities
to a common was tewate r treatment plant (WWTP). Where possib le,
treated was tewate rs and treatment sludges/sediments from these
WWTPs were also collected and analysed. Groundwater samples from
many sites we re anal ysed to i nvestigate impacts on local groundwater
aquife rs. In some cases, such as semiconductor manufacturing
facilities, it was not possible to collect wastewater samples and the
investigations therefore focussed entirely on groundwater samples
collec ted from sources in the vicinity of the plants.
Though this study has certain limitations due to its overall scope and
limited access to some types of samples at some sites, it does provide
substantial information on the environmental contamination of theseparts of the industry where little has previously been available.Thisstudy demonstrates the nature of environmental contamination due to
the manufacture of some components used in electrical/electronic
equipment at multiple sites in many countries.Evidence of environmental contamination by a diverse range of
chemicals, many with known uses in this industry, was found for each of the three sectors investigated.This included both chemicalsincorporated into the products as well as chemicals used inmanufacturing processes, many with known toxicity to humans andother potential environmental impacts. Some chemicals were found inwastestreams from more than one sector , including some toxic andenvironmentally persistent groups of chemicals;
- polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs); widely used as brominated
flame-retardants
- phthalates; widely used as plasticizers (softeners) in plastics
- certain chlorinated solvents
- high levels of some heavy metals.Of these chemicals, many that are incorporated into electronic products
have also been i dentified with in and around e-waste recycling yards in
China and India in a recent Greenpeace investigation (Brigden et al.
2005), including certain heavy metals, phthalates and the brominated
flame-retardants PDBEs. Laptop compu ters purchased in Europe
within the last year have also been found to contain mixtures of
PBDEs (Brigden et al. 2006), though the compositions were differentfrom those found at the manufacturing sites.
Other chem icals f ound in wastestreams and groundwater samples were
specific to each of the manufacturing sectors, for example the
brominated flame-retardant TBBPA and photoinitiator-relatedchem icals at PWB manufac turing sites.These differences reflect the
different pr ocess es employ ed with in each sector , though this may also
be due in part to the types of samples that it was possible to collect
from fac ilities in each sector (e.g. no wastewaters samples were
analysed from semiconduc tor chip manufacturers as no such
wastestreams could be identified at the plants visited).

7Flame-retardants are chem icals added to a wide variety of
materials, including casings and components of many electronicgoods, to prevent the spread of fire.Two widely used groups of
chem icals are brominated flame retardants (including PBDEs
and TBBPA) and phosphorus based compounds (including TPP).
- PBDEs (P olybrominated diphenyl ethers) are
environmentally persistent chemicals, some of which are highlybioaccumulative and capable of interfering with normal brain
development in animals. Several PBDEs are suspected
endocrine disruptors, demonstrating an ability to interfere with
hormones involved in growth and sexual development. Effectson the i mmune system have also been reported.
- 
TBBPA (Tetrabromobisphenol-A) There is evidence that
TBBP A may i nterfere with thyroid hormones, with the potential
for effects on growth and development, and other in vitro
studies (not within a living organism) indicate the potential foreffects on othe r hormone systems, the immune system, liver and
kidneys. Recently concerns have been raised over chemicals
formed during the degradation of TBBPA in the environment.- TPP (Triphenylphosphate) is acutely toxic to aquatic life and
is a s trong inhibitor of a key enzyme system in human blood. It
can also cause contact dermatitis in some individuals and is apossible endocrine disruptor .
Phthalates are widely used as plasticizers (softeners) in plastics,
especially PVC (e.g. in cables and other flexible components),
though many othe r industrial uses exist. Many phthalates are
toxic to wildlife and humans, often through their metabolites(chemicals to which they breakdown in the body). DEHP , a widely
used phthalate, is a known reproductive toxin capable of causing
changes to both male and female reproductive systems in
mammals (e.g. development of the testes in early life). Otherphthalates (e.g. DBP and BBP) also exert reproductive toxicity.Both DEHP and DBP are classified as “toxic to reproduction”within the EU. Certain other phthalates (DINP and DIDP) canaffect the liver and kidneys, albeit at higher doses.Flame Retardants
A farmer picking peanuts from a
field near the Compeq Factory,in the Guangdong Province,China. October 2006
© GREENPEACE

8CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
A large proportion of the compounds isolated from discharged
wastewaters and associated samples could not be identified, andtherefore their properties and potential impacts remain unknown. Forsome chemicals identified in wastestreams (e.g. photo-initiator relatedchemicals used in PWB manufacture), very little information isavailable on their toxicity and environmental properties, presumablylargely as a result of rapidly changing manufacturing processes and thechemicals employed within certain sectors.The possible impacts on
human health and the environment due to the use and release of these
chemicals, therefore, remain largely unknown.
The ineffective treatment of wastewaters by the WWTPs to which they
are d ischarged has been d emons trated at some i ndustrial estates in
Thailand where PWBs are manufactured. As is the case for many
industrial estates where common WWTPs receive mixed wastes from
many fac ilities, although treatment pr ocess es may be able to degrade
certain chemicals they are not effective at dealing with persistent
organic chemicals and heavy metals in wastewaters. As this study has
found, this can mean that such chem icals are s till present in treated
wastewaters discharged to the environment. Furthermore, their
accumulation in WWTP sludges creates an additional wastestream
contam inated with heavy metals and pe rsistent organic chemicals. For
certain chemicals used in PWB manufacture (e.g. photoinitiator-related
compounds) the results suggest that they are degraded by thetreatment processes employed at some sites. However , such wastewater
treatment is not universally carried out, and these chemicals werefound i n was tewate rs being directly discharged to the environment from
other PWB manufacturing facilities (both Fortune and Compeq in
China). Due to the limited information available on these compounds
the impac ts of such d ischarges remai ns unkno wn.
In addition to the chemicals identified in wastewater networks,
contamination of groundwater aquifers with chlorinated chemicals andsome heavy metals (e.g. nickel) was evident at some sites. Many of
these chemicals have known uses in the facilities located at the sites
where they were found. Groundwater contamination is of particularconce rn as local communities use this resource for drinking water in
many places.Trihalomethanes (THMs) were also found in some groundwater
samples from sites in all sectors.These chemicals are generally formedas by-products of chlorine based water disinfection, which is commonpractice for many groundwater sources including open wells, and this istheir most likely source in these samples.
Despite the overall complexity of the sample set available and the result
obtained, some distinct patterns of contamination could be attributed to
each of the different sectors investigated
PWB manufacturing
For the PWB manufacturing facilities investigated, wastewaters and
sediments from discharge pipes/channels contained many chemicals of
environmental concern. Some groups of chemicals were found
throughout wastewater distribution networks and WWTPs, as well as
in was tewaters discharged directly to the wider environment, either by
WWTPs or individual facilities.These included some persistent and
toxic chemicals; PBDEs (brominated flame-retardants) and phthalates,as we ll as h igh levels of some heavy metals. Other types of flame-
retardant were found in wastewaters from facilities in China;TBBPA
(commonly incorporated into PWBs) and TPP; see flame-retardantsbox.
PBDEs we re widely distributed, being found in wastewaters and/or
sediments at all sites, including wastewaters released directly to
environment.Though present in many samples, there were substantial
differences in the number of PBDEs and their relative amounts in
samples fr om different locati ons.Distribution patterns indicate that the
facilities are significant point sources of these chemicals.
Other chemicals specific to the PWB sector were found in discharged
wastewater networks at most sites, including photoinitiator-related
compounds and very high levels of heavy metals, including copper ,
nickel and zinc.

9
This farmer is on his break,
drinking water . His field isnear the Compeq factory inthe Guangdong Province,China. October 2006
© GREENPEACE

Groundwater samples collected from PWB manufacturing sites were
generally not impacted with the chemicals found in other samples.
Although high levels of some metals were commonly present inwastestreams, their levels in groundwaters were generally not high.However , one sample from the Hi-Tech IE in Thailand did contain nickelat a level above the World Health Organisation (WHO) drinking waterguideline value and nearly 5 times the Thai groundwater quality levelfor this metal.
Semiconductor chip m anufacture
Volatile org anic chem icals (VOCs) we re found in samples from each of
the sites where semiconductor chips are manufactured.The VOCs
identified included chlorinated chemicals, commonly used as industrial
solvents or d egreasing agents, many with kno wn toxic effects of the
central nervous system, liver , and kidneys.Coppe r and n ickel are wi dely used in PWB manufacture. In some
cases, manufacturing processes use other chemicals which can impede
the reco very of metals from wastewaters. Releases of copper to aquatic
environments can have si gnificant impacts. At the EETH facility in
Thailand, wastewater contained the highest level of copper of the sites
at a concentr ation almost two times the maximum permitted level for
industrial eff luents i n Thailand.
10CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
Photoinitiators and related compounds. Photoinitiators use UV
light to induce polymerisation and are extensively used in the
manufacture of PWBs. Benzophenone and acetophenone basedchemicals have traditionally been used though new compoundshave been recently introduced, including thioxanthones.There isvery little information on the potential human health and
environmental impacts of many of these compounds, especially
those more recently introduced.
- Benzophenones; From animal experiments, the parent
compound benz ophenone can have to xic effec ts on the l iver and
kidneys. Benzophenone and some of its derivatives may effect
the es trogenic hor mone sys tem.
- Acetophenones; Though in use for many years, little
information exists on their toxicity. Acetophenone itself is a
toxic chemical; exposure can cause sedative effects in humans
as well as effects on the blood; vapours can cause skin
irritation.Effec ts on lungs, kidneys, and liver have also been
repor ted in animals.
- Thioxanthones; Thioxanthones are used in PWB photoresist
processes. Little information is available on these compounds,though some derivatives of thioxanthone are known to be ofhigh aquatic hazard and capab le of causi ng lon g-term effects in
aquatic organisms at low concentrations.Photoinitiators and related compounds
Some metals are used in the manufacture of PWBs and other
electrical components; particularly copper but also nickel andother metals.
Copper is widely used due to its high electrical conductivity;
some PWB manufacturing processes use water soluble coppercompounds. Many aquatic organisms are extremely sensitive to
copper , particularly in soluble forms, and releases to aquatic
environments can have significant impacts. Effects can occur atvery low levels, including reductions in growth and fertility rates
as well as increased mortality.
Nickel is also used in the manufacture of PWBs, including nickel
electroplating involving water-soluble nickel compounds. Ingestion
of some nickel compounds can cause toxic effects in humans andanimals; gastrointestinal effects and even cardiac effects. 2-5%
of the population are nickel sensitive and can suffer effects at far
lower doses. Some nickel compounds are carcinogenic to humans,and possibly some animals.Metals

11
Ayutthaya, Thailand
Wastewater from treated 
wastewater pond (far side) inside a combined wastewater treatment
plant of Bangpa-in Industrial Estate,
flowing towards public canal,
13 September 2006.
© GREENPEACE / SATAPORN THONGMA

12CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
The mos t extensive contamination was seen at the Cavite Export
Processing Zone (CEPZA) industrial estate in the Philippines, where
chlorinated VOCs (ethenes & ethanes) were found in 5 groundwater
samples, all collec ted close to the centre of the industrial estate.The
distribution of these chemicals in the groundwater indicates localisedindustrial inputs within the CEPZA IE. In three samples, the level of
one or more chlor inated ethene exceeded maximum recommended
levels for drinking water set by the World Heath Organisation (WHO)
and/or US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). For one of thesethe level of tetrachloroethene was 9 times the WHO guidance value and
70 times the U SEPA maximum contaminant level.
The situation was less clear at the other sites. Chlorinated VOCs were
found i n only one sample at the Gateway IE (Ph ilippines). In the case
of the On Semicon site (Philippines), the greatest groundwater
contamination was detected to the south of the facility, indicating that
anothe r so far un identified source may be responsible.
Some samples associated with this sector contained high levels of
metals, primarily zinc, though current levels would not be expected to
pose a risk to health in drinking water . In many cases the likely sourceswere unclear , though high levels do appear to be centred around the On
Semicon site.The data g ive a snap-shot of g roundwater contamination at each site. It
was not the i ntention of this study to conduct a full comprehensive
survey of the aquifers, nor was there the ability to do so due to the
limited numbe r of g roundwater access points at each site.There is
clearly a need for further detailed investigations of chlorinated VOCs in
groundwater at the semiconductor chip manufacturing sites to find thefull e xtent of the contam ination of the aquifers, particularly at the
CEPZA IE in the Philippines. As no samples of production wastes
(such as wastewaters) could be collected from the facilities in thissector, the nature and extent of chemicals in these waste streams are
unknown.
Component assembly
At the investigated sites in Mexico where component assembly takes
place, high levels of some metals were found in about half thegroundwater samples collected, principally nickel and zinc.The levels of
nickel in 3 samples [1 from a well adjacent to the Sanyo Video facility
in Tijuana, and 2 collected close to the Flextronics IE in Guadalajara]
were above the WHO maximum guideline value for nickel in drinking
water , the highest being over double the WHO value. No contaminationwith chlorinated VOCs was found in these groundwaters.
Samples of was tewater were only accessible at one site, that belonging
to IBM i n Guadalajar a.A numbe r of chem icals of environmental
concern were found in these wastewaters, including nonyl phenols, a
phthalate , and also trace levels of 2 PBDEs, flame-retardant chemicals
discuss ed abo ve.Nonyl phenols (NP) are pe rsistent chemicals that are
toxic to aquatic life, and can bioaccumulate. NPs are commonly formed
as degradation products of nonylphenol ethoxylates (NPEs), a group of
chem icals us ed as surfac tants (d etergents). One NPE was also found in
the same wastewater , along with a phthalate (DEHP).Chlorinated methanes, ethanes and ethenes, many of which are or
have been widely used as solvents in industrial processes,
including surface cleaning in the manufacture of electrical
equipment (PWBs & semiconductor chips); especially 1,1,1-trichloroethane, trichloroethene and tetrachloroethene. Many ofthese chemicals are potentially carcinogenic to humans. Most can
affect the central nervous system (CNS), liver , and kidneys and
are irritating to the skin, eyes, and mucous membranes. Some canbe absorbed directly through the skin.The widespread use and
storage of chlorinated solvents has led to releases of these
chemicals into the environment, including groundwater aquifers.Chlorinated volatile organic chemicals (VOCs)
Nonylphenol (NP) is a chemical most widely known as a
breakdown product of nonylphenol ethoxylate (NPE) surfactants
(detergents), though it has reportedly also been used as an
antioxidant in some plastics. It is a strong endocrine (hormonesystem) disruptor , capable of causing intersex (individuals withboth male and female characteristics) in fish. Nonylphenol can
also build up through the food chain and may be capable of
causing damage to DNA and even sperm function in humans.Nonylphenol (NP) 

Overall, the results from this study clearly demonstrate that the current
use of hazardous chemicals and practices in the manufacture ofelectronic equipment is resulting in contamination of the environmentwith many hazardous chemicals, some of which are persistent and ableto bioaccumulate. Commonly used wastewater treatment processes areunable to deal with many of the chemicals used, including certainbrominated flame-retardants and heavy metals.
At those sites where groundwater contamination has been highlighted it
is imperative that any further inputs to the groundwaters aquifers areimmediately prevented and full site investigations carried out to find
the extent of the contamination and enable remediation. Where
contam inated g roundwater sour ces are used for drinking water , clean
drinking water from other sustainable sources needs to be supplied in
the interim.
Despite its high demand for resources, including a diverse array of
hazardous chemicals, the electronics industry at a global level appearsto remai n relatively free from specific environmental regulation.This
may, in part, be a consequence of the very rapid evolution and
development of the sector , such that the rate of introduction of newindustrial processes outpaces the development of regulatory controls.
When it comes to wor ker and environmental protection, there are some
signs of chan ge with in the electronics industry.The EU Directive on the
restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and
electronic equipment, or the RoHS Directive, has had a substantial
impac t on the i ndustry well beyond Europe and, in the case of some
companies at least, well before its official entry into force on July 1st
2006. This Directive prevents the use of the heavy metals lead,
mercury,cadmium and hexavalent chrome and of certain brominated
flame-retardants, namely PBBs and PBDEs (with exceptions for deca-
BDE and some designated uses of metals). It does not control the use
of all potentiall y hazardous chem icals, including other brominated
flame-retardants such as TBBPA. Furthermore, it addresses only a very
small part of the problem, with a heavy focus on avoiding the presence
of onl y certain hazardous chemicals in the final products put on the
market in the EU. Aside from the upstream changes these specific
prohibitions require, RoHS alone is likely to have little impact on the
use of the major ity of the hazardous chem icals used in the
manufacturing processes themselves, nor on the overall efficiency and
resource intensity of those processes.What is urgently required is a much more fundamental shift in thinking
and emphasis by thos e compan ies en gaged in electronics manufacture
to ensure that concerns regarding chemical and other raw material use,
workplace exposure and waste management become a routine part of
company plann ing, research and development cycles, without waiting
for legislative measures to catch up and without pursuing derogations
from existing law. In technological terms, electronics manufacturing
remai ns at the cu tting edge and has a strong economic future.There is
no reason why it should not also be at the cutting edge when it comes
to clean designs and technologies, substitution of hazardous chemicals,
increas ed resource efficiencies, greater worker health protection and
the prevention of environmental pollution at source. In short, it is vital
that, in the inevitable race for technological advances, the electronics
manufac turing industry does not remain blind to the parallel need for
pollu tion preventi on and sus tainability.
13
© GREENPEACECollecting water
samples from a well
near the Sanyo plant in
Tijuana. June 2006.

Examples include lead, a highly toxic metal that has traditionally been
used in electrical solders and other materials used in the manufactureof such products, and certain toxic brominated compounds, such as
polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), the use of which as flame
retardants has resulted in releases of these chemicals to theenvironment.
Studies investigating the use of hazardous chemicals in this sector have
tended to focus on impacts on human health and the environment
resulting from the recycling and disposal of old electrical/electronic
equipment, an alread y large and rapidly increasing wastestream.
Greenpeace recently conducted a study demonstrating workplace and
environmental contamination due to recycling activities in China andIndia (Brigden et al. 2005). However , the use of hazardous chemicals in
this type of product is not restricted to older , now obsolete models.
Greenpeace recently reported the presence of certain hazardous
chemicals in five laptop computers purchased in Europe in March 2006(Brigden & Santillo 2006). Although legislation in some countries andregions has prohibited or imposed greater controls on the use of certainhazardous chemicals (e.g. the European RoHS Directive, EC 2003),and despite moves by some companies to replace hazardous substanceswith safer alternatives (Cobbing 2006), even very recently
manufactured models of computers and related equipment may still
contain some toxic heavy metals and other hazardous chemicals.
14CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
1 :: INTRODUCTION
THERE HAS BEEN GROWING CONCERN IN RECENT YEARS OVER THE PRESENCE OF HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS AND MATERIALS WITHIN
ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT. INTEREST HAS CENTRED IN PARTICULAR ON COMPUTERS AND THEIR PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT,DUE LARGELY TO RAPIDLY INCREASING PRODUCTION OF SUCH GOODS GLOBALLY.
© GPIOne of the residents near the Compeq
factory in the Guangdong Province,China preparing her stove to makebread. October 2006
© GREENPEACE 

A topic that has received less public attention to date is the potential
for environmental impacts during the manufacture ofelectrical/electronic equipment, from both chemicals incorporated into
the products as well as other chemicals used in their manufacture but
that do not form part of the final product, such as solvents andsurfactants (Walters et al. 2006).This study was undertaken toinvestigate such impacts from certain sectors within this industry.
A typical compu ter is an incredibly complex construction consisting of
a wide range of diverse components, from the visible external keyboard,
casing and screen to the internal circuitry and wiring including printed
wiring boards (PWBs), semiconductors, hard drives, interface sockets,
cables, etc. many of which are themselves composed of numerous
individual par ts.The manufacture of this type of equipment is a truly
global i ndustry. A typical computer may have been assembled using
thousands of components manufactured at numerous specialisedfacilities, which may be located in a number of different countries.
There are many diverse manufacturing sectors within this industry.
This study is not, therefore, intended to be a comprehensive
investigation into all aspects of the whole manufacture process of
computers and peripheral equipment, but rather to provide some ‘snap-shot’ case studies into environmental contamination from the use ofhazardous chem icals in three major sectors of this industry;-
• Printed wiring board (PWB) manufacture
• Semiconductor chip manufacture• Component assembly
The assembly of individual component into discrete devices and the
final pr oduct can make use of surfactants and chemical solvents as well
as flux chemicals and metals in electrical solders. Historically solders
were lead based alloys and, although lead-free alternatives are now
widely used (Lau et al. 2003), numerous derogations permitting
continued use of leaded solders have recently been agreed under the
EU’s RoHS Directive (EC 2005).The manufacture of PWBs and
semiconductor chips are highly complex and chemically intensive
processes using a wide range of chemicals, many of which do not form
part of the final product.These processes, described in more detail by
Walters et al. (2006) are outlined briefly below in order to put the
current study into context.
Printed Wiring Board (PWB) manufacture
Printed wiring boards (PWB) are also known as printed circuit boards
(PCB). In this repor t the te rm PWB is us ed to avoid confusion with
another common use of PCB to refer to the chemicals polychlorinated
biphenyls.PWBs are essentially complex copper circuitry embedded within an
electrically insulating baseboard. Baseboards are generally made fromglass fibre-epoxy resin based composites to which flame retardant
chemicals are commonly added.Tetrabromobisphenol-A (TBBPA), a
brominated flame retardant (BFR), is widely used in epoxy resinboards.This compound becomes largely chemically bound into thepolymer , though traces of unreacted TBBPA do remain unbound in the
finished board (Sellstrom & Jansson 1995) and the harsh chemical
environments used during PWB production may be expected to causesome leaching of unreacted monomer .The initial stage of baseboard
manufacture is not further covered in this report.
The manufacture of a PWB involves producing complex copper
circuitry on th in layers of insulating material (baseboard).The layers
are then lam inated together and holes drilled to allow electrical
commun ication between lay ers.Additional circuitry may be laid down
on the ou ter surface and a r ange of the surface finishing chemicals
applied to clean, strengthen and protect the board. For each layer , the
coppe r circuitry is pr oduced by f irstly coating the base material with
coppe r.The circuit pattern is temporarily protected from the subsequent
stripping (etching) stage by a template or ‘mask’ laid on top of the
coppe r in the shape of the d esired c ircuit (usi ng the photochemical
techniques described below), and then unwanted copper is selectively
stripped back off from everywhere except where the circuit is required.Multiple processes and chemicals that can generate a mix of hazardouswastes are used in PWB manufacture; specific techniques applied vary
between manufacturers.
The pr ocess of creati ng circuits utilises complex photochemistry, i.e.
exploiting chemical changes through exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light.
The (cleaned) coppe r surface is first coated with a photoresist mixture
(of monome rs,crosslinking agents and photocatalysts) that changes its
solubility upon exposure to UV light. A diverse range of organic
chem icals are us ed in photoresists. A mask (map) of the circuitry is
applied and UV l ight shone on the board. Many pr ocess es are used, but
in that most commonly used the photoresist mixture polymerise on
exposure to UV light and becomes insoluble while unexposed areas
remai n solub le.The latte r are then washed away using a suitable
solvent, which can still include chlorinated solvents, though water based
systems are increasingly available (Lau et al. 2003, Shaw et al. 1997).
Spent d eveloping solu tion containing dissolved photoresist mixtures is
one of the largest liquid wastestreams generated by PWB
manufac turing (USEPA 1995). Exposed copper is then etched from
the surface ,and the pr otective photoresist is subsequently removed
using other chemicals (‘film stripping’) to leave the finished copper
circuit.These processes create complex wastestreams that includesolub le coppe r,photoreactive chemicals and solvents.
15

Individual layers are joined together using epoxy resins under heat and
pressure. Holes, or ‘vias’, are drilled through the PWB to allow theattachment of components, or provide electrical connection betweenlayers by copper coating the insides of the holes. Hole coating hastraditionally been carried out using the ‘electroless copper process’followed by electroplating.The electroless copper process uses dissolvedcopper compounds, formaldehyde and chelating chemicals (that canimpede recovery of metals from wastewaters), as well as other
hazardous chemicals.This process is therefore associated with
significant environmental concerns, though some manufactures now usealternative processes which are less chemical intensive and
environmentally impacting (Chang 1995, Hui et al. 2003). Outer layercircuitry is then laid down in a similar manner to that used for inner
layers, and then surface finishes are applied primarily to prevent copperoxidation and give physical protection.These are usually based onmetall ic solders (either lead-tin or lead free alloys) and/or other metals
includ ing nickel and g old, which can involve the use of water-soluble
nickel compounds.
The processes used, including numerous rinse cycles, result in
significant loss of metals and process chemicals into wastewaters.
Though some chem ical reco very does take place at many facilities,
wastewaters can represent a significant source of environmental
pollution (USEPA 1995).
Semiconductor chip manufacture
Semiconductor chips, or ‘microchips’ consist of a complex array of
microscopic components based on semiconducting material within anextremely small area.These circuits respond much more quickly anduse less electricity than conventional circuitry.The manufacture ofsemiconductor chips involves many chemical processes that require vast
quantities of process chemicals and water (Walters et al. 2006); over
30 kg of materials (including water) are required for the manufactureof a single 2 g memory chip (Williams et al. 2002). Due to the dynamic
nature of this industry, technologies used and the chemicals and
processes employed are rapidly changing (Dietrich 2004).
Semiconductor chips are constructed from ultra pure materials in a
multiple step-wise process, essentially involving three basic elements:
the layering of insulating, semiconducting or conducting material, the
doping of semiconducting layers with an array of chemicals to tunetheir electrical properties and the surface patterning using masking and
etching processes analogous to PWB construction. In this way multiple
layers of circuitry are built up.The processes are intolerant of even trace impurities, requiring the use
of very high purity chemicals (gases and solvents), many in highvolumes. Some recycling/reclamation of spent chemicals does occur ,though recovered solvents and gases can contain impurities that maymake clean-up to the necessary high purity impracticable, and so wastesolvents may often be incinerated (Timms 1999).The processing ofsolvent waste is often out-sourced to separate companies. Use ofchlorinated solvents by this industry has resulted in groundwater
contamination at a number of locations (Williams 2003). Large
volumes of wastewaters are generated, mainly from surface rinsing thatfollows etching and cleaning stages.These contain a wide range of
chemicals including solvents, acids and metals, particularly dissolvedcopper .
Processes used in semiconductor manufacture also generate gaseous
wastestreams contai ning a wide range of hazardous air pollutants.
These can include heavy metals, perfluorinated compounds, inorganic
acids and volatile organic chemicals (VOCs), some of which are potent
greenhous e gases.Though abatement of chemicals in gaseous
wastestreams commonly take place, significant chemical emissions to
air have nevertheless been reported (Chein & Chen 2003).
The use of hazardous chemicals in this industry has raised concerns
over workers health, particularly the potential impacts from long-term,low level exposure to a wide and frequently changing range ofchemicals. Epidemiological studies have highlighted increased
incidences of reproductive effects and certain cancers (Chen et al.
2002, Clapp 2006, Hsieh et al. 2005, Schenker et al. 1995), thoughestablishing cause-effect relationships to chemical exposure is
extremely difficult in such circumstances (Fowler 1999).
This study was not intended to be an exhaustive investigation of the
electronics manufacturing industry, rather an attempt to gain
understanding of the chemical wastes released to the environment by
certain sectors of this industry in a number of different countries. It
was not possible to investigate, and therefore compare, the same
manufac turing sector in each of the different countries included in this
study, nor to collect the same range of samples for each of the
individual facilities investigated.This study does, however , provide
substantial i nformation on the environmental contamination of these
parts of the industry where little has previously been available.The
individual manufacturing facilities or Industrial Estates in each of the
four countr ies,and the manufacturing activities carried out at each is
presented in Table 1.1.
16CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION

17
©GREENPEACE/RIZMAN
FACILITIES
Compeq
FortuneElec & Eltek (EETH)Navanakorn IEBangpa-in IE; CKL Electronics
Hi-Tech IE; KCE
Rojana IE; PCTT
Gateway Busi ness P ark (mixed activity IE)
On Sem icon (Also kno wn as ‘On Semiconductor’)
Cavite Expor t Processing Zone, CEPZA; mixed activity IE
Kemet
Sanyo Video,Tijuana
Sony,Tijuana
Parque Integral (Flextronics), Guadalajara
Jabil, Guadalajara
Solectron, GuadalajaraSanmina-SCI plant 3, Guadalajara
HP , Guadalajara
IBM Site, GuadalajaraMANUFACTURING SECTOR
PWB manufacture
PWB manufacturePWB manufacturePWB manufacturePWB manufacturePWB manufacturePWB manufactureSemiconductor chip manufactureSemiconductor chip manufactureSemiconductor chip manufactureSemiconductor chip manufactureAssembly (TV & LCD)Assembly (TV & LCD)Component assemblyComponent assemblyComponent assemblyComponent assembly
Assembly (PC & other components)
Assembly (PC & other components)COUNTRIES
China
ChinaThailandThailandThailandThailandThailandPhilippines
Philippines
PhilippinesMexico
Mexico
Mexico
Mexico
Mexico
Mexico
Mexico
Mexico
Mexicotable 1.1: Facilities/Sites and Industrial Estates (IEs) investigated, the country in which they are based and the manufacturing sector
to which they belong.August 2006
Image shows the inside
of a laptop and the type
of component produced
and assembled in the
factories that are
highlighted in 
this report.

18CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
2 :: SAMPLING PROGRAM
FOR EACH OF THE THREE MANUFACTURING SECTORS INVESTIGATED IN THIS STUDY, SEVERAL SEPARATE FACILITIES INVOLVED IN SIMILAR
ACTIVITIES WERE VISITED AND A RANGE OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF SAMPLES COLLECTED FROM EACH, DEPENDING ON SAMPLE AVAILABILITYAND SUITABILITY AT THE SITE.
© GPIGreenpeace collec ting
samples fr om a was tewate r
channe l on the IBM site i n
Guadalajar a,Mexico.
June 2006.
©GREENPEACE

Boluo County, H uizho u City
Guangdong Pro vinceCHINAMONGOLIA
INDIA
Figure 2.1 :: Map of China showing the location of Boluo County in which the
Fortune and Compeq manufacturing facilities were located.The types of samples collected include groundwaters, wastewaters
(both treated and untreated), sediments from discharge channels andwater bodies that receive discharged wastewaters, treatment facilitysludges, and soil samples.
All samples were collected and stored in pre-cleaned glass bottles that
had been rinsed thoroughly with nitric acid and analytical gradepentane in order to remove all heavy metal and organic residues.
Wastewater samples were collected in a 1 litre screw-cap bottle. For
those samples analysed for volatile organic chemicals, a sample wascollected in a separate 125 ml amber bottle with a ground-glass
stopper . Sediment and soil samples were collected in 100ml bottles. All
samples we re kept cool and retur ned to the Greenpeace Res earch
Labor atories for analysis. Detailed description of sample preparation
and analytical procedures are presented in the Appendix.
2.1 :: PRINTED WIRING BO ARD (PWB)
MANUFACTURE; CHINA & THAILAND
A number of facilities involved in the manufacture of printed wiring
boards (PWB) were visited both in China and Thailand. A range ofsamples we re collec ted including wastewaters, sediments from
discharge channels and rivers, sludges from wastewater treatment
plants (WWTP), soil and groundwater .
2.1.1 :: China
This study investigated two facilities involved in the manufacture of
PWB i n China; Fortune and Compeq.These two separate facilities are
both located i n Boluo County ,Guan g Don g,China, the location of which
is shown in Figure 2.1. Both are stand-alone facilities, not situated
within an Industrial Estate. Fortune is located in agricultural land at
Bu Shan g Village,near to the Bushang River while the Compeq facility
is situated on the banks of the XianGang River , Hu Zhen Village.
19

At the Fortune facility, wastewaters are discharged via an underground
channel which flows into an open ditch that in turn flows into theBushang River . Wastewaters discharged via this route are notcontinuous but released in batches. At the time of sample collectionwastewater discharge was not taking place.The underground channeland open ditch flow through farmland neighbouring the Fortune facility.
The Compeq facility, located on the banks of the XianGang River , has
four outfalls that discharge wastewaters to the river . From the most
upstream to the most downstream, these discharges are hereinafterreferred to as;-
1. Open discharge channel #2
2. Pipe #2
3. Pipe #1
4.Open d ischarge channel #1, from wastewater treatment plant
Samples of discharged wastewaters were collected from both facilities,
as well as sediments from discharge channels and the creeks / riversinto which they flow. Soil and groundwater samples were also collectedfrom the vicinity of the Fortune facility. For both facilities, sampleswere collec ted on two s eparate occasi ons, firstly in November 2005
(MI05049-51) and a s econd set in January 2006 (MI06001-
MI06010). Details and locations of the individual samples are given in
Table 2.1 and i n Figure 2.2 (Fortune) and Figure 2.3 (Compeq).
20CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
MI06051
MI06009
MI06008
MI06007
MI05049
MI050101
2SEDIMENT
WATER SA MPLE
3
4
1Undergrou nd
ChannelAlley Ditch
Disuse d DitchRoadFarm landN
FORTUNE1
234
1
TYPE
groundwater
wastewatersedimentsediment
soil
soil
sediment
wastewate r
sediment
sediment
sediment
wastewate r
wastewate rDATE
19.11.05
18.11.0519.01.0619.01.0619.01.0619.01.06
17.01.06
19.11.0518.01.0617.01.0617.01.0618.01.0618.01.06SAMPLE LOC ATION
Fortune
well, located at the outfall of underground channel into the open ditch
underground channel; to an open ditch leading to the BuShang Riverunderground discharge channelopen ditch, leading to the Bushang Riverfield close to the Fortune facility, adjacent to the open ditch field 500m from the Fortune facility; unaffected by wastewater discharges
Compeq
XianGang River; 500 m upstream of discharge pipes
discharge channel #2; furthest upstream outfalldischarge channel #2; furthest upstream outfalldischarge pipe #2; new ou tfall 0.3m ups tream of ol d outfall (MI06001)
discharge pipe #2, old (no w unus ed) outfall
discharge pipe #1
discharge channe l #1, furthest downstream outfallSAMPLE#
MI05049
MI05051MI06009MI06008MI06007MI06010
MI06003
MI05050MI06006MI06002MI06001MI06004MI06005table 2.1 :: description of wastewater, sediment, soil and groundwater samples associated with the Fortune and Compeq PWB
manufacturing facilities, ChinaFigure 2.2 :: Sketch map of the locations from which samples were collected
in the vicinity of the Fortune PWB manufacturing facility, China

ROJAN A IE
HI-TECH IE
BANGPA-IN IE
NAVANAK ORN IE
EETHCHAO PHR AYA RI VERAYUTTH AYA
PATHUM THANI
BANGKOKTHAIL AND
ROJAN A IE
HI-TECH IE
BANG PA-IN IE
NAVA NAK ORN IE
EETHCHAO P HRAY A RIVERAYUTTH AYA
PATHU M THANIShow water well locat ions
BANGKO K2.1.2 :: Thailand
Five separate locations were investigated in Thailand, in each case
where facilities are involved in the manufacture of PWBs. One location
is a stand-alone facility (EETH), while the reminder are situated within
Indus trial Es tates (IEs). Each of the Indus trial Es tates contains many
individual facilities, some involved in the manufacture of PWBs, and
many othe rs involved in a range of industrial activities, though
primarily centred on the manufac ture of e lectronic devices.The five
locations (and the individual PWB manufacturing facilities investigated
within each Industrial Estate), as shown in Figure 2.4, are:-
- Elec & Eltek (EETH), Pathumthani Province
- Bangpa-in IE, Ayutthaya Province (CKL Electronics)
- Hi-Tech IE, Ayutthaya Province (KCE)- Rojana IE, Ayutthaya Province (PCTT)
- Navanakorn IE, Pathumthani Province
21COMPEQ
MI06003
MI06006
MI06002
MI06001
MI05050
MI06004
MI06005Xian’ga ng River1
2
331
1
2SEDIMENT
WATER SA MPLE
3
4
1
2
32
4Xian’gang Bridge
pipe 2
pipe 1ROJAN A IE
HI-TECH IE
BANGPA-IN IE
NAVANAK ORN IE
EETHCHAO PHR AYA RI VERAYUTTH AYA
PATHUM THANI
BANGKOKTHAIL AND
ROJAN A IE
HI-TECH IE
BANG PA-IN IE
NAVA NAK ORN IE
EETHCHAO P HRAY A RIVERAYUTTH AYA
PATHU M THANIShow water well locat ions
BANGKO KROJAN A IE
HI-TECH IE
BANGPA-IN IE
NAVANAK ORN IE
EETHCHAO PHR AYA RI VERAYUTTH AYA
PATHUM THANI
BANGKOKTHAIL AND
ROJAN A IE
HI-TECH IE
BANGPA-IN IE
NAVA NAK ORN IE
EETHCHAO P HRAY A RIVERAYUTTH AYA
PATHU M THANIShow water well locat ions
BANG KOKFigure 2.3 :: Sketch map of the locations from which samples were collected
in the vicinity of the Compeq PWB manufacturing facility, China 
Figure 2.4 :: Map of the sites investigated in Thailand where facilities are
involved in the manufacture of PWBs. Map derived from maps obtained fromthe Thailand Department of Groundwater Resources (www.dgr.go.th)

Detailed information on the exact processes employed is not available
for all facilities. However , from information on some company websitesit is known that the electroless copper process is used at the EETH andpossibly other facilities.This process utilises water soluble coppercompounds, hazardous chemicals such as formaldehyde, and chelatingchemicals such as EDTA that impede the recovery of metals fromwastewaters. In addition to copper , the use of nickel and other metals inthe PWB manufacturing processes is widely reported, though detail on
solvents, surfactants and other processes chemicals is not generally
available (EETH 2006, CKL 2007, KCE 2007, PCTT 2006).
In May 2006, samples of groundwater were collected from the
immed iate v icinity of each of the f ive sites. In addition wastewaters,
sediments and treatment plant sludges were collected from some of the
sites. For each of the Industrial Estates there is at least one combined
wastewate r treatment plant (WWTP) that recei ved was tewate rs from
many fac ilities within the estate. In some instances it was possible to
collect wastewaters from individual PWB manufacturers prior to their
treatment by WWTPs. In thes e instances, samples of treated
wastewater were also collected from the WWTP , along with sludge and
sediment samples where possible. Details of all samples are presented
below and i n Table 2.2.
At Elec & Eltek (EETH), a channel flows from west to east at the rear
of the facility.There are no continuous direct discharges from EETH tothe canal, but many small open pipes are visible on the banks of the
channel below the EETH facility. Any liquids flowing through these
pipes would be discharged into the channel. A sample of water and oneof sediment were collected from this channel near the middle of the
factory perimeter . A second sediment sample was collected from the
channel at the upstream (western) edge of the factory perimeter .Two
groundwater samples were collected to the north and southeast of
EETH.At the Navanakorn IE it was not possible to collect samples of
wastewaters from PWB manufacturing facilities that operate withinthis industrial estate; PCTT. Four groundwater samples were collected;two to the northeast and one to the west of the estate as well as onefrom a residential property within the estate.
For the Bangpa-in, Hi-Tech and Rojana estates, wastewaters from
individual facilities are carried via underground pipes to combined
WWTPs. Manholes in front of individual facilities give access to
individual wastewater inputs to the pipe network. At each estate,wastewater was collected from one of the PWB manufacturers as well
as treated wastewater from the combined WWTP .
CKL, one of the two known PWB manufacturing facilities within the
Bangpa-in IE was specifically sampled as collection of wastewaters
from th is facility was possible prior to their reaching the WWTP . It was
not possible to collect wastewater samples form the other facility,
Mectec. Wastewater was collected at its point of discharge from CKLvia a manhole. Sediment was also collected from a separate manhole in
which no water was flowing.Three samples were collected from the
Bangpa-in WWTP that receives wastewaters from CKL and otherfacilities; one sample of treated wastewater at the point of discharge
from the WWTP , and two samples of sludge from the many wastewater
treatment tanks. Four groundwater samples were also collected fromclose to the Bangpa-in IE; one to the north, one to the south and oneto the west of the estate as well as one from a drinking water tank
within the CKL facility.
22CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION

23
© GPIAyutthaya, Thailand
Liquid dripping from a pipe above
wastewater treatment tank inside a
combined wastewater treatment
plant of Bangpa-in Industrial Estate.
13 September 2006.
TYPE
wastewater
SedimentSediment
groundwater
groundwater
groundwater
groundwater
groundwater
groundwater
wastewate r
Sediment
wastewater
Sludge
Sludge
groundwater
groundwatergroundwatergroundwater
wastewater
wastewaterSedimentgroundwatergroundwatergroundwatergroundwater
wastewater
wastewatergroundwatergroundwatergroundwatergroundwatergroundwaterDATE
16.05.06
16.05.0616.05.06
16.05.06
16.05.06
16.05.06
16.05.0616.05.0616.05.06
26.05.06
16.05.0626.05.0616.05.0616.05.06
16.05.06
16.05.0616.05.0616.05.06
17.05.06
26.05.0617.05.0617.05.0617.05.0617.05.0617.05.06
26.05.06
17.05.0617.05.0617.05.0617.05.0617.05.0617.05.06SAMPLE LOC ATION
Elec & Eltek (EETH)
canal behind EETH; near the middle of factory perimeter
canal beh ind EETH; near the middle of factory perimeter , as MI06024
canal beh ind EETH; upstream (western) edge of the factory
groundwater tank; village 0.3 Km north (N) of EETH (G1185)
groundwater tank; village 1 Km southeast (SE) of EETH (MN0258)
Navanakorn IE
groundwater tank; temple 1 Km northeast (NE) of estate (JICB0005)
groundwater tank; village 1 Km northeast (NE) of the estate (NB0052) groundwater tank; temple 1 Km west (W) of the estate (MQ0546)groundwater from a residential property within the estate
Bangpa - in IE
CKL; manhole in front of facility containing flowing wastewater
CKL; manhole in front of facility; dry, no flowing watercombi ned WWTP; discharge treated wastewater 
combined WWTP; one of many treatment tanks (dry tank)combined WWTP; one of many treatment tanks (wet tank) filtered drinking water; tank within the CKL facilitygroundwater tank; school 3 Km north (N) of Bangpa-in IE (QO859)groundwater tank; school 1.5 Km south (S) of Bangpa-in IE (MQ0519)groundwater tank; village 2 Km west (W) of Bangpa-in IE (G1223)
Hi-Tech IE
KCE; manhole in front of facility
communal WWTP; treated wastewater pond, awaiting discharge to canal
communal WWTP; treated wastewater pond, as MI06046
groundwater tank; village 2 Km west (W) of estate (MQ0923)
groundwater tank; village 1.5 Km east (E) of Hi-Tech IE (MQ0521)
groundwater tank; school 2 Km northeast (NE) of Hi-Tech IE (G1344)
groundwater tank; village 2 Km southeast (SE) of Hi-Tech IE (14444)
Rojana IE
PCTT; manhole in front of facility, pipe leading to WWTP (Phase 1)
WWTP (Phase 1); treated wastewater being discharged to a canalgroundwater tank; village 1.5 Km west (W) of estate (MQ0738)groundwater tank; village 1 Km northwest (NW) of estate (MQ0629)
groundwater tank; village 1 Km southwest (SW) of estate (02578)
groundwater tank; temple 1.5 Km southeast (SE) of estategroundwater tank; via an apartment, 1.5 Km east (E) of estate (17496)SAMPLE#
MI06024
MI06025MI06026
MI06027
MI06028
MI06032
MI06033MI06034MI06059
MI06036
MI06037MI06038MI06039MI06040
MI06035
MI06041MI06043MI06044
MI06045
MI06046MI06047MI06048MI06049MI06050MI06051
MI06052
MI06053MI06054MI06055MI06056MI06057MI06058table 2.2 :: description of wastewater, sediment, sludge and groundwater samples collected in from five separate sites in which
facilities are involved in the manufacture of PWBs,Thailand©GREENPEACE/SATAPORN THONGMA

It was not possible to collect wastewater from any of the facilities.To
investigate impacts on the groundwater aquifers within the area of each
site, samples of groundwater were collected from the vicinity of each
site. A total of 20 samples were collected from the three sites in thePhilippines in June 2006 and 1 sample was collected from within the
Kemet facility in Mexico in February 2006. A summary of the samples
collected is given in Table 2.3.
The Gateway Busi ness P ark IE in the Philippines is a mixed estate with
facilities mos tly engaged i n the manufacture of electronic products.
Located within this IE are Intel Philippines, a manufacturing and
testing facility for Semiconductors and microprocessors, and Luzon
Electronics,a subsi diary of Hitach i that is involved in the manufacture
of hard drives. Four samples of groundwater were collected from
locati ons with in the estate.Within the Hi-Tech IE, a sample of wastewater from the KCE facility
was collected via a manhole. It was not possible to collected samples ofwastewater from other PWB manufacturers known to operate withinthis estate. At the WWTP , treated wastewater is stored in a large pondprior to discharge to a public canal system. A sample of wastewaterand sediment were collected from this pond. Four groundwater sampleswere also collected from close to the Hi-Tech IE; one to the west, oneto the east, one to the northeast, and one to the southeast of the estate.
At the Rojana IE, wastewater was collected from the PCTT facility at
its point of discharge to the underground pipe network leading to the
Phase 1 WWTP . A sample of treated wastewater was collected from
this WWTP as it was bei ng discharged to an open canal sys tem.Five
groundwater samples were also collected from close to the Rojana IE;
one to the west, one to the northwest, one to the southwest, one to the
southeas t and one to the eas t of the es tate.
2.2 :: SEMICONDUCTOR CHIP MANUFACTURE;
PHILIPPINES AND MEXICO
Facilities involved in the manufacture of semiconductor chips were
investigated at three sites in the Philippines and one site in Mexico.The
individual sites were;
– Philippines; Gateway Business Park Industrial Estate (IE), General
Trias,Cavite
– Philippines; On Semicon, stand alone facility, Biñan, Laguna
– Philippines; Cavite Export Processing Zone (CEPZA) IE, Rosario,
Cavite
– Mexico; Kemet, stand alone facility, Monterrey
The locations of the three sites in the Philippines are shown in Figure
2.5.The location of the Kemet facility in Monterrey, Mexico is shown 
on a map in Figure 2.6, in Section 2.3.
24CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
South China Sea
Philippine
Sea
Sulu SeaMANILA
MALAY SIAPHILIPPINES
CEBU
DAVAORosar io, Ca vite
General Trias, Ca vite
Carm ona, Ca vite
Figure 2.5 :: Map of the Philippines showing the location of three sites
investigated with relation to the manufacture of semiconductor chips

On Semicon is a stand-alone facility that manufactures and tests
semiconductor chips.The facility is located next to a small river , and aresidential community is based to the northeast on the opposite side of
the river downstream of On Semicon. Six samples of groundwater were
collected in the vicinity of the facility; three from the residentialcommunity close to the northeast perimeter of the facility, and three
from locations 0.5-1 km to the southwest in Barangay Maduya.Two of
the groundwater samples by the northeast perimeter (MI06065 &
MI06066) were collected from sources used by the community for
drinking water .
The CEPZA IE is a large mixed use estate with over 250 facilities
involved in a wide range of activities, including the manufacture ofsemiconductor chips and other electronic devices (PEZA 2007). Acommon WWTP is located within the Industrial Estate. A total of 10samples of ground water were collected within and around this estate.In Mexico, the Kemet facility in Monterrey is involved in the
manufacture of capacitors and tantalum based chips. One sample ofwater was collected from a tap within a bathroom of the Kemet facilitythat is believed to be a source of groundwater , it is not known if thiswater had undergone purification treatment. Due to the location fromwhich this sample was taken, it was not possible to collect the sampledirectly into a ground-glass stopper amber bottle, as described above.Instead the sample was collected in a clean, transparent PET waterbottle.
25TYPE
06.06.06
06.06.0606.06.06
06.06.06
06.06.0606.06.0606.06.0606.06.0606.06.06
06.06.06
06.06.0606.06.0606.06.0606.06.0606.06.0606.06.06
06.06.06
06.06.06
06.06.0606.06.06
22.02.06SITE
Gateway IE
Gateway IEGateway IE
Gateway IE
On Sem icon
On Sem icon
On Semicon
On Semicon On Semicon 
On Sem icon 
CEPZA IECEPZA IECEPZA IECEPZA IECEPZA IECEPZA IE
CEPZA IE
CEPZA IE
CEPZA IECEPZA IE
KemetSAMPLE LOCATION
Philippines
water tank; middle of Gateway IE
tap (groundwater) near Intel Philippines, northern part of Gateway IEtap (groundwater) near the WWTP within Gateway IE(between MI06060 & MI06061)tap (groundwater) near Luzon Electronics, southern part of Gateway IEhandpump 200m to the nor theast (NE) of On Semicon
handpump 100m to the nor th (N) of On Semicon
handpump 100m to the north (N) of On Semicon, 20m from MI06065
handpump 500m to southwest (SW) of On Semicon; Barangay Maduyahandpump 1 km to southwest (SW) of On Semicon; Barangay Maduyatap 750m to southwest (SW) of On Semicon; Health centre, B. Maduya
tap;residential commun ity 1 km nor th (N) of IE
tap;residential commun ity 1 km nor th (N) of IE, 150m east of MI07070
water pump; residential commun ity approx 2 km northeast (NE) of IE
water tank within the IE; east side of IE
water tank within the IE; east side of IE 250m south of MI07073tap within the IE; west side
within IE, near the Danam facility; southeast side of IE
within IE, near the MA Technology facility; southeast side of IE
within IE, near the Keyrin Electronics facility; north side of IEwithin IE near Dae Duck facility; west side of IE 500m west of MI06075
Mexico
Bathroom tap within the Kemet facilitySAMPLE#
MI06060
MI06061MI06062
MI06063
MI06064MI06065MI06066MI06067
MI06068
MI06069MI06070MI06071MI06072MI06073MI06074MI06075MI06076
MI06077
MI06078MI06079
MI06013table 2.3 :: description of groundwater samples collected from sites in the Philippines and Mexico where facilities are involved in the
manufacture of semiconductor chips

2.3 :: COMPONENT ASSEMBLY , MEXICO
A number of locations were investigated in two areas of Mexico,
Tijuana and Guadalajara, where facilities are involved in the assemblyof compu ters and other electrical devices.The individual facilities and a
brief description of their activities are given below;
Tijuana
- Sanyo Video; assemble televisions with liquid crystal displays (LCDs)
or plasma screens 
-Sony (stand alone facility); assemble televisions with LCDs or plasma
screens
Guadalajara
- Parque Integral (Flextronics); an estate housing separate divisions of
Flextronics that assemble PWBs, computer parts other electronic
devices, plus facilities of their suppliers
-Jabil; assemble PWBs, PCs and other electronic devices
-Solectron; assemble PWBs, LCDs and other electronics devices
-Sanmina-SCI plant 3; assemble computer components
- HP; assembled personal computers (PCs) and other electronic
devices
-IBM Site; assembled PCs,Think Pads and hard disk components at
the ti me of sampl ing.This site also houses Hitachi (assemble CD
drives) and Sanmina SCI (assemble servers) The locati ons of the Tijuana and Guadalajara sites in Mexico are shown
in Figure 2.6.The sites of individual facilities and Industrial Estate
located within the Tijuana and Guadalajara areas are shown in Figures2.7 and 2.8 respec tively.
Within each area, samples of groundwater were collected in the vicinity
of the assembly facilities. Discharged wastewaters were also collected
from one facility in Guadalajara as access to such samples was notpossible for the other facilities investigated. A total of 13 samples of
groundwater were collected from all sites; 4 samples from Tijuana inJune 2006, and 9 samples from Guadalajara - 2 in February 2006 and7 in June 2006. In addition, 2 samples of discharged wastewaters were
collected from the IBM site, Guadalajara in June 2006. Details of the
individual samples are given in Table 2.4.
In Tijuana, Sanyo Video is situated adjacent to two other facilities; one
manufacturing electronic devices and the other , plastic products. Other
facilities also involved in the manufacture of electronic products are
sited a few kilometres to the north of Sanyo Video.Three samples ofgroundwater were collected from wells immediately to the south of the
Sanyo Video facility.The second location in Tijuana was Sony, a stand-
alone facility located approximately 5 km to the south of Sanyo Video.One groundwater sample was collected from a pumping station to thesoutheas t of Sony .
26CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
UNITED STA TES
CUBAMEXICO
Guadal ajaraTijuana
Monterrey
GuatemalaGulf of M exicoGulf of CaliforniaSANYO V IDEOTIJUANA
02 .5kmMI06080MI06081
MI06083SONY D E TIJU ANA
Figure 2.6 :: Map of Mexico showing the locations of Tijuana and Guadalajara
where sites involved in assembly were investigated, and also Monterrey, thesite of the Kemet facility involved in semiconductor chip manufactureFigure 2.7 :: Map of the Tijuana area in Mexico showing the locations of
component assembly facilities and some of the groundwater samplescollected in their vicinities

27
© GREENPEACE
DATE
09.06.06
09.06.0609.06.06
09.06.06
02.02.06
15.02.0611.06.0611.06.0611.06.0611.06.06
11.06.06
11.06.0611.06.06
11.06.06
11.06.06SITE
Tijuana
Tijuana
Tijuana
Tijuana
Guadalajar a
Guadalajar a
Guadalajar a
Guadalajar a
Guadalajar a
Guadalajara
GuadalajaraGuadalajaraGuadalajar a
Guadalajar a
GuadalajaraSAMPLE LOC ATION
Groundwater
Sanyo Video; covered well 400 m south (S) of Sanyo Video
Sanyo Video; open well 250 m south (S) of Sanyo Video
Sanyo Video; “new hope” well, close to Sanyo Video
Sony; pumping station 1.5 km southeast (SE) of Sony (CESPT 41909)
Sanm ina-SCI plant 3; well at rear of the fac ility
Flextronics;bathr oom tap within the facility
Flextronics IE; 300 m nor th (N) of estate, from a dripping pipe
Flextronics IE; pumping station Well 61, adjacent to the estate entrance
Flextronics IE; 500 m northeast (NE) of estate, from a dripping pipe
Flextronics IE; groundwater tank 2 km northeast (NE) of estate
Jabil;groundwater tank 400 m northeast (NE) of the facility
Solec tron;pipeline 2 km to the east (E) of the facility 
HP;Well “San Sebastianito” immediately behind the facility
Wastewater
IBM site; open channel #1, from storm water
IBM site; open channel #2 flowing from within the siteSAMPLE#
MI06080
MI06081MI06082 MI06083MI06011MI06012MI06084MI06085
MI06086
MI06087MI06088MI06089MI06090
MI06091
MI06092table 2.4 :: description of groundwater and wastewater samples collected from facilities involved in the assembly of PWB, PC and
other electronic devices, MexicoThe entrance of the
Sanmina plant in
Guadalajara, Mexico.
June 2006.

Figure 2.8 :: Map of the Guadalajara area in Mexico showing the locations of
component assembly facilities and certain samples associated with themSix separate locations were investigated in the Guadalajara area.The
Parque Integral is a large Industrial Estate owned by Flextronics.Theestate houses a number of divisions of Flextronics that are involved inseparate activities including the assembly of PWBs, other computerparts and other electronic devices. Some suppliers to Flextronics alsohave facilities within the estate. Five samples of groundwater werecollected from the vicinity of the Flextronics facilities within this estate.One was collected in February 2006 from a bathroom tap within the
Flextronics facility.The remainder were collected in June 2006; one
from a pumping station adjacent to the estate entrance, two from pipeslocated very close to the estate, to the north and to the northeast, and
one from a groundwater tank 2 km to the northeast.
For four other stand-alone facilities, one sample of groundwater was
collected from locations near to each of the facilities. One sample was
collec ted in February 2006 fr om a well located at the rear of
Sanm ina-SCI plant 3.The remainder were collected in June 2006; one
sample from the “San Sebastianito” well located immediately behind
the Hewlett P ackard (HP) fac ility, one sample from a groundwater
tank to the nor theast of the Jabil stand-alone facility, and one sample
from a groundwater pipe 2 km to the east of the Solectron facility. In
the vicinity of the Solectron facility, groundwater is known to flow to
the northeast.
Two samples of discharged wastewater were collected from the large
IBM site in Guadalajara, Mexico, which has been producing electronic
products since 1982. Within this large site, IBM assembled PCs and
Thinkpad computers at the time of sampling.Two other facilities arealso located within the IBM site; Hitachi (assemble hard drives and CD
drives) and Sanmina SCI (assemble servers).The samples of
wastewater were collected from separate open channels flowing from
the IBM site. One channel (MI06091) carries combined wastewaters
from two individual channels that join upstream of the sampling point;one of these is the discharged wastewater from within the site.The
source of the other , and the relative contributions to overall wastewater
flow and contaminant inputs to the combined channel, are not known.Similarly the exact source of the wastewater in the other channel that
was sampled (MI06092) is not known, other than it originated within
the IBM site.
28CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
GUADALAJA RA
HP
IBMJAIBIL FLEXTRO NICSMI0608 8
HPMI06090
MI06092
MI06091MI06087
MI06086
SOLE CTRON - MI060 89
SANMINA S CI - MI06011 0 5km

293 :: METHODOLOGY
Heavy metal concentrations were determined by ICP atomic emission
spectrometr y (AES), following acid digestion and using appropriate
certified reference materials in addition to intra-laboratory standards.
A wide range of metals and metalloids were quantified in all samples,the list being based on their known use in this sector & presence in e-
waste recycling yards (Brigden et al. 2005). A full list of all elements
quantified, and the method detection limits for different samples typesis given in the Appendix.Extractable organic compounds were isolated from each sample and
identified as far as possible using gas chromatography and mass
spectrometry (GC/MS), following liquid:solid extraction into a mixture
of pentane and acetone for solid samples or liquid:liquid extractionwith pentane onl y for wastewater samples. Volatile organic chemicals
(VOCs) were identified and quantified in groundwater samples as
received (with no pre-treatment) using GC/MS with HeadSpace sampleintroduction technique.
A full list of all VOCs that were used as a standards for Selective Ion
Monitoring (SIM) GC/MS organic analysis, and for quantification of
VOCs detected in water samples, is provided in the Appendix.Metals 
(quantitative)
√
√√√√Extractable organic compounds 
(quantitative)
-
√
√
√√Volatile organic compounds
(qualitative & quantitative)
√
√
-
--TYPE OF ANALYSIS
SAMPLE TYPE
Groundwater 
Wastewater 
Sediment Sludge 
SoilA RANGE OF DIFFERENT ANALYSES WAS CARRIED OUT ON THE VARIOUS SAMPLES COLLECTED DEPENDING ON THE SAMPLE TYPE. A
SUMMARY OF THE TYPE OF ANALYSES FOR EACH GROUP OF SAMPLES IS GIVEN BELOW

4 :: RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
FOR EACH MANUFACTURING SECTOR (PWB MANUFACTURING, SEMICONDUCTOR CHIP MANUFACTURE, ASSEMBLY) THE RESULTS 
FROM THE ANALYSES OF SAMPLES ARE PRESENTED AND DISCUSSED IN SEPARATE SECTIONS (4.1-4.3) AND THE DATA SUMMARISED INTABLES 4.1-4.21.
30CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
For each sector , the data for individual sites are separately outlined.
These data are collectively discussed for the sector as a whole towards
the end of each section. Information on certain key pollutants detected
during this study is presented in Text Boxes A-G.
Of the full range of metals and metalloids quantified in this study, a
number were not present above method detection limits in any sample(arsenic, gallium, germanium, indium, mercury, selenium, thallium). For
clarity these are not included in the individual results tables, but the
detection limits for each is given in The Appendix.
It shoul d be noted that all elements (metals and metalloids) quantified
in this study are naturally found at some level in uncontaminated
environmental samples such as so ils, sediments, surface waters and
groundwaters, though generally at low concentrations. Inputs from
point sources such as industrial discharge can, however , result in levels
that far e xceed natur al backg round concentr ations.The following
sections focus on those metals found at levels in the various samples
that indicate levels above background due to inputs from industrial or
other anthr opogen ic sour ces. In the case of organic contaminants,
some of which may also have natural origins, the focus of discussions
is on thos e compounds more l ikely to have ar isen exclusively from
man-mad e sour ces.
In the f ollowing sections the data from the analyses of the samples
collected are presented and discussed separately for each of the three
manufacturing sectors investigated in this study; printed wiring board
(PWB) manufacture (Section 4.1), Semiconductor chip manufacture(Section 4.2), and component assembly (Section 4.3).
4.1 :: PRINTED WIRING BOARD (PWB)
MANUFACTURE; CHINA & THAILAND
4.1.1 Facilities in China
A total of 13 samples were collected from the vicinity of two separate
PWB manufacturing facilities in China.These included 4 wastewatersamples, 6 sediment samples, 2 soil samples and 1 sample of
groundwater .The results from these samples are presented in the tables
below. Organic chemicals identified in all samples are presented inTables 4.1, and 4.2 for the Compeq and Fortune facilities respectively.
The metal quantification data for each facility are presented in Tables
4.3 and 4.4 respectively. VOCs were not quantified in the water
samples associated with the Compeq and Fortune facilities.Compeq
For the Compeq facility, sampling was carried out in November 2005
and January 2006. A single wastewater sample MI05050 wascollected in 2005 from the most upstream discharge channel. In 2006,two more wastewater samples (MI06004 & MI06005) were collectedfrom other discharges, as well as four sediment samples from
discharge channels (MI06001, 02, 06) and the XianGang River(MI06003).The wastewater sample MI05050 contained the
brominated flame retardant Tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA). Also
present were diphenylmethone (benzophenone) and two derivatives ofdiphenylethone, and as well as a benzothiazole derivative.The two
wastewater samples that were collected from other outfalls (MI06004
& MI06005) contained two PBDEs at trace levels: BDE-47 and BDE-
99.One of thes e (MI06004) also contai ned an add itional 7
brominated compounds that it was not possible to identify. Besides, all
wastewater samples contained high concentrations of copper .The
highest level was found in the sample collected from the most
upstream outfall (MI05050) with copper at 811 µg/l. MI06004
contained about half this level (389 µg/l), while the level in MI06005
was far lo wer.
All sediment samples contained the same two PBDEs found in the
wastewaters at trace levels, including that from the river upstream of
Compeq, suggesting significant contributions from other sources.Theoutfall of pipe#2 had been recently moved. Sediment from the oldoutfall of pipe#2, MI06001, contained another PBDE (BDE-153) andone PCB congener (PCB-153). Both sediments from the old and the
current outfall locations of pipe #2 contained a number of additional
brominated compounds that could not be fully identified; 24 in thesediment from the old outfall (MI06001) and 7 from the new outfalllocation (MI06002).
Furthermore, all three sediments (MI06001, MI06002 and MI06006)
collected close to wastewater outfalls contained copper and tin at very
high levels. By far the highest concentrations were found in the samplefrom the most upstream outfall (MI06006), with copper at 21900
mg/kg (2.19%) and tin at 10800 mg/kg (1.08%).This sample also
contained nickel and zinc at high concentrations, though to a lesserdegree.The two sediments collected adjacent to pipe #2, located
further downstream, (MI06001, MI06002) contained lower , but still
elevated levels of copper (979-1460 mg/kg) and tin (194-355 mg/kg).
For pipe #2, the higher levels were found at the current dischargepoint (MI06002), situated i mmediately upstream of the old and now
unused discharge point (MI06001). In contrast, river sediment
collected upstream of all wastewater discharges (MI06003) did notcontai n high metal concentr ations indicating the high levels found were
much more likely a direct result of discharges by Compeq.

FORTUNE
MI05049
GW
17
2(12%)
--
(1)
1
------------MI05051
WW
107
25(23%)
(3)(1)
-
3211251312
--
1MI06008
Sed
49
17(35%)
(3)
----------
1
--
-
13MI06009
Sed
104
45(43%)
7(12)
---
1
-
1
-
19
--
3
--
1
1MI06007
soil
23
3(13%)
(3)
-------------
-
-MI06010
soil
18
4(22%)
(2)
------------
1
-
1
LOCATION
SAMPLE#SAMPLE TYPE
No. of organic compounds isolated
No. reliably identified (% of total)
PBDEs
Tetrabromobisphenol AChlorinated benzenePhthalatesDiphenylmethanone (benzophenone) and derivativesDiphenylethanone derivativeQuantacure ITXCyclohexanone derivativesAlkyl benzenesTriphenyl phosphate (TPP)Sterol derivativesOther aromatic hydrocarbonsFatty acidsCyclic siloxane derivativesResin acid derivativesAliphatic hydrocarbonstable 4.2.: organic chemicals identified in groundwater (GW), wastewater (WW), sediment (Sed) and soil samples from the Fortune
PWB manufacturing facility, China.The number of compounds reliably identified is presented for each group; (#) - signifiescompounds identified at trace levels using a selective SIM method; ( - ) – not detected.COMPEQ
MI05050
WW
27
7 (26%)
--
(1)
1122
--MI06004
WW
19
2(11%)
(2)
--------MI06005
WW
6
2(33%)
(2)
--------MI06003
Sed
18
6(33%)
(2)
-------
4MI06006
Sed
33
12(36%)
(2)
------
37MI06002
Sed
17
2(12%)
(2)
----
-
--MI06001
Sed
43
5(12%)
(3)(1)
--
1
----
LOCATION
SAMPLE#
SAMPLE TYPE
No. of organic compounds isolated
No. reliably identified (% of total)
PBDEs
PCBsTetrabromobisphenol ADiphenylmethanone (benzophenone)Benzoic esters and aldehydeDiphenylethanone & derivativesSulphur or nitrogen compoundsTerpenoidsAliphatic hydrocarbonstable 4.1 :: organic chemicals identified in wastewater (WW) and sediment (Sed) samples from the Compeq PWB manufacturing facility,
China. From left to right, samples are presented from upstream to downstreamlocations.The number of compounds reliably identified is
presented for each group; (#) - signifies compounds identified at trace levels using a selective SIM method; ( - ) – not detected.

32CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
COMPEQ
MI05050
WW
µg/l
-
42
-----
811
-
2315
-
62
--
21MI06004
WW
µg/l
-
22
-----
389
-
130
-
50
--
36MI06005
WW
µg/l
-
31
-----
60
-
32
----
24MI06001
Sed
mg/kg
-
114
1.7
--
1435
979
42
521
-
40
194
49
100MI06002
Sed
mg/kg
-
129
1.8
--
1548
1460
48
440
-
43
355
54
113MI06003
Sed
mg/kg
-
137
2.0
--
1573
40
46
389
-
21
7
57
117MI06006
Sed
mg/kg
-
226
0.8
--
2249
21900
40
1360
-
171
10800
15
447
LOCATION
SAMPLE#SAMPLE TYPEMETAL
Antimony
BariumBeryllium
Bismuth
CadmiumChromiumCobaltCoppe r
LeadManganese
Molybdenum 
NickelTinVanadiumZinctable 4.3 :: metals quantified in groundwater (GW), wastewater (WW), sediment (Sed) and soil samples from the Compeq PWB
manufacturing facilities, China. From left to right, samples are presented from up stream to downstream locations.Concentrations are given in mg/kg dry weight for sediment and soil samples, and µg/l for water samples. ( - ) - not detected.

33
©GREENPEACE/ROSE
COMPEQ
MI05049
GW
µg/l
-
260
-----
5
-
220
----
349MI05051
WW filtered
µg/l
-
80
-----
944
-
137
-
314
---MI05051
WW unfiltered
µg/l
-
8200
8
--
217
-
83900
794568
-
45001040
35
893MI06008
Sed
mg/kg
-
127
2.4
-
<0.5
1334
143
44
263
-
53215290MI06009
Sed
mg/kg
-
217
1.8
-
<0.5
1175
23500
139260
2
26905610
36
332MI06007
soil
mg/kg
-
113
2.3
-
<0.5
1536
35
46
301
-
21
-
5782MI06010
soil
mg/kg
-
62
1.1
-
<0.5
9
19
11
24
372
-
9
-
2851
LOCATION
SAMPLE#SAMPLE TYPEMETAL
Antimony
Barium
BerylliumBismuthCadmium
Chromium
CobaltCopperLeadManganeseMolybdenum NickelTinVanadiumZinctable 4.4 :: metals quantified in groundwater (GW), wastewater (WW), Sediment (Sed) and soil samples from the Fortune PWB
manufacturing facility, China. Concentrations are given in mg/kg dry weight for sediment and soil samples, and µg/l for water samples.
( - ) - not detected.Image shows the inside
of a laptop and the type
of  component produced
and assembled in the
factories that are
highlighted in 
this report.
21 August 2006.

Fortune
Two sets of samples were collected from the Fortune facility: a
groundwater (MI05049) and wastewater (MI05051) in November2005 as well as four further samples in January 2006 including two
sediment samples (MI06008 & MI06009) and two soil samples
(MI06007 & MI06010).
Wastewater collected from the underground discharge channel from
Fortune (MI05051) contained a large number of organic chemicals.
These included;
• brominated chemicals: three PBDEs (BDE-47, BDE-99 and BDE-
153),TBBPA and 18 additional brominated compounds that could
not be full y identified.
• a phosphorus based flame retardant: triphenyl phosphate (TPP)
• photoinitiators and related compounds: derivatives of
diphenylmethanone (benz ophenone), diphenylethanone and a
thioxanthen-9-one derivative known as “Quantacure ITX”)
• three phthalate esters, dibutylphthalate (DBP), diisobutylphthalate
(DiBP) and diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP).
•other compounds including alkyl benzenes, aliphatic hydrocarbons,
sterols derivatives and fatty acids
Discharge of wastewater was not occurring at the time of sampling.
Wastewater in the underground channel was from a previous recent
discharge ,and contai ned a ve ry high level of suspended solids which
may have been due to resuspension of sediment that had accumulated
in the channel over time from previous discharges.Therefore both total
and d issolved (afte r filtration) metal concentrations were separately
determined for this sample. Concentrations of dissolved copper (944
µg/l) and nickel (314 µg/l) were particularly high.Total metal levels
(which includ es the amounts in suspended solids) were far higher still,
particularly for copper at 83900 µg/l. Other metals were also present
at high levels in suspended material, particularly lead (794 µg/l), tin(1040 µg/l) and zi nc (893 µg/l).The total metal levels indicate that
the majority of each metal in the wastewater is mainly present in the
suspended solids.This may be due to resuspension of sediment in thechanne l,sediment that has accumulated high levels of metals from
discharged wastewaters over a longer period of time.Though possible, it
is unlikely that the total levels of metals reflect the levels in wastewater
as discharged.Sediment samples from the underground channel and the ditch that it
discharges into both contained PBDEs, including the tetrabrominatedform BDE-47, the pentabrominated form BDE-99 and thehexabrominated form BDE-153 (which together are generally amongthe most abundant PBDEs found in environmental samples).Thesediment from the underground wastewater channel (MI06009)contained by far the most PDBEs (19), many at well above tracelevels. Both sediments contained at least 25 additional brominated
compounds that could not be fully identified.The channel sediment
(MI06009) also contained the photo-initiator related chemicalsdiphenylmethanone (benzophenone) and the thioxanthen-9-one
derivative “Quantacure ITX”, as well as a resin acid derivative and arange of alkyl benzenes. Metal concentrations in the channel sediment
reflect the high levels in the discharged wastewater , with exceptionallyhigh concentrations of copper (23500 mg/kg, 2.35%), tin (5610mg/kg, 0.56%) and nickel (2690 mg/kg, 0.27%), and to a far lesser
degree lead and zi nc.Concentr ations in the open d itch were far lower;
only coppe r exceed ed background levels at 143 mg/kg, nearly 200
times lower than in the channel.
Both soil samples also contained PBDEs and other brominated
compounds that coul d not be full y identified; 18 in the soil collected
adjacent to the open wastewater receiving ditch (MI06007), and 7 in
the soil collected 0.5 km from the Fortune facility (MI06010). Metalconcentrations in the soil sample MI06007 were moderately higher
than in the soil collected 0.5 km from the Fortune facility (MI06010),though th is was a consis tent d ifference f or all metals, i.e.there was no
specific signature of contamination from those metals prevalent in the
wastewate r channel (copper , tin, nickel).
The one sample of groundwater (MI06049) contained a trace level of
1,4-dichlorobenzene and the phthalate ester dibutylphthalate (DBP).
No brominated compounds were identified in this sample. Other thanfor zinc (349 µg/l), metal concentrations were not elevated in this
groundwater .
34CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION

4.1.2 :: Facilities in Thailand
32 samples associated with PWB manufacture in Thailand were
collected in 5 separate locations, including 19 groundwater samples, 7wastewater samples, 4 sediments and 2 sludge samples.The results of
the organic analysis for wastewater , sediment and sludge samples are
presented in Tables 4.5 & 4.7. VOCs were detected in only 5 water
samples, which further underwent quantitative analysis (see Table 4.9
for results).The metal quantification data for wastewater and solid
samples are presented in Tables 4.6 & 4.8; data for groundwatersamples are presented in Tables 4.10-4.11.
Elec & Eltek (EETH)
5 samples we re collec ted fr om the site of the EETH fac ility;one
wastewate r sample MI06024, two s ediment samples MI06025 &
MI06026 fr om the was tewater carrying canal, and two groundwater
samples MI06027 & MI06028. The was tewate r sample contai ned a
high concentr ation of coppe r (3710 µg/l), and a range of chlorinated
VOCs, though at trace levels, including chlorinated solvents
(tetrachlor omethane; di-,tri- and tetr a-chlor inated ethenes and
trichlor oethane), hexachlorobutadiene, as well as trihalomethanes(THMs).THMs are chlorinated and brominated chemicals that are
formed as by-products of chlorine based water disinfection. Otherorganic compounds detected in this sample were dichlorobenzene,camphor and two phthalate esters - diethyl phthalate (DEP) anddiethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP).
Canal sediment from the same location (MI06025) contained a very
high copper level (22650 mg/kg), i.e. with copper comprising over 2%of the s ediment by weight. Other metals (beryllium, lead, nickel, tin and
zinc) were also present at above background levels, though to a lesser
degree. Levels of copper and tin were also high in canal sediment fromthe upstream edge of the factory (MI06026), though less than in
MI06025. Both canal sediment samples contained dichlorobenzene and
PBDEs at trace levels.
No elevated metal concentrations and no VOCs were detected in either
of the two groundwater samples.
35EETH HI-TECH IE
MI06024
WW
41
15(36%)
-
1
(4)(1)(5)(1)
----
2
--
1MI06025
Sed
14
4 (29%)
(3)(1)
------------MI06026
Sed
13
3 (23%)
(2)(1)
------------MI06045
WW
25
12 (48%)
--
(1)(1)
--
23211
-
1
-MI06046
WW
17
3 (18%)
-
(1)
--------
11
--MI06047
Sed
17
2 (12%)
(2)
-------------
LOCATION
SAMPLE#SAMPLE TYPE
No. of organic compounds isolated
No. reliably identified (% of total)PBDEs Chlorinated benzeneTrihalomethanesDi- or tetrachloromethanesChlorinated ethanes/ethenesHexachlorobutadieneBenzophenone, chlorophenylBenzophenone and its derivativesDiphenylethanone derivativesXanthen-9-one derivativePhthalatesStigmast-5-en-3-olBenzoic acid and derivativesOther aromatic hydrocarbonstable 4.5 :: organic chemicals identified in wastewater (WW), sediment (Sed) and sludge samples from sites involved in the
manufacture of PWBs; EETH and Hi-Tech IE,Thailand.The number of compounds reliably identified is presented for each group; (#) -signifies compounds identified at trace levels using a selective SIM method; ( - ) – not detected.

Hi-Tech IE
Within the Hi-Tech IE, 7 samples were collected including two
wastewate r samples MI06045 (untreated KCE was tewate r) &
MI06046 (treated wastewater from WWTP), a single sediment sample
MI06047 fr om the WWTP ,and four groundwater samples MI06048-
MI06051. The untreated was tewate r from KCE (MI06045) contai ned
the phthalate ester diisobutyl phthalate (DiBP) and a number of
aromatic k etones (photo initiators and related compounds); diphenyl-
methanone (benz ophenone) and two chlor inated d iphenyl-methanone
derivatives, two diphenyl-ethanone derivatives and a xanthen-9-one
derivative chemically similar to “Quantacure ITX”. Also present was a
benzoic ester and two v olatile chlor inated compounds; dichloromethane
and chloroform at concentration of 1.1 µg/l and 1.9 µg/l respectively.
The treated was tewate r (MI06046) also contained a phthalate ester ,
diethylhe xyl phthalate (DEHP), as we ll as tr aces of d ichlor obenzene.
Both wastewaters also contained high levels of copper and nickel.The
wastewate r from KCE (MI06045) contained the higher copper level
(1010 µg/l),while nickel was higher (251 µg/l) in the treated
wastewater (MI06046), which also had a somewhat elevated zinc level.The sediment (MI06047) collected from the same WWTP pond as the
treated wastewater sample (MI06046) contained copper and tin at
somewhat high levels.The only organic compounds that could beidentified in this sample were two PBDEs, both present at trace levels.
Of the four groundwater samples, one (MI06049) contained two metals
at above-background levels, namely zinc and nickel (the latter at 96µg/l, or about 10 times background levels).To a lesser extent the level
of zinc in two other groundwater samples (MI06048, MI06050) was
also elevated. Neither the groundwater samples nor the treatedwastewater sample collected from the WWTP contained any detectable
VOCs.
Bangpa-in IE
Nine samples were collected from the Bangpa-in IE: two wastewater
samples MI06036 (untreated KCL wastewater) & MI06038 (treated
wastewater from WWTP), one sediment from a CKL manhole(MI06037), two WWTP sludge samples (MI06039-40), and four
groundwater samples MI06035, MI06041, MI06043-44.The location
of one of these samples (MI06041) is 3 km to the southwest of the Hi-Tech IE.
36CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
EETH HI-TECH IE
MI06024
WW
µg/l
-
33
-----
3710
-
732
-
21
--
65MI06025
Sed
mg/kg
-
153
5.8
--
6119
22650
151224
-
107463
30
190MI06026
Sed
mg/kg
-
147
1.1
--
49
9
4260
39
116
-
279338
70MI06045
WW
µg/l
-
30
-----
1010
-
2240
-
5690
-
77MI06046
WW
µg/l
-
15
-----
432
-
411
-
251
--
295MI06047
Sed
mg/kg
-
125
1.7
--
57
9
134
22
132
7
267572
77
LOCATION
SAMPLE#SAMPLE TYPEMETAL
Antimony
BariumBeryllium
BismuthCadmiumChromiumCobaltCopperLeadManganeseMolybdenum Nickel
Tin
VanadiumZinctable 4.6 :: metals quantified in wastewater (WW) and sediment (Sed) samples from sites involved in PWB manufacture; EETH & Hi-
Tech IE,Thailand. Concentrations are given in mg/kg dry weight for sediment and sludge samples and µg/l for water samples. ( - ) -
not detected.

Both was tewaters contained high concentrations of copper , with the
higher level (1780 µg/l) in the wastewater from KCL, while the treated
wastewater contained 570 µg/l. Both wastewaters also contained nickel(59-114 µg/l) and zinc (134-153 µg/l) at notable levels.The two
wastewater samples had different profiles of extractable organic
compounds. Sample MI06036 from the CKL underground dischargepipe, contained a characteristic range of photoinitiators and related
compounds; diphenylmethanone (benzophenone) derivatives including a
chlorinated derivatives, two diphenylethanone derivatives, and a rangeof benzoic acid esters. Sample MI06038, treated wastewater from the
WWTP w here CKL and othe r facilities sends their wastewaters,
contained dibutyl phthalate (DBP), two PBDEs (BDE-47 and BDE-
99) at trace levels, and a terthiophene derivative, but none of thephoto initiator-related compounds were found in CKL’s discharge.
The sediment sample MI06037, from a separate underground pipe of
CKL (with no wate r flow at the sampl ing time), contained extremely
high levels of copper (7.6% by weight) and tin (6.3%), as well as lead,
nickel and zinc at elevated levels.This sample also contained the same
two PBDEs f ound i n the treated was tewate r and d ichlorobenzene,
though all at trace levels.Similarly, both sludge samples from the WWTP (MI06039 &
MI06040) contained extremely high levels of those metals present inthe was tewate rs,namely copper (8.4-8.9%), tin (0.33-0.63%) and
zinc (0.48-0.58%), as well as antimony, bismuth, nickel and lead at
levels above background levels for uncontaminated environmentalmaterials such as so ils and sediments.The sludges also contained the
same two PBDEs found in the treated wastewater . One of the sludge
samples, MI06039, additionally contained a range of aliphatichydrocarbons, a derivative of a cyclic siloxane, and diphenyl ether .
No VOCs we re detected in any of the groundwater samples. Copper in
MI06035 and zi nc in MI06044 we re pres ent at leve ls slightly elevated
above typical background levels for groundwater .
37BANGPA-IN IE ROJANA IE
MI06036
WW
63
9(14%)
----
12
2
---
4
---MI06038
WW
39
5(13%)
(2)
-----
-
1
----
11MI06037
Sed
14
3(21%)
(2)(1)
-----------
-MI06039
Sludge
32
12(38%)
(2)
-------
-
--
127MI06040
Sludge
14
2(14%)
(2)
------------
-MI06052
WW
29
8 (28%)
(3)(1)(1)(1)
---
1
-
1
----MI06053
WW
32
8(25%)
--
(2)
----
3
1
----
2
LOCATION
SAMPLE#SAMPLE TYPE
No. of organic compounds isolated
No. reliably identified (% of total)
PBDEs 
Chlor inated benzene
Trihalomethanes THMs
Di- or tetr achlor omethanes
Benzophenone, chlorophenyl
Other benzophenone derivatives
Diphenylethanone d erivatives
Phthalate estersCarbamodithioic acid, dimethyl-, methyl ester
l-Limonene
Benzoic acid and its derivatives
Cyclotetr asiloxanes
Other aromatic hydr ocarbons
Aliphatic hydrocarbonstable 4.7 :: organic chemicals identified in wastewater (WW), sediment (Sed) and sludge samples from sites involved in the
manufacture of PWBs; Bangpa-in IE and Rojana IE,Thailand.The number of compounds reliably identified is presented for each
group; (#) - signifies compounds identified at trace levels using a selective SIM method; ( - ) – not detected.

Rojan a IE
Among the 7 samples collected from the Rojana IE were two
wastewate r samples, MI06052 (untreated wastewater from PCTT) &
MI06053 (treated was tewate r from WWTP), and f ive groundwater
samples, MI06054-MI06058. Both wastewater samples contained
phthalate es ters – diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) in PCTT wastewater
and,in the treated was tewate r (MI06053), a combi nation of
diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP), dibutyl phthalate (DBP) and diisobutyl
phthalate (DiBP). The PCTT wastewater (MI06052) also contained
chlor inated and br ominated compounds (three PBDEs,
dichloromethane, chloroform and dichlorobenzene). Dichloromethane
and chlor oform were present in this sample at concentration of 2.2 µg/l
and 35.5 µg/l respec tively. In addition to the phthalate esters listed
above, the treated wastewater (MI06053) contained a derivative ofcarbamodithioic acid, two aliphatic hydrocarbons, chloroform (0.9
µg/l) and traces of bromodichloromethane.This treated wastewateralso contained some metals above background levels for surfacewaters, including chromium, copper , nickel, tin and zinc. In the PCTT
wastewater sample, only copper was present at the slightly elevated
level of 73 µg/l.
Two groundwater samples collected near to the Rojana IE (MI06054
& MI06058) contai ned zi nc at sl ightly elevated concentrations above
background levels. No groundwaters contained any chlorinated VOCs,
though two samples (MI06055 & MI06056) contained traces of thetoxic compound phenol.
38CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
BANGPA-IN IE ROJANA IE
MI06036
WW
µg/l
-
95
----
-
1780
-
479
-
59
--
153MI06038
WW
µg/l
-
36
-----
570
-
311
-
114
--
134MI06037
Sed
mg/kg
-
792
0.4
--
91
3
75900
323603
4
114
62600
19
164MI06039
Sludge
mg/kg
70
286
0.4
79
-
110
30
89000
112
1360
9
14103350
15
5790MI06040
Sludge
mg/kg
49
327
0.3
106
-
133
22
84400
91
2500
4
598
6290
8
4780MI06052
WW
µg/l
-
37
-----
73
-
26
-
17
--
94MI06053
WW
µg/l
-
33
-
--
203
-
106
-
73
-
153
81
-
1470LOCATION
SAMPLE#SAMPLE TYPEMETAL
Antimony
Barium
BerylliumBismuthCadmiumChromiumCobaltCopperLead
Manganese
Molybdenum Nickel
Tin
VanadiumZinctable 4.8 :: metals quantified in wastewater (WW), sediment (Sed) and sludge samples from sites involved in PWB manufacture;
Bangpa-in IE & Rojana IE,Thailand. Concentrations are given in mg/kg dry weight for sediment and sludge samples and µg/l for water
samples. ( - ) - not detected.

Navankorn IE
Only groundwater samples were collected from the Navarkorn IE:
MI06032-MI0634 and MI06059. No elevated metal concentrations
were found i n any sample. VOCs we re detected only in MI06059; the
compounds chloroform and bromodichloromethane.These THMs were
both pres ent at tr ace levels (1.2 µg/l).
39MI06024
WW
EETH
<0.5
<0.5
<0.5<0.5
-
<0.1
<0.5
<0.1<0.5<0.5<0.1<0.5Bromoform
ChloroformMethane ,bromod ichlor o-
Methane ,dibromochlor o-
Methane ,dichlor o-
Methane ,tetrachlor o-
Ethane ,1,1,1-tr ichlor o-
Ethene, 1,1-dichloro-
Ethene, 1,2-dichloro-, cis-Ethene, trichloro-Ethene ,tetrachloro-
HexachlorobutadieneMI06045
WW
Hi-Tech IE
-
1.9
--
1.1
-
-
-----MI06059
GW
Navanakorn IE
-
1.21.2
--
-
------MI06052
WW
Rojana IE
-
35.5
--
2.2
-
------MI06053
WW
Rojana IE
-
0.9
<0.5
--
-
------
SAMPLE#
SAMPLE TYPELOCATIONCOMPOUNDS CONCENTRATION, µg/l
THMS CHLORINATED
METHANES,
ETHANES & ETHENEStable 4.9 :: volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) quantified in groundwater (GW) and wastewater (WW) samples from sites involved in
the manufacture of PWBs,Thailand. ( - ) - not detected.

40CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
BANGPA-IN IE ROJANA IE
MI06035
GW
µg/l
-------
49
-------MI06041
GW
µg/l
-
41
-------------MI06043
GW
µg/l
-
139
-------
210
----
20MI06044
GW
µg/l
-
147
-------
127
----
50MI06054
GW
µg/l
-
29
------------
71MI06055
GW
µg/l
-
47
-------------MI06056
GW
µg/l
-
43
-
------
65
-----MI06057
GW
µg/l
-
56
-
------
17
-----MI06058
GW
µg/l
-
55
-
------
75
----
67MI06059
GW
µg/l
-
74
-
------
25
-----
LOCATION
SAMPLE#
SAMPLE TYPEMETAL
Antimony
Barium
BerylliumBismuthCadmiumChromiumCobaltCopperLead
Manganese
Molybdenum 
Nickel
Tin
VanadiumZinctable 4.10 :: metals quantified in groundwater (GW) samples from sites involved in PWB manufacture; Bangpa-in IE & Rojana IE,
Thailand. ( - ) - not detected.

41EETH NAVANAKORN IE HI-TECH IE
MI06027
GW
µg/l
-
118
-
------
97
----
12MI06028
GW
µg/l
-
125
-
------
110
-----MI06032
GW
µg/l
-
93
-
------
144
-----MI06033
GW
µg/l
-
47
-
------------MI06034
GW
µg/l
-
198
-
------------MI06048
GW
µg/l
-
57
-
------
119
----
55MI06049
GW
µg/l
-
14
-------
29
-
96
--
179MI06050
GW
µg/l
-
27
-------
24
----
71MI06051
GW
µg/l
-
66
-------
213
----
20
LOCATION
SAMPLE#
SAMPLE TYPEMETAL
Antimony
Barium
BerylliumBismuthCadmiumChromiumCobaltCopperLead
Manganese
Molybdenum 
Nickel
Tin
VanadiumZinctable 4.11 :: metals quantified in in groundwater (GW) samples from sites involved in PWB manufacture; EETH, Navanakorn IE &-
Tech IE,Thailand. ( - ) - not detected.

4.1.3 :: Discussion
Many similarities were seen in the chemicals identified in the
wastewaters and other samples associated with the individual PWBmanufacturing facilities located in China and Thailand. Similar patterns
were seen in the distribution of certain groups of organic chemicals,
and in those metals present at high concentrations, including;
- brominated flame-retardants, primarily polybrominated diphenyl
ethers (PBDEs)
- phthalate esters- chemicals used as photoinitiators, and related compounds
- chlorinated solvents
- benzoic acid esters- heavy metals; primarily copper , nickel and zinc
Some g roups of chem icals were found only in the wastewaters from
PWB manufacturing facilities, while others were also present at other
points,in was tewate r pipes and channels, within communal WWTPs,
and even i n treated was tewaters discharged from WWTPs (although in
this last case it is not possible to ascribe the presence of these
chem icals to any i ndividual chemical plant as many contribute
wastewater to the treatment plant). In some cases accumulation was
found in sediment and sludge samples collected from wastewater pipes
and channels and communal WWTPs. Some heavy metals were found
to have accumulated to very high levels in some of these samples.
Analysis of the organic chemicals in samples collected from the sites in
China and Thailand has sho wn the comple xity of the contaminants that
arise from PWB manufacture.This was particularly obvious in case of
the samples collec ted fr om Ch ina.The majority of the organic
compounds that have been isolated dur ing GC/MS screen ing anal ysis
could not be reliably identified, partially due to the lack of the current
databas es on spec tral characteristics of some industrial chemicals that
have not been on the mar ket for a lon g time, or which have not
previously been recognised as significant environmental contaminants.
Those chemicals include a range of brominated organic substances
which it was possib le to i dentify onl y as “polybrominated compounds”
by Selective Ion Monitoring (SIM) GC/MS analysis (see Appendix for
details of the analyses). It was found that 8 samples out of a total of
13 that we re collec ted fr om the fac ilities in China contained
unspecified brominated compounds which deserve further investigation.
The number of such compounds ranged from 7 in samples MI06002,
MI06004 and MI06010 to as many as 27 i n sample MI06008. Bothsamples MI06007 and MI05051 contained 18 unspecified brominated
organic compounds, samples MI06001 and MI06009 contained 24and 25 compounds respectively. At the same time, other thangroundwater , all samples from China were found to contain brominatedorganic compounds which were reliably identified, including congenersof PBDEs (in 9 samples) and TBBPA (in 2 samples) as discussedbelow. It is necessary to mention that samples containing brominatedcompounds were represented by wastewaters (MI05051 & MI06004),
sediments (MI06001-MI06002 & MI06008-MI06009) and soil
samples (MI06007 & MI06010).Therefore, the presence of thesecompounds in the environmental samples could have resulted from
discharges or fugitive losses from the industrial sector in theinvestigated area.
Of all organic chemicals identified, the widest distribution was found
for PBDEs, a group of pol ybrominated chemicals widely used as flame-
retardants. Many PBDEs are en vironmentally persistent chemicals, and
some are also toxic and highly bioaccumulative. More information on
PDBEs is g iven in Text Box A.
PDBEs were identified in at least one sample collected from every site
sampled, whether in wastewater or in sediments from wastewater
channels and ponds. In almost all cases, the PDBE congeners identified
at all sites were BDE-47, BDE-99 and BDE-153. All such samplescontained two or three of these PDBE congeners, with the exception ofone sample from the Fortune facility in China that contained these
three along with many additional PBDEs.
PBDEs were found in discharged wastewaters from three facilities;
Fortune and Compeq in China, and PCTT within the Rojana IE in
Thailand. The was tewater from Fortune, and one of the wastewaters
from Compeq also contained another brominated flame retardant,
TBBPA, which is widely used in the manufacture of PWBs (in which it
is gene rally polymerised, Lassen et al. 1999).The Fortune wastewater
also contained a different type of flame retardant,TPP .This toxic
chemical is an aryl phosphate, a phosphorus based chemical, different
to the br ominated compounds menti oned above.TPP was not found in
any other sample. Additional information on TBBPA and TPP is given
in Text Box A.
42CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION

43
The river behind the Compeq
factory in the Guangdong
Province, China is slowly drying
up. October 2006.
© GREENPEACE 

CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
BOX A :: FLAME RETARDANTS
Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) are one of several classes of
brominated compound in widespread use as flame retardant additives
in plastics and foams, including plastic casings of electronic equipment
(OECD 2003).There are many different chemicals (congeners)included in this group, differing in the numbers and positioning ofbromine atoms in the molecules.Those in common commercial use are
“penta” (i.e. a mixture rich in pentabrominated congeners), “octa”,
(rich in octabrominated congeners) and “deca” (almost exclusively thedecabrominated congener).
PBDEs are environmentally persistent chemicals. Some, especially the
lower brominated congeners (e.g. “penta-BDE”), are also highlybioaccumulative.Their manufacture and use as additives in plastics
and other polymers, in which they are not tightly bound to the polymer
matrix, has led to their widespread presence in the environment.PBDEs can be detected in indoor air and dusts in the workplace and
in the home (Santillo et al. 2003 a & b).They also occur in almost
every part of the environment, including sediments (Allchin & Morris2002), freshwater and marine fish (Asplund et al. 1999a, b), birds
eggs (Hites 2004) and even whales from the deep oceans and the
Arctic (de Boer et al. 1998, Ikonomou et al. 2002).
PBDEs have also been reported as common contaminants in humans,
including reports from Sweden, Spain, Finland and North America
(Lindstrom et al. 1997, Meneses et al. 1999, Strandman et al. 1999,She et al. 2000). Concentrations of lower brominated PBDEs have
shown increasing levels in both blood and breast milk in recentdecades, particularly in regions in which “penta” remains in
commercial use (Alaee et al. 2003, Meironyte et al. 1999,Thomsen etal. 2002). Workers in electronics recycling facilities in Europe have
been f ound to have higher blood levels of PBDEs than other workers,
probably as a result of inhalation of contaminated dust (Sjödin et al.2001, Sjödin et al. 2003). For the general population, exposure to
PBDEs pr obably occurs through a combination of food contamination
and direct exposure to chemicals from consumer products and/orcontaminated dusts (Harrad et al. 2004). While their acute toxicity is
considered low, chronic exposure to certain PBDEs (especially in the
womb) has been associated with abnormal brain development inanimals (Eriksson et al. 2002), with possible long-term impacts on
memory, learning and behaviour (Darnerud 2003, Eriksson et al. 2001,
2002, Viberg et al. 2004).There are concerns that similar effects may
be of relevance in humans (Branchi et al. 2003). PBDEs also exhibit
endocrine (hormone) disrupting properties, interacting with both
oestrogen and thyroid hormone systems either as the parent compoundor as metabolites (Meerts et al. 1998, 2001, Legler & Brouwer 2003).
Effects on the immune system have also been reported (Birnbaum &
Staskal 2004, Darnerud 2003). Furthermore, when plastics containingPBDEs are burned, either in an incinerator or by open burning, the
potential exists for formation of brominated dioxins (IPCS 1998),which may be of equivalent toxicity to chlorinated dioxins.
Becaus e of thes e environmental and human health conce rns, controls
are increasi ngly being placed on the use of PBDEs (along with some
other brominated fame retardants) in some regions. Penta-BDE is
includ ed as a “priority hazardous substance” under the EU Water
Framework Directive (EU 2001) and remains under consideration for
inclusion as a POP (persistent organic pollutant) under the 2001
global Stockholm Con vention (P eltola & Yla-Mononen 2001, UNEP
2006). Both “penta” and “octa” are now banned from use in Europe
(EU 2003a). Within the electronics sector , use of PBDEs other than
“deca” was prohibited from July 2006 under the Directive onRestrictions on Hazardous Substances (RoHS), associated with theWEEE Directive (EU 2002a, b).

Tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA), another form of brominated flame
retardant, is used widely in various industrial and consumer products
including electrical and electronic appliances (Lassen et al. 1999).Thischemical is most frequently used in polymeric form, i.e. bound to the
polymers in which it is incorporated, though a small percentage of
total use is in additive uses (i.e. in a similar manner to the common
additive flame retardants PBDEs and HBCD). Despite its primary use
in reactive, polymeric forms,TBBPA has been found in the indoor
environment, including in office dust samples (Leonards et al. 2001).It has been reported that TBBPA may interfere with the binding of
thyroid hormones (Meerts et al. 1998, 2001), raising the potential for
diverse effects on growth and development. Concerns have also beenraised that TBBPA can induce oestrogen-like properties (Meerts et al.
2001, Samuelsen et al. 2001, Olsen et al. 2003), neurotoxicity(Mariussen & Fonnum 2003), immunotoxicity (Pullen et al. 2003),
nephrotoxicity (Fukuda et al. 2004) or hepatotoxicity (Ronisz et al.
2004, Tada et al. 2006). However , most of the studies are in vitro
studies and these are not used for the purpose of risk assessment.
A risk ass essment repor t pub lished by Eur opean Commission in 2006
(EC 2006) has conclud ed that “No health effects of concern have
been identified for TBBP-A”.This study has been prepared by the
United Ki ngdom on behalf of the Eur opean Un ion and was based on
the sc ientific publications up to 2004. But very recently the UK revised
the environmental risk assessment to take into account new test data
and exposure information provided by Industry (DEFRA 2006). “Theexposure section was updated with site-specific monitoring data. Initialresults of studies of degradation in anaerobic sewage sludge andanaerobic sediment were added.These show de-bromination of TBBPAto form bisphenol A, another substance being assessed under theExisting Substances Regulation. Other recent studies in the publishedliterature also f ound evidence for debromination of TBBPA in the
environment.TC NES agreed that this source of Bisphenol A to the
environment should be considered further in an update to theBisphenol A r isk ass essment”. Finalisation of this revised
environmental risk assessment, expected to identify some significant
risks to the environment, is expected shortly.Triphenyl phosphate (TPP), one of a number of so-called triaryl
phosphates, has long been used as a flame retardant for polymers such
as poly(butylene terephthalate) (PBT), an important polymericmaterial for the electrical and electronic industries and automotive
production (Xiao et al. 2006) and in phenolic and phenylene oxide-
based resins (IPCS 1991).This compound is not chemically bound to
plastic material and therefore may be released into environment
through leaching from polymers in which it is incorporated. As a
result, phosphoric triesters have been detected in variousenvironmental compartments such as air (Marklund et al. 2003,
Hartmann et al. 2004, Carlsson et al. 1997), wastewater , surface and
groundwater (Fries & Puttmann 2003), including location whereelectronic wastes are recycled (Brigden et al. 2005). Although a
relatively minor component compared to other flame retardants in airsamples from three schools, a day care centre and an office, much
higher levels were found in close proximity to computer monitors
(video display units, or VDUs) when in normal use (Carlsson et al.
2000). Further investigations revealed that TPP was present at levelsup to 10% by weight of the plastic in the outer covers of the monitors.
Combustion of polymers containing TPP may also be a major sourceto the environment (IPCS 1991).TPP is the most acutely toxic to
aquatic life of all the triaryl phosphates in common use (IPCS 1991).
It has been reported as a contaminant in human blood (Jonsson et al.2001) and is a s trong inhibitor of a key enzyme (monocyte carboxyl
esterase) in human blood cells (Amini and Crescenzi 2003). Recent
research has also indicated an ability to inhibit human androgenhormone reception in vitro (Honkakoski et al. 2004). Contactdermatitis following exposure to TPP has been reported by several
authors, with some cases dating back to the 1960s (Carlsson et al.1997 and Sanchez et al. 2003).

Accumulation of PBDEs in sediments was also evident at some
locations. At the Fortune and Compeq sites in China, the same PBDEsfound in wastewater samples were also found in sediment samplescollected from wastewater channels and the waterways into which theydischarge. At the Compeq site, these PBDEs were also found in theXianGang River upstream of the wastewater discharge points and sothere may be other inputs to the river upstream of Compeq.
The sediment sample (MI06009) from the Fortune wastewater channel
contained by far the most PBDEs of all samples, many at well abovetrace levels.This sample, as well as the sediment from the open ditch to
which wastewater is discharged, and the wastewater itself, also
contai ned many add itional pol ybrominated chemicals that could not be
fully identified. It is possible that some of these were other PBDEs, a
hypothesis which requires further investigation.
For two of the other PWB manufacturers, CKL within the Bangpa-in
IE and the EETH facility (both in Thailand), PBDEs could not bedetected in the wastewater from either facility, but were found in
sediment samples from the wastewater discharge channels.This
suggests previous discharge of wastewaters containing PBDEs, whichgenerally have low water solubility and a high affinity for binding to
sediment particulates.
The results d emons trate the distribution of PBDEs throughout
wastewater discharge networks and treatment facilities, and in some
cases the inability of the wastewater treatment processes to deal
effectively with the pres ence of these chemicals in wastewaters. At
three sites in Thailand where facilities are located within Industrial
Estates (IEs), samples were collected from both an individual PWB
manufac turing facility and a communal WWTP that receives
wastewater from many different facilities. At one of these sites, the
CKL facility within the Bangpa-in IE, the same PBDEs found in
sediment collec ted from the CKL discharge pipe were also found in two
samples of sludge from the WWTP as well as treated wastewater being
discharged by the WWTP . PBDEs were also found in sediment from the
treated was tewate r pond of the WWTP at the Hi-T ech IE, presumably
from wastewaters discharge to it from one or more facilities, though
these were not found in the wastewater from the KCE facility at the
time of sampl ing. It was not possible to collect sediment from the KCE
discharge to see whether PBDEs had been previously discharged from
this facility. At the Rojana IE, PBDEs were found in the wastewater
from the PCTT fac ility though not in treated wastewater from the
WWTP . It was not possible to collect sediment or sludge samples from
this WWTP , which may have contained PBDEs accumulated from
wastewate rs discharged to it, found at the other sites. In all cases, the
WWTPs receive wastewater from many facilities within the Industrial
Estate, and therefore additional sources of PBDEs to the WWTP , fromfacilities other than the specific PWB manufacturers investigated,
cannot be ruled out.In addition to the distribution throughout the various wastewater
networks, general background contamination with PBDEs was found inthe vicinity of the two facilities in China.The XianGang River receiveswastewater discharges from the Compeq facility. River sedimentcollected upstream of all discharge points contained two PDBEs thatwere also found in sediments collected by Compeq wastewater outfalls.However , many additional polybrominated compounds were found at theoutfalls locations that were not present in the upstream river sediment.
At the Fortune facility, two soil samples from the area showed traces of
PDBE contamination.The soil collected adjacent to the wastewaterditch contained more PBDEs and other polybrominated compounds
than the soil collected 500m from the Fortune site. It is not possible todistinguish the contribution to such general background contamination
arising specifically from the PWB manufacturing facility from thecontribution arising from other point and diffuse sources in the area.
Anothe r class of chem icals found in wastewaters from individual
facilities were phthalate esters, particularly DEHP , but also DiBP and
DBP.Of thes e,DEHP was present in the wastewater from three
facilities; PCTT (Rojana IE) and EETH,Thailand, as well as the
Fortune facility in China.The latter also contained DiBP and DBP ,
while at the Hi-T ech IE (Thailand), DiBP was found in the wastewater
from the KCE facility.
At one site, a phthalate ester discharged by an individual PWB
manufacturer to a WWTP was also found in the treated wastewater
discharged by the WWTP into the wider environment, though it is
clearly not possible to state conclusively that the contamination had acommon origin in both cases.The treated wastewater at the Rojana IE
contained DEHP (also found in the PCTT wastewater), as well as
DiBP and DBP which were not present in the PCTT wastewater . At the
Hi-Tech IE and Bangpa-in IE, treated wastewaters from WWTPs also
contained phthalates that were not found in the wastewaters from thePWB manufacturer investigated at each Industrial Estate. At some
locations, there appear to be additional sources of phthalates to the
communal WWTP .
Phthalates (phthalates esters) are predominantly used as plasticizers to
soften plastics (especially PVC) and have undergone large-scale and
ongoing releases to the environment (CSTEE 2001).They have been
detected in various environmental compartments, including in the
tissues of wildlife and in the human body (Otake et al. 2001, Butte &
Heinzow 2002, Fromme et al. 2004, Colon et al. 2000, Blount et al.
2000, Silva et al. 2004). Phthalates are relatively persistent in the
environment. Among the greatest concerns relate to the toxicity of
some phthalates, includ ing DEHP and DiBP , to the developing
reproductive system in mammals (Ema & Miyawaki 2002, Mylchreest
et al. 2002). More information on phthalates is presented in Box B.
46CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION

© GREENPEACE
BOX B :: PLASTICISERS - PHTHALATE ESTERS
Phthalates (or , more accurately, phthalate diesters) are non-
halogenated chemicals with a diversity of uses, dominated by use asplasticizers (or softeners) in plastics, especially PVC (e.g. in cablesand other flexible components). Other applications included uses ascomponents of inks, adhesives, sealants, surface coatings and personal
care products. Some phthalates are discrete chemicals, such as the
well known di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP), while others arecomplex mixtures of isomers, such as diisononyl phthalate (DINP).
All uses of phthalates, especially the major use as PVC plasticisers,
result in large-scale losses to the environment (both indoors and
outdoors) during the lifetime of products, and again following disposal.
Within the European Union (EU) alone, this amounts to thousands of
tonnes per year (CSTEE 2001). As a result, phthalates are among themost ubiquitous man-made chemicals found in the environment.They
are widely found in the indoor environment, including in air and dust
(Otake et al. 2001, Butte & Heinzow 2002, Fromme et al. 2004).Phthalates are commonly found in human tissues, including in blood
and, as metabolites, in urine (Colon et al. 2000, Blount et al. 2000,
Silva et al. 2004). In humans and other animals they are relativelyrapidly metabolised to their monoester forms, but these are frequently
more to xic than the parent compound (Dalgaard et al. 2001).Substantial concerns exist with regard to the toxicity of phthalates to
wildlife and humans. For example, DEHP , one of the most widely used
to date, is a known reproductive toxin, capable (in its monoester formMEHP) of interfering with development of the testes in early life. In
addition, adverse impacts on female reproductive success in adult rats
and on development of the young have been reported followingexposure to this chemical (Lovekamp-Swan & Davis 2003).Butylbenzyl phthalate (BBP) and dibutyl phthalate (DBP) have also
been reported to exert reproductive toxicity (Ema & Miyawaki 2002,
Mylchrees t et al. 2002). Both DEHP and DBP are classified as “toxic
to reproduction” within Europe. Recent research has revealed a
correlation between phthalate exposure during pregnancy and
decreased ano-genital index (distance from the anus to the genitals) inmale children (Swan et al. 2005). Decreased AGI correlated with
concentrations of four phthalate metabolites, namely monoethyl
phthalate (MEP), mono-n-butyl phthalate (MBP), monobenzylphthalate (MBzP), and monoisobutyl phthalate (MiBP). It was also
found that DBP can not only be taken up by crops and enter the food
chain, but also affects proteome formation as well as the physiologyand the morphology of some crops during growth (Liao 2006). Other
commonly used phthalates, including the isomeric forms DINP and
DIDP (diisodecyl phthalate), are of concern because of observedeffects on the liver and kidney, albeit at higher doses.
At present, there are few controls on the marketing and use of
phthalates, despite their toxicity, the volumes used and their propensity
to leach out of products throughout their lifetime. Of the controlswhich do exist, however , probably the best known is the EU-wide ban
on the use of six phthalates in children’s toys and childcare articles,
first agreed as an emergency measure in 1999 and finally made
permanent in 2005 (EC 2005). While this addresses one importantexposure route, exposures through other consumer products remainunaddress ed.Lao Zhao, one of the
farmers who lives near
the Compeq factory,
preparing his meal by
blowing through a
bamboo tube to stoke
the fire. Guangdong
Province, China.
October 2006.

In addition to the widely distributed organic chemicals discussed above,
some heavy metals were found at high concentrations either indischarged wastewaters or through the wastewater networks, includingin samples from WWTPs.
Most significant among the contaminants found was copper , present at
high concentrations in the wastewaters from all facilities (ranging from60 µg/l to 3710 µg/l). For comparison, background concentrations of
copper in uncontaminated surface waters can vary significantly but
average levels are typically below 10 µg/l (ATSDR 2004, Salomons &Forstner 1984). Wastewater discharged by EETH had the highest
copper concentration, over 300 times average background levels, and
almos t two ti mes the max imum pe rmitted level for industrial effluents
in Thailand (2000 µg/l or 2.0 mg/l, PCD 2004). EETH is known to use
the electroless copper process (EETH 2006), which uses soluble copper
compounds and che lating chem icals that i mped e the recovery of metals
from was tewaters (Walters et al. 2006). Some of the other facilities
may also use this widely used process, though this cannot be confirmed
withou t add itional i nformation.
Two other facilities sampled in Thailand (KCE and CKL) send
wastewaters to WWTPs. Samples of these wastewaters also contained
high copper concentrations (1010-1780 µg/l). At both sites, the treated
wastewaters discharged from the WWTPs had somewhat lower levels(432-570 µg/l), and although these levels are below Thai dischargestandards, they are still approximately 50 times average background
copper concentrations. Similar copper levels were found in wastewaters
discharged to waterways from the two facilities in China, Compeq andFortune, which contained dissolved copper at 811 and 944 µg/l
respectively, just below the maximum allowable national effluent
standard for China of 1.0 mg/l (SEPA 1996).
Soluble copper compounds are widely used in PWB manufacture
(Walters et al. 2006). In very high doses, copper can cause toxic effects
in humans, though of greater concern is the impact of such discharges
on aquatic organisms, may of which are highly sensitive to soluble
coppe r even at ve ry low doses. More information on the uses and
effects of copper is given in Box C.Treated wastewaters discharged by the WWTPs at the Bangpa-in, Hi-
Tech and Rojana IEs in Thailand also contained elevated levels ofnickel (114-251 µg/l) and zinc (134-1470 µg/l) and, in the case of theRojana IE, tin (81 µg/l).These metals are generally present at farlower levels in uncontaminated fresh surface waters; nickel below 20µg/l (ATSDR 2005b), zinc below 50 µg/l (ATSDR 2005c) and tinbelow 2 µg/l (ATSDR 2005d). High concentrations were not found inthe individual wastewaters from the PWB manufacturers at the time of
sampling, which suggests other facilities are the primary sources of
nickel, zinc and tin to these WWTPs. However , wastewater from onefacility, Fortune in China, did contain high levels of nickel and zinc as
well as tin, though primarily in suspended rather than soluble forms,which may reflect accumulation of these metals in sediment within the
channel from discharged wastewaters over some time
Nickel is wi dely used in the manufacture of PWBs, whereas the specific
use of zi nc is not well documented. Some processes employ water-
soluble nickel compounds that have the potential to leach to
groundwaters following release to the environment (Walters et al.
2006). Exposure to high concentrations of nickel can results in toxic
effects, and some nickel compounds are carcinogenic to humans and
animals (A TSDR 2005b , IARC 1990). More information on the uses
and effects of nickel and zinc is given in Box C.
Tin is extensively used in PWB manufacture, in layering and etching
processes as well as a component of electrical solder (Walters et al.
2006). Exposure to inorganic tin does not usually cause toxic effects in
humans or animals, unless ingested in extremely large amounts(ATSDR 2003). However , the high concentrations of tin in some
samples, together with other more toxic metals, demonstrate poor
waste treatment and disposal practices.
Metals discharged in wastewater tend to bind to sediment particles and
accumulate i n bottom s ediments. At all locations, the discharge of
wastewaters containing high levels of heavy metals over considerable
time has resulted in the accumulation of these metals (primarily copper ,
nickel,zinc and tin) to very high levels in discharge channel sediments
as well as in sediments and sludges within WWTPs. Reflecting the
levels in the wastewaters, copper was the most prevalent metal, with
extreme ly high levels at some locations. At the Bangpa-in IE and
EETH facility,Thailand, and at both facilities in China, for example
where copper levels in sediments from discharge channels ranged from
22650-75900 mg/kg (2.3-7.6%). These levels are many hundreds of
times higher than copper levels in uncontaminated sediments (ATSDR
2004, Salomons & Forstner 1984).The highest level found was in the
CKL d ischarge channe l at the Ban gpa-in IE, over 1500 times typical
background concentrations.
48CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION

BOX C :: METALS
Copper is widely used within electronics products due to its high
electrical conductivity, primarily as a pure metal, or as part of
mixtures (alloys) with other metals, including beryllium (ATSDR
2004, OECD 2003). Levels of copper in the environment are typicallyquite low, with soils containing less than 30 mg/kg, and only slightlyhigher levels (less than 50 mg/kg) in freshwater sediments (Alloway
1990, ATSDR 2004, Salomons & Forstner 1984). Background
concentration of soluble copper in uncontaminated surface waters canvary significantly, but average levels are typically below 10 µg/l
(ATSDR 2004, Salomons & Forstner 1984).
Coppe r is an i mpor tant element for humans and animals in low doses,
though exposure to high levels of bioavailable copper can lead to
bioaccumulati on and to xic effec ts (ATSDR 2004). However , many
aquatic org anisms are extremely sensitive to copper , particularly in
soluble forms, and releases of soluble copper compounds to aquatic
environments can have si gnificant impacts. Copper in soluble forms is
highly mobile in the aquatic environment, particularly at higher acidity.
In these forms, copper is far more bioavailable and is toxic to a wide
range of aquatic plants and an imals (A TSDR 2004, Gerhardt 1993,
Mance et al. 1984). Effects can occur at very low levels, including
reductions in growth and fertility rates as well as increased mortality(Bryan & Langston 1992, UNEP 1993). Although dependent on many
others factors, the majority of aquatic organisms cannot tolerate or
survive at copper concentrations above 1 mg/l (1000 µg/l), and
impac ts can occur at concentr ations as low as 0.05 mg/l (50 µg/l) for
some s ensiti ve org anisms (Nor 1987, Salomons & F orstner 1984).The
World Health Organisation (WHO) set a drinking water guideline value
for coppe r of 2000 µg/l (WHO 2006).
Nickel is used in the manufacture of PWBs, primarily in the formation
of metal surface finishes through electroplating, as well as in layering
and etching processes used to produce the copper circuitry of the PWB
(USEPA 1998). Nickel electroplating involves the use of water-solublenickel compounds (USEPA 2001). Levels of nickel in the environment
are typically quite low, with soils and freshwater sediments generally
containing nickel below 60 mg/kg (Alloway 1990, ATSDR 2005b).Although nickel is generally persistent in soils, water-soluble nickel
compounds can be quite mobile and have the potential to leach
through soil and subsequently enter groundwater . Concentrations ofnickel in uncontaminated surface waters are typically below 20 µg/l,while groundwater levels are generally below 10 µg/l (ATSDR 2005b,
Salomons & Forstner 1984).Very small amounts of nickel are essential for normal growth and
reproduction in some animals and plants, and most likely also for
humans (ATSDR 2005b, Alloway 1990). However , toxic and
carcinogenic effects can result from exposure to higher concentrationsfor a wide range of life forms (ATSDR 2005b). Reported effects in
humans include nausea, abdominal cramps, diarrhoea and vomiting, as
well as cardiac effects following very high doses (ATSDR 2005b). A
significant proportion of the population (2-5%) are nickel sensitive
and effects can occur in sensitised individuals at far lowerconcentrations (ATSDR 2005b). Oral exposure to high nickel
concentrations can also result in a range of toxic effects in many
animals, predominantly gastrointestinal and cardiac effects, and nickelsensitisati on has also been reported in some animals (ATSDR 2005b).
Furthermore, some nickel compounds have been classified as
carcinogen ic to humans, and the re is also evidence of carcinogenicity in
animals (DHHS 2005, IARC 1990).The WHO set a nickel drinking
water guideline value of 70 µg/l (WHO 2006), and in Thailand the
groundwater qual ity level is 20 µg/l (SEPA 1996, PCD 2000).
Zinc
Repor ts on the manufacture of PWBs do not specifically list the use of
zinc in the manufacturing processes employed (Walters et al. 2006).Elevated levels found in this study may be due to other manufacturing
facilities within the industrial estates, though it remains a possibilitythat the PWB fac ilities may be contr ibuting to the total load on the
environment. Levels of zinc are generally quite low in the environment;
in uncontam inated soils and sediments levels are typically below 100
mg/kg, while in uncontam inated fresh surface waters and groundwater
levels are typically below 50 µg/l (ATSDR 2005c, Salomons &
Forstner 1984).
Zinc is an essential nutrient for humans and animals, though exposure
to high concentrations of bioavailable zinc can result in significant
bioaccumulation with possible toxic effects (ATSDR 2005c). Highdoses of zinc in humans can induce a range of symptoms, including
pancreatic damage, anaemia, gastrointestinal distress and diarrhoea.
Similar effects are also seen in animals (ATSDR 2005c, Goyer 1996).The WHO does not set a drinking water guideline value for zinc, but
levels up to 3 mg/l (3000 µg/l) are not considered unacceptable (WHO
2006).

Nickel and zinc were also present at elevated levels in sediments at
these four sites, at levels (generally 2-4 times background levels),though to a far lesser extent than for copper (ATSDR 2005b, ATSDR2005c, Salomons & Forstner 1984).Though not generally consideredas a toxic metal, tin was also present at very high levels, ranging from463-62600 mg/kg, the highest (over 6000 times background levels)again being found in the sediment from the CKL discharge channel(ATSDR 2003).
The impact of discharging heavy metals to WWTPs was clearly
demonstrated at the Bangpa in IE. As seen for some organic chemicals
(e.g. PDBEs), these facilities tend to concentrate metals into sludges,
producing an add itional contam inated wastestream. One of the sludge
samples fr om th is WWTP contained the highest levels of copper
(89000 mg/kg, or 8.9% by weight), nickel (1410 mg/kg) and zinc
(5790 mg/kg) of all samples.
Some groups of organic chemicals were found in samples from
wastewate r discharge pipes and channels from many of the individual
PWB manufacturers, but were not present in any other samples from
these sites.These included photoinitiator-related chemicals, benzoic acidesters, chlorinated solvents and trihalomethanes (THMs).
Photo initiators are catalysts used in the photolithography processes,
which is employ ed to print designs onto PWBs using UV light. More
information is given on these compounds in Text Box D.Three similar
groups of photoinitiator-related chemicals were commonly identified;
diphenyl-methanone (also kno wn as benz ophenone) and its d erivatives,
diphenylethanone derivatives, and xanthen-9-one derivatives.
Photoinitiator-related chemicals were found in wastewaters collected
from individual PWB manufacturers at four separate sites, in both
Thailand (CKL in the Bangpa-in IE, KCE in the Hi-Tech IE) and China
(Compeq and Fortune). A similar pattern of chemicals was found in thewastewaters from each of these facilities. Wastewater from all of the
four facilities contained diphenylmethanone and the same
diphenylethanone derivative (2,2-dimethoxy-diphenylethanone), whilethe related compound, diphenylethanedione was found in all but the
Fortune wastewater .There is little information available on the toxicity of the
diphenylmethanone-related compounds. However , diphenylmethanone(or benzophenone) itself have been found to have toxic effects to liverand kidneys in animals (US DHHS 2000) and displayed potentialhormone disrupting properties in several tests (Matsumoto et al. 2005,Kawamura et al. 2003). More information is given on these compoundsin Text Box D.
Two other closely related chemicals, derivatives of diphenylmethanone,
were also found in wastewaters from both the CKL and KCE facilitiesin Thailand; 2-chloro- and 2-hydroxy-diphenylmethanone. 2-
Chlorodiphenylmethanone, also known as o-chlorobenzophenone, is
known to be us ed as a photopol ymerisation initiator for coating plastic
mouldings (Adachi et al. 2005). Additional photoinitiator-related
chemicals were also identified in wastewater samples, though each was
only pres ent in samples fr om one fac ility.These included three different
derivatives of diphenylmethanone, and two xanthen-9-one derivatives.
One of the latter , a thioxanthen-9-one derivate commonly known as
Quantacure ITX, was pres ent in the was tewate r and underlying
sediment in the discharge channel from the Fortune facility.
Quantacure ITX usuall y consists of several isomers of thioxanthone
isopropyl derivatives. It has been widely used as a photoinitiator in inks
in the flexographic printing industry (USEPA 2000).There is littleinformation available on the properties of these chemicals, though ithas been shown that thioxanthone-based compounds, including isomers
of isopropylthioxanthone, can cause long-term effects in aquatic
organisms at relatively low concentrations (USEPA 2000). Someadditional information on thioxanthone-based photoinitiators is
presented in Box D.
The Hi-Tech wastewater contained a related chemical, xanthen-9-one
derivate. It was not possible to find any information about the toxicity
of this compound. It is d ifficult to evaluate what effects on the
environment and, consequently, wild life and human health, could be
caused by such photoinitiator-related chemicals as their toxic properties
have not been full y investigated.
50CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION

BOX D :: PHOTOINITIATORS AND RELATED
COMPOUNDS
Photoinitiators are additives that use ultraviolet (UV) or visible light to
induce polymerisation, or to cure materials, as in the case of coatings
and inks. Photoinitiators have extensive applications in the manufactureof printed circuits, encapsulation of electronic components, decorative
coating, surface coating, etc.The main advantage of polymerizationstarted by photoinitiators is temperature-independence and easy control.
It can be conducted at very low temperatures and can be stopped simply
by remo ving the light source.
Photoinitiators sold under various trade names including Quantacure,
Irgacure ,Darocure, Photocure, Vicure and others. Many photoinitiators
that have been traditionally used by the industry in the past and those
that remain in use are based on benzophenone (Allen et al. 1988, 1990,
1997, Eustis et al. 2006) and acetophenone (Torbiero et al. 2006,
Umarji et al. 2005, Mijangos et al. 2006). Industrial developments
during last two decades promoted fast growing research and synthesis of
new chem icals that are used in the fields of photopolymerisation and
photoimaging science and technology (Corrales et al. 2003,Yilmaz et al.
2004). As a result, new polymers bearing thioxanthone (Jiang et al.
2006), anthraquinone, camphorquinone or benzyl moieties (Seidl et al.
2006) have been synthesis ed. Information on these photoinitiators are
mainly in the form of numerous patents. However , there is very little
information on the toxicity of these new compounds.This is a majorconcern because it is unknown what effects they could cause on humanhealth and the en vironment thr ough use in, and release from,
manufacturing processes.
Benzophenone based photoinitiators
Benzophenone its elf and its derivatives are used as photoinitiators
during production of UV-cured resins, inks and coatings (Eustis et al.
2006). Apart from this application, benzophenone has many other
uses, including as a fragrance enhancer , and, occasionally, as a flavor
ingredient.It is also used in the manufacture of insecticides,
agricultur al chem icals and phar maceu ticals and is an add itive for
plastics and adhesives (US DHHS 2000). In animals the liver is the
primary target org an of benz ophenone toxicity in rats and mice, based
on increas es in liver weights, hepatoce llular hypertrophy, clinical
chem istry changes, and induction of liver microsomal cytochrome
P450 2B isome r.The kidney was also identified as a target organ of
benzophenone to xicity in rats onl y, based on exposure concentration-
related increases in kidney weights and microscopic changes (US
DHHS 2000). Benzophenone and some of its d erivatives displayed
estrogenic activity in the MCF-7 ce ll proliferation assay (Matsumoto
et al. 2005) and in the yeast two-hybrid assay (Kawamura et al.
2003).Acetophenone based photoinitiators
One of the most widely used acetophenone-based photoinitiator is 2,2-
dimethoxy-1,2-diphenylethanone, also known as 2,2-Dimethoxy-2-phenylacetophenone (DMPA) or “Photocure 51”. DMPA is a
photoinitiator which is added to polysiloxanes to produce photosensitivepolymers that are widely used in silicon microelectronics (Torbiero et al.2006, Umarji et al. 2005). Diphenylethanedione (also known simply asbenzyl) is a raw material for production of DMPA. Another
acetophenone-based photoinitiator , 2,2-diethoxyacetophenone, is used in
the synthesis of telechelic polyurethane methacrylates which havewidespread use in the coatings industry (Asha et al. 2005).
Despite the fact that acetophenone-based photoinitiators have been in
use for over two decades, little information exists in the public domain
conce rning their to xicity.Acetophenone itself is a toxic chemical. Acute
exposure of humans to acetophenone v apor may pr oduce ski n irritation
and tr ansient corneal injury. Acute oral exposure has been observed to
cause hypnotic or s edative effec ts,hematolog ical effec ts and a weak ened
pulse in humans. Congestion of the lungs, kidneys, and liver were
repor ted in rats acutely exposed to high levels of acetophenone via
inhalati on (U SEPA 2000). DMPA has been f ound to be toxic to HepG2
cells,a human hepatoma ce ll line, in dose-dependent manner during
photopolymerisation experiments in tissue engineering (Liu & Bhatia
2002).
Thioxanthone based photoinitiators
Thioxanthones are widely used bimolecular photoinitiators in vinyl
polymerisations.They have been employed in processes such as UV-cured
printing inks, surface coating, microelectronics, and photoresists
(Coralles et al. 2003).The thioxanthones were also often used in
conjunc tion with othe r photo initiators to design cost effective synergistic
photoinitiator blends (Cho et al. 2003, Segurola et al. 1999, Andersen et
al. 1996). Recently thioxanthone-based photoinitiators have received arevitalized interest because of their absorption characteristics at near
UV range (Temel et al. 2006).
Isopropyl derivatives of thioxanthone are used as photoinitiators under
the tr ade name Quantacure ITX in many applications, including
production of UV -cured i nks that compr ise a comparatively new ink
technology in the flexographic printing industry (USEPA 2000). Little
information is available on these compounds, though derivatives of
thioxanthone i nclud ing isomers of isopropylthioxanthone are known to be
of high aquatic hazard and capable of causing long-term effects in
aquatic org anisms even at concentrations of less than 0.1 mg/l (USEPA
2000).
Public and reg ulator y conce rns arose around the proprietary product
Quantacure ITX in September 2005, when a laboratory in Italy found
that tr aces of th is photo initiator had been found in some milk products
for babies. Quantacure ITX, which was us ed as a cur ing agent for ink on
Tetra Pak’s packaging, had migrated through packaging into the milk.
Following this discovery, millions of litres of the baby milk were recalled
or conf iscated by g overnment au thorities.

Chlorinated chemicals, many commonly used as solvents, were found in
wastewater at the EETH facility, and to a lesser extent at the PCTTfacility on the Rojana IE, both in Thailand. Though present at onlytrace levels, the wastewater at EETH contained a range of thesevolatile chlorinated chemicals, while the PCTT wastewater containedonly one, a chlorinated methane. Due to the volatile nature of thesechlorinated chemicals, they can evaporate rapidly from waters and thismay have contributed to the low levels found in these wastewater
samples. It is possible that discharged wastewaters initially contained
far higher levels. Wastewaters at some sites contained additionalvolatile chlorinated chemicals known as trihalomethanes (THMs).
These chemicals are generally present due to use of chlorine basedwater disinfection rather than their intentional use in industrial
processes.
Chlor inated solvents and THMs we re also i dentified in many of the
samples of g roundwater collected in the vicinity of semiconductor chip
manufacturing facilities investigated in this study, and these chemicals
are fur ther discuss ed und er that section of the report (Section 4.2)
with add itional information provided in Boxes E & F .
Esters of benzoic acid were found in wastewater samples from the CKL
and KCE facilities in Thailand and the Compeq facility in China.These
chemicals are not of particular environmental concern as they canoccur as natural components of plants (Dudareva et al. 2000), thoughtheir presence in the wastewaters at these three locations suggests
their industrial application and provides further indications that similar
processes are employed at the separate facilities.
The distribution of discharged chemicals through wastewater networks
and treatment fac ilities was i nvestigated at three sites where samples
could be collected from WWTPs. A similar pattern was observed at
these sites for some brominated flame-retardants (PBDEs), phthalates,
and a numbe r of metals. In many cas es,representatives of these
chemical groups were identified in the wastewaters from individual
manufacturers and also in treated wastewater from the WWTP , as well
as sludge and s ediment samples fr om the WWTPs.These patterns of
distribution suggest movement of the chemicals from individual
facilities, through the wastewater network within the Industrial Estate
and,in some cas es, ultimately discharged from the WWTP into the
wider environment.The accumulation of these chemicals in WWTP
sludge and sediment samples further demonstrates the failure of the
wastewate r treatment pr ocesses employed to treat these chemicals
effectively. Disposal of solid wastes such as WWTP sludge containing
these chemicals, whether to landfill, poorly controlled dumps or
incinerators, can provide additional routes of entry into the wider
environment.Some chemicals found in wastewaters from the CKL and KCE
manufacturing facilities (photoinitiator-related chemicals, benzoic acidesters) were not found in treated wastewaters or solid samples fromWWTPs.This pattern suggests that the WWTPs may be able todegrade these chemicals in wastewaters, at least to concentrationsbelow the detection limits of the methods employed in this study.However , if this is the case, such treatment processes are not universallyapplied or effective as these, and other chemicals, were also found in
wastewaters from the Fortune and Compeq facilities being discharged
directly into the environment.
Impacts on groundwater
Although h igh leve ls of metals, particular ly copper , were present in
wastestreams from all sites, very high levels were not generally found in
groundwater samples from the vicinity of these facilities. Only one
groundwater sample contai ned coppe r at a detectable level, 49 µg/l in
sample MI06035 collec ted fr om a water tank within the CKL facility.
Though higher than in all other samples, which had copper levels below
20 µg/l,the leve l at th is location is still within the range typically found
in groundwater (ATSDR 2004).The only groundwater sample collected
in China, adjacent to the Fortune facility, contained a high zinc level,
though th is groundwater did not contain high levels of copper and other
metals that were present in discharged wastewaters. In Thailand, one
sample collected to the east of the Hi-Tech IE (MI06049) containedsomewhat higher levels of nickel (96 µg/l) and zinc (179 µg/l) than
found in the majority of other groundwater samples. Levels of nickeland zi nc in groundwater are typicall y below 10 µg/l and 50 µg/l
respectively (ATSDR 2005b, ATSDR 2005c). One other sample
collec ted clos e to the Hi-Tech IE also contained a slightly elevated level
of zinc (71 µg/l),as did two of the five samples collected close to
Rojana IE (67-71 µg/l). However , none of these samples contained high
levels of coppe r , the most prevalent metal in the wastewaters at these
sites. It is the refore not possib le on the basis of the results fr om the
current study to draw links between metal concentrations in
groundwater and discharges from the PWB manufacturing sector .
52CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION

The somewhat elevated levels in these samples may be due in part to
the activities at the nearby Industrial Estates, though other sources,
including local geology cannot be discounted. Also the use of zinc andcoppe r in water distribution piping can cause levels of these
magnitudes. In all cases, the levels of copper and zinc found would notbe expected to pose a risk to health in drinking water (WHO 2006)
and do not exceed Chinese and Thai national groundwater qualitylevels. However , the one groundwater sample with elevated nickel,
MI06049 collected to the east of the Hi-Tech IE, contained a level (96µg/l) that exceeds both the Thai groundwater quality level of 20 µg/l
and the World Health Organisation (WHO) drinking water guidelinevalue of 70 µg/l (SEPA 1996, PCD 2000, WHO 2006).This potential
contamination deserves further investigation.
All groundwater samples collected from these sites were generally free
of org anic chem icals. No chlorinated organic chemicals were found in
any of the samples, other than two THMs in one sample, most likely as
a result of chlorine based water disinfection. Other than chlorinated
solvents, the org anic chem icals highlighted in the wastewaters from the
PWB manufacturing facilities, such as PBDEs, tend to have very low
mobility in soils and would not be expected to be seen in groundwaters.
4.2 Semiconductor chip manufacture; Philippines &
Mexico
Twenty-one groundwater samples associated with semiconductor chip
manufacture were analysed for metals and VOCs.Twenty of thesesamples were collected from three sites in the Philippines: GatewayBusiness Park IE, On Semicon, and Cavite Processing Zone IE(CEPZA IE).A single groundwater sample was collected from within the Kemet
manufacturing facility in Monterrey, Mexico. VOCs were detected in 12
of the 21 samples (11 of the 20 from the Philippines and in the singlesample fr om Mexico). Quantitative analysis was carried out on 11 of
these samples (the sample from Mexico was not quantified due to themethod of collec tion). A summary of the VOCs identified in the samples
is presented in Table 4.12 and the levels of individual VOCs is presentedin Table 4.13.The metals data for these samples are presented in Tables
4.14-4.15.
4.2.1 Facilities in Philippines
Gateway Business Park IE 
Of the f our samples that were collected from the Gateway Business
Park IE, two (MI06060 & MI06062) contained low levels of VOCs,
none of which were identified in the other two samples (MI06061 &MI06063). All four trihalomethanes (THMs) were detected in sample
MI06060; bromoform and dibromochloromethane at concentrations
1.4 µg/l and 0.7 µg/l respectively; chloroform andbromodichloromethane at below the level of quantification (0.5 µg/l for
each). Sample MI06062, which contained one THM (chloroform) at
trace level, also contained other chlorinated compounds includingchloromethane and chloroethane at concentrations of 0.8 µg/l and 5
µg/l respectively; dichloromethane and 1,1-dichloroethane werepresent, though at trace level. MI06062 was collected from a location
between those of MI06060 & MI06061.
53MI06060
GW
4
(4)
----MI06062
GW
5
(1)
(2)(2)
--MI06068
GW
5
-
-
(1)(3)
1MI06069
GW
1
-
--
(1)
-MI06073
GW
5
-
-
(1)(4)
-MI06074
GW
5
-
-
(1)(4)
-MI06075
GW
4
(1)
-
(1)(2)
-MI06076
GW
4
(4)
----MI06077
GW
4
(4)
----MI06078
GW
4
-
--
(4)
-MI06079
GW
8
(4)
--
(4)
-MI06013
GW
4
(3)
--
(1)
-SAMPLE#
SAMPLE TYPE
LOCATION   
NO. OF VOC’S 
ISOLA TED & 
RELIABLY 
IDENTIFIED
Trihalomethanes
Chlor inated methanes
Chlorinated ethanes
Chlorinated ethenesBis(chlorophenyl)sylfonetable 4.12 :: volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) identified in groundwater (GW) samples from sites involved in the manufacture of
semiconductor chips, Philippines and Mexico.
GATEWAY IE 
PHILIPPINESON SEMICON 
PHILIPPINESKEMET
MEXICOCAVITE PROCESSING ZONE IE PHILIPPINES

54CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
MI06060
1.4
<0.5
<0.5
0.7
-
-
-
--
-
-
---MI06062
-
<0.5
--
0.8
<0.5
5.0
<0.5
-
-
-
---MI06068
-
---
-
-
-
<0.5
-
-
21.3
0.31.6
-MI06069
-
---
-
-
-
--
-
1.4
---MI06073
-
---
-
-
-
0.8
-
1.9
28.9
-
12.8
0.5MI06074
-
---
-
-
-
<0.5
-
0.3
20.0
-
6.40.3SAMPLE#
LOCATION
COMPOUND
Bromoform
ChloroformMethane, bromodichloro-Methane, dibromochloro-
Methane, chloro-
Methane , dichloro-
Ethane, chloro-
Ethane, 1,1-dichloro-Ethane, 1,1,1-trichloro-
Ethene, 1,1-dichloro-
Ethene,1,2-dichloro-, cis-Ethene,1,2-dichloro-, trans-Ethene, trichloro-Ethene, tetrachloro-table 4.13 :: volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) quantified in groundwater samples from sites involved in the manufacture of
semiconductor chips; Gateway Business Park IE and Cavite Processing Zone IE, Philippines. ( - ) - not detected.
GATEWAY IE 
PHILIPPINES
CONCENTRATION,µg/l
TRIHALOMETHANES (THMS)
CHLORINA TED METHAN ES   
CHLORINATED ETHANES   
CHLORINATED ETHANES   ON SEMICON 
PHILIPPINESCAVITE PROCESSING ZONE IE PHILIPPINES

55MI06075
15.4
---
-
-
-
<0.5
-
-
--
3.32.7MI06076
1.4
<0.5
0.81.8
-
-
-
--
-
----MI06077
5.0
1.64.07.7
-
-
-
--
-
----MI06078
-
---
-
-
-
--
19.0
31.9
-
14.5
350MI06079
0.8
0.5
<0.5
0.9
-
-
-
--
0.2
2.8
-
<0.5
0.1CAVITE PROCESSING ZONE IE PHILIPPINES
©GREENPEACE/ROSE
Image shows a chip produced by
INTEL in the Philippines.
Water samples were taken from 
the und erground wells near the
INTEL industrial complex
highlighted in this report.
21 August 2006.

The sample collected in the northern part of the IE near Intel
Philippines (MI06061) contained levels of copper (233 µg/l) and zinc(246 µg/l) higher than typical groundwater levels. All other samplescontained copper below 20 µg/l. Somewhat less elevated levels of zinc(138-144 µg/l) were also present in MI06062 and MI06063, thoughnot in sample MI06060 collected from a location between those ofMI06062 and MI06063. Levels of zinc in groundwater are typicallybelow 50 µg/l (ATSDR 2005c). In addition, all four samples contained
very similar levels of vanadium (65-68 µg/l), above typical background
levels for groundwater .
On Semicon (also know as ‘On Semiconductor’)
Of the six samples (MI06064 – MI06069) collec ted clos e to the On
Semicon fac ility, all but one sample contained elevated levels of zinc,
though levels of other metals may be considered normal for
uncontam inated wate rs.The highest zinc levels were found in samples
collec ted clos est to the facility.To the southwest, MI06067 collected
500m from the facility contained 631 µg/l, with levels dropping to
normal backg round leve ls for the sample furthest from the facility
(MI06068). To the north, a sample collected 100m from the facility
(MI06065) contained the highest level of all samples (852 µg/l),
though a sample collec ted onl y 20m fr om th is location had a somewhat
lower level, 201 µg/l. Levels of zinc in groundwater are typically below
50 µg/l (ATSDR 2005c).
56CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
MI06070
µg/l
-
34
-------
239
----
255MI06071
µg/l
-
52
-------
183
----
20LOCATION
SAMPLE#METAL
Antimony
BariumBerylliumBismuthCadmiumChromiumCobaltCopper
Lead
ManganeseMolybdenum NickelTinVanadiumZinctable 4.15 :: metals quantified in groundwater samples from sites
involved in the manufacture of semiconductor chips; CEPZA IE,
Philippines ( - ) - not detected.
CEPZA IE, PHILIPPINESMI06060
µg/l
---------
44
-
--
65
-MI06061
µg/l
-
7
-----
233
-
23
---
68
246LOCATION
SAMPLE#
METAL
Antimony
Barium
Beryllium
Bismuth
CadmiumChromiumCobaltCopperLeadManganeseMolybdenum NickelTinVanadiumZinctable 4.14 :: metals quantified in groundwater samples from sites
involved in the manufacture of semiconductor chips; Gateway
Business Park IE, On Semicon (Philippines) and Kemet (Mexico).
( - ) - not detected
GATEWAY BUSINESS PARK IE, PHILIPPINES

57MI06072
µg/l
---------
23
----
1770MI06073
µg/l
-
41
-------
66
-----MI06074
µg/l
-
45
-------
63
-----MI06075
µg/l
-
34
-------
-
---
3948MI06076
µg/l
-
71
-----
26
-
73
-
46
--
236MI06077
µg/l
-
71
-------
29
-
20
---MI06078
µg/l
-
52
-----
27
-
16
-
28
---MI06079
µg/l
-
24
-------
-
4054
---
CEPZA IE, PHILIPPINESMI06062
µg/l
-
--------
24
---
66
138MI06063
µg/l
-
6
-----------
67
144MI06064
µg/l
-
22
-----
-
-
383
----
128MI06065
µg/l
-
15
-------
398
----
201MI06066
µg/l
-
--------
305
----
852MI06067
µg/l
-
40
-------
206
----
631MI06068
µg/l
-
68
-------
2410
----
23MI06069
µg/l
-
24
-------
364
----
469MI06013
µg/l
-
71
-------------
GATEWAY BUSINESS PARK IE, PHILIPPINES ON SEMICON, PHILIPPINES KEMET,
MEXICO

No VOCs were found in any of the three samples collected to the north
of On Semicon (MI06064-MI06066), nor in the sample collected tothe southwest, closest to the facility (MI06067). Unexpectedly, themost contaminated sample was that collected furthest from OnSemicon (MI06068), which contained five volatile organic chemicals,namely 1,1-dichloroethane, cis- and trans-isomers of 1,2-dichloroethene, trichloroethene, and bis(chlorophenyl)sulfone.Thissuggests significant groundwater contamination, but arising from a
different facility. A further sample (MI06069), collected closer to the
facility than MI06068, contained only one of these compounds, thetrans-isomer of 1,2-dichloroethene, and at a far lower level that in
MI06068.
Cavite Processing Zon e IE 
Of the 10 groundwater samples from CEPZA IE, 7 contained VOCs. In
contr ast,three samples collec ted ou tside the Industrial Estate, to the
north and nor theast (MI06070-72), did not contain any VOCs.Two
samples (MI06076 & MI06077) collected on the southeast edge of
Indus trial Es tate contai ned onl y THMs, chemicals formed as by-
products of chlorine based water disinfection.
Of the THMs identified in all samples, bromoform was detected in four
samples in the range from 0.8 µg/l (MI06079) to 15.4 µg/l
(MI06075). Chloroform, bromodichloromethane anddibromochloromethane were detected in three samples (MI06076,MI06077 and MI06079), the highest concentrations being found in
sample MI06077, at levels of 1.6 µg/l, 4 µg/l and 7.7 µg/l respectively.
In addition to the THMs, other chlorinated VOCs were found in five
samples, all collected within the Industrial Estate, closest to its centre.
The mos t contam inated samples we re those collected in the northern
(MI06078) and eastern (MI06073 & MI06074) side of the Industrial
Estate.These samples contained a range of chlorinated ethenes
(isome rs of d ichlor oethene, trichloroethene and tetrachloroethene) and
a chlorinated ethane (1,1-dichloroethane), suggestive of localised
industrial inputs, perhaps from spills or leaks from storage tanks or
transfe r ope rations.Two samples collected in the western edge of the
Industrial Estate (MI06075 & MI06079) also contained chlorinated
ethenes, though fewer chemicals were found in these samples, and in
lower concentr ations.The sample from the northern part of the Industrial Estate (MI06078)
contained the highest concentrations of all the chlorinated ethenesidentified, namely: 1,1-dichloroethene (19 µg/l), cis-1,2-dichloroethene(31.9 µg/l), trichloroethene (14.4 µg/l) and tetrachloroethene (350µg/l).The two eastern samples (MI06073 & MI06074) containedsimilar but slightly lower levels of dichloroethene and trichloroethene,but far lower levels of tetrachloroethene (0.3-0.5 µg/l) and 1,1-dichloroethene (0.3-1.9 µg/l). Of these two samples, that collected
closest to the centre of the Industrial Estate (MI06073) contained the
higher levels of all chlorinated ethenes. In addition, both samples fromthe eastern part also contained 1,1-dichloroethane, though at trace
levels in both samples.The distribution pattern of VOCs at this site, andimplications from the use of groundwater as drinking water , are
discussed in Section 4.2.3 below, for all sites.
In add ition to the VOCs, a numbe r of samples contai ned one or more
metals at e levated concentrations. In general, the samples containing
high levels of metals were different to the samples containing
chlor inated ethanes and ethenes. High leve ls of zinc were found in 3
samples; two from locations outside the Industrial Estate to the north
and northeast (MI06070 & MI06072), and one from the southeast
edge of the Indus trial Es tate fur thest from its centre (MI06076).
These samples were free of VOCs, other than the THMs in sample
MI06076. By far the highest zinc level was found in MI06072 (1770µg/l), far higher than background levels in groundwater , which are
typically below 50 µg/l (ATSDR 2005c).The most western sample(MI06079), which did contai n VOCs (THMs and chlorinated ethenes),
also contained nickel (54 µg/l) and molybdenum (40 µg/l) at levels
slightly above typical groundwater background levels.
58CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION

4.2.2 :: Facilities in Mexico; Kemet
A single sample of groundwater MI06013 was collected within the
Kemet facility in Monterrey, Mexico.This sample contained 1,2-dichloroethene and three THMs (chloroform, bromodichloromethane
and dibromochloromethane). All were detected at trace levels, though
the precise levels were not quantified due to the method of collection
for this sample. No metals were present above typical background
levels.
Due to the method of collection and storage of this sample, it is
possible that some VOCs may have been lost from the water sample byevaporation prior to analysis. It is possible that the water at source
contai ns thos e VOCs i dentified abo ve trace leve ls,including 1,2-
dichlor oethene ,and may have contai ned add itional VOCs to those
identified.4.2.3 :: Discussion
Of the four sites investigated in this sector , VOCs were found in one or
more sample collected from each site. At all sites the VOCs identifiedincluding chlorinated chemicals commonly used as industrial solvents
or degreasing agents, in addition to THMs which are commonly found
as by-products of chlorine based water disinfection.
However , only the samples from the CEPZA IE site gave a clear
indication of groundwater contamination arising from site under
investigation.The data for the CEPZA IE in the Philippines clearly
demonstrates contamination of the groundwater with chlorinated VOCs,with the highest degree of contamination centred within the IE.The
distribution patte rn of VOCs i n the samples i ndicates that one or more
facilities with in the es tate, probably in the northern/eastern part, are a
source of chlor inated ethenes and ethanes to the groundwater aquifer .
At the On Semicon site, the distribution pattern of VOCs indicates that
this facility is not the source of the VOCs in the groundwater in the
area; rather another so far unidentified source is likely to exist to the
south of the On Semicon facility.
For two other sites, the situation is less clear again; the Gateway IE
(Philippines) and the Kemet facility (Mexico). VOCs were found in onlyone of the f our samples from the Gateway IE and all at relatively low
levels.While the re is no clear pattern of groundwater contamination,
there may be a source of chlorinated VOCs in the vicinity of the WWTP
from where sample MI06062 was collected. At the Kemet facility, 1,2-
dichloroethene was found in the one sample collected, though it was
not possible to quantify the level of this chemical, nor to speculate on
its origins. As mentioned above, due to the method of collection it is
possib le that some VOCs may have been lost from the water sample by
evaporation prior to analysis.
59

CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
BOX E :: DISINFECTION PRODUCTS -
TRIHALOMETHANES (THMS) 
THMs (trichloromethane or chloroform, tribromomethane or
bromoform, bromodichloromethane and dibromochloromethane) are
formed in drinking water primarily as a result of chlorination oforganic matter present naturally in raw water supplies duringdisinfection.The rate and degree of THM formation increase as a
function of the chlorine and humic acid concentration, temperature, pH
and bromide ion concentration. Chloroform is the most common THMand the principal disinfection by-product in chlorinated drinking water .
In the presence of bromides, brominated THMs are formedpreferentially and chloroform concentrations decrease proportionally.
THMs are not expected to be found in raw water (unless near apollution source) but are usually present in finished chlorinated water .
Although the THMs identified in groundwater samples in the current
investigation are unlikely to be linked directly to industrial activities atthe electronics manufacturing plants under study, the following
background information is provided as their presence is nevertheless of
some toxicological and environmental significance.
Two THMs, chloroform and bromodichloromethane, are established
animal car cinogens (IARC 1999). There are numerous studies on the
effects of the THMs on human health. Several studies (Cantor 1997,
Koivusalo & Vartiainen 1997, Boorman 1999) have suggested that
long-term consumption of chlorinated drinking water may increase the
risk of b ladder cancer and other site-specific neoplasms. A study
(Vinceti et al. 2004) analysing cancer mortality in a residential cohort
from an Italian municipality, where drinking water had high
trihalomethanes content o ver a 22-year period, reported associations
between chlorinated drinking water and cancer risk.The levels of
chlor oform and total THMs r anged from 33.1 g/l to 51.7g/l and from
39.7g/l to 70.0g/l respec tively,depend ing on the time of the
measurement afte r initial chlorination (just after treatment and after
24 hour s).The study concluded that, despite the fact that the increased
rates of some site-spec ific cance rs coul d be due to l ife-style
confounding factors, particularly to smoking, the higher death ratesfrom prostate, breast and ovarian cancer and for melanoma may well
have been related to long-term exposure to THMs in the drinking
water . A recent publication (Tardiff et al. 2006) reviewing last findings
concerning association between adverse reproductive anddevelopmental effects and exposure to disinfection by-products found
no impact of chlorination by-products on the highly controversial
outcome of spontaneous abortion. However , as in the previously
published review on the same subject (Graves et al. 2001), the updated
weight of evidence suggested a positive association with disinfectionby-products exposure and some measures of growth retardation such
as intrauterine growth retardation, small for gestational age, term low
birth weight, and small body length or head circumference. At thesame ti me, in the last update on Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality
by the WHO (2006), it is stated that exposure to one of the THMs
(bromodichloromethane) has been linked to a possible increase inreproductive effects (increased risk for spontaneous abortion or
stillbirth).
Chloroform
IARC has classified chloroform as possibly carcinogenic to humans
(Group 2B) (IARC 1999).The most universally observed toxic effect
of chloroform is damage to the centrilobular region of the liver .Theseverity of these effects per unit dose administered depends on the
species and pathway by which the chloroform enters the body (WHO
2006).Toxic effects in human following ingestion or inhalation of
substantial dos es include hallucinations and distorted perceptions,
nausea, vomiting, and other unspecified gastrointestinal effects (Lewis
2004). Apart from being the principal THM in drinking water ,
chloroform has also been used in a range of industrial applications,
including as a solvent, a heat transfer medium in fire extinguishers andan intermediate in the preparation of dyes and pesticides.The currentextent of any of these recorded uses is unclear .

Chlorinated ethenes and ethanes are known to have been used as
solvents in the manufacture of semiconductor chips. Contamination ofgroundwater with these chemicals has previously been reported in thevicinity of facilities that used them as solvents, including those involvedin the manufacture of materials for semiconductor chips, in a numberof countries (Williams 2004). Previous investigations of contaminationat two semiconductor chip manufacturing sites, in Japan and Thailand,reported high levels of two of the chemicals found in this study;
trichloroethene (also known as trichloroethylene) and 1,2-
dichloroethene (ERTC 2001, Williams 2004). At the site in northernThailand, within the Northern Region Industrial Estate in Lamphun
Province, groundwater was found to contain very high levels of bothtrichloroethene and 1,2-dichloroethene within a factory perimeter , both
at far higher levels than those found in this study, over 100 mg/l (1mg/l= 1000 µg/l).The levels in the groundwater were found to vary greatlywith d epth and over short distances from the source of contamination
(ERTC 2001). This prev ious repor t suggests that far higher levels of
those VOCs i dentified at the CEPZA IE site may be present in the
groundwater aquifer closer to the source or sources of these chemicals,
though th is coul d not be conf irmed as it was not possib le to collec t
samples with in the pe rimeters of factories at the CEPZA IE.
There is clearly a need for further detailed investigations of chlorinated
VOCs in groundwater at the chip manufacturing sites to find the fullextent of the contamination of the aquifers, particularly at the CEPZA
IE site.
61Bromoform
In an NTP bioassay, bromoform induced a small increase in
relatively rare tumours of the large intestine in rats of both sexes,
but did not induce tumours in mice. Data from a variety of assays on
the genotoxicity of bromoform are equivocal. IARC has classifiedbromoform in Group 3 (not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity to
humans). Studies in animals, combined with limited observations in
humans, indicate that the principal adverse health effects associatedwith inhalation or oral exposure to bromoform are central nervous
system depression and liver and kidney damage (ATSDR 2005a).
Dibromochloromethane (DBCM)
IARC has classified DBCM in Group 3 (not classifiable as to its
carcinogenicity to humans). In an NTP bioassay, DBCM induced
hepatic tumours in female and possibly in male mice (WHO 2006).
Studies in animals, combined with limited observations in humans,indicate that the principal adverse health effects associated with
inhalation or oral exposure to dibromochloromethane are central
nervous system depression and liver and kidney damage (ATSDR2005a)
Bromodichloromethan e (BDCM)
IARC has classif ied BDCM i n Group 2B (possibly carcinogenic to
humans). BDCM gave both positive and negative results in a variety of in vitro and in vivo genotoxicity assays. In an NTP bioassay,BDCM induced renal adenomas and adenocarcinomas in both 
sexes of rats and male mice, rare tumours of the large intestine(adenomatous polyps and adenocarcinomas) in both sexes of ratsand hepatocellular adenomas and adenocarcinomas in female mice.Exposure to BDCM has also been linked to a possible increase in
reproductive effects (increased risk for spontaneous abortion or
stillbirth) (WHO 2006).

CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
BOX F :: CHLORINATED SOLVENTS AND OTHER
CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS
The widespread use and storage of chlorinated solvents has led to
releases of these chemicals into the environment, including to
groundwaters used as sources of drinking water .The main applications
of chlorinated solvents include dry cleaning operations, manufacture of
fluorocarbons, use as solvents for fats, oils, waxes and resins, as a
degreasing agents, in organic synthesis, during cleaning of printedcircuit boards, in polymer manufacture and in paint removers, as well
as many others. Many of these chemicals are considered to be
potentially carcinogenic to humans. Most can affect the central
nervous system, liver , and kidneys and, following high exposures, cande-fat the skin (possibly causing dermatitis) and are irritating to the
eyes and mucous membranes. Some can be absorbed through intactskin, and several can cause rapid and erratic heartbeats.
Dichlor omethane is widely used as a solvent. It is listed by the
International Agency for Research of Cancer (IARC) in Group 2B
(possib ly carcinogenic to humans). It causes central nervous system
(CNS) depression, liver and kidney damage, and can cause elevated
blood carbo xyhemog lobin (also caus ed by e xposure to carbon
mono xide). Contact of the liquid with skin or eyes causes painful
irritation and possible burns. Dichloromethane has been found in
surface water samples at concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 743 µg/l.Levels are usually higher in groundwater because volatilization isrestricted; concentrations as high as 3600 µg/l have been reported insome contaminated aquifers. Mean concentrations in drinking waterare generally below 1 µg/l (WHO 2006).
Trichlor omethane (Chloroform) has been used in industrial processes
(e.g. as a solvent), although its pres ence i n drinking water is usually
due to chlorine-based disinfection (see THMs box).Tetrachloromethane (carbon tetrachloride) is a confirmed carcinogen
with experimental carcinogenic, neoplastigenic, and tumorigenic data
(listed in Group 2B by IARC). It is toxic to humans by ingestion,
subcutaneous and intravenous routes, and is mildly toxic by inhalation.Experimental data showed that carbon tetrachloride has teratogenic
and reproductive effects, and can damage the liver , kidney and lungs
(Lewis 2004). Because of its harmful and ozone depleting effects,
many uses are now banned and it is only used in some industrial
applications. Historically it was used in the production ofchlorofluorocarbon (CFC) refrigerants (Budavari et al. 1986, WHO
2006) but this use of carbon tetrachloride was stopped in 1996 when
CFC-11 and CFC-12 were themselves banned (UNEP 1997).Concentrations of tetrachloromethane found in drinking water are
generally less than 5 µg/l (WHO).
1,1 - Dichloroethane is a highly flammable chemical.There are limited
data showing that it can be present at concentrations of up to 10µg/lin drinking water (WHO 2006). However , because of the widespread
use and disposal of this chemical, its occurrence in groundwater may
still be on the increase in some regions. It is not listed as a suspectcarcinogen. It is a CNS depressant, but seems to be less likely than
other chlorinated solvents to cause liver or kidney damage.
1,2 - Dichloroethen eexists in a cis- and a trans- forms.The cis- form
is more frequently found as a water contaminant. Both cis- and trans-
isomers are CNS depressants, and can irritate skin, eyes, or mucousmembranes.The presence of these two isomers, which are metabolites
of other unsaturated halogenated hydrocarbons in wastewater and
anaerobic groundwater , may indicate the simultaneous presence of
more toxic organochlorine chemicals, such as vinyl chloride.
Accordingly, their presence indicates that more intensive monitoringshould be conducted (WHO 2006).These chemicals have been found in
drinking water supplies derived from groundwater at levels up to 120
µg/l.

1,1 - Dichloroethene is a central nervous system depressant and may
cause liver and kidney toxicity in occupationally exposed humans. Itcauses liver and kidney damage in laboratory animals. 1,1-
Dichloroethene has been detected in finished drinking water taken fromgroundwater sources at median concentrations of 0.28–1.2 µg/l and inpublic drinking water supplies at concentrations ranging from 0.2 to
0.5 µg/l (WHO 2006).
1,1,1 - Trichloroethane is widely used as a cleaning solvent for
electrical equipment, and as a solvent for adhesives and coatings.
Exposure to high concentrations can lead to hepatic steatosis (fattyliver) in both humans and laboratory animals.Toxic effects in
laboratory animals included reduced liver weight and changes in the
kidney consistent with hyaline droplet neuropathy.This solvent has beenfound in only a small proportion of surface waters and groundwaters,
usually at concentrations of less than 20 µg/l; higher concentrations
(up to 150 µg/l) have been observed in a few instances (WHO 2006).
Trichloroethene is used primarily in metal degreasing. IARC classified
trichlor oethene as Gr oup 2A (pr obably carcinogenic to humans) based
on suff icient wei ght of ev idence of carcinogenicity in animals with
suppor ting human data. It can cause CNS depression, can affect
kidneys, liver , and lungs, and can cause rapid and irregular heartbeat,
leading to death in extreme cases. Exposure can cause skin, eye, and
mucous membrane irritation. Poor handling, as well as improperdisposal of trichloroethene in landfills, have been the main causes of
groundwater contamination. It is expected that exposure to
trichloroethene from air will be greater than that from food ordrinking water , unless the drinking water contains trichloroethene at
levels abo ve abou t 10 µg/l (WHO 2006).Tetrachloroethene is widespread in the environment and is found in
trace amounts in water , aquatic organisms, air , foodstuffs and human
tissue.The highest environmental levels of tetrachloroethene are found
in the commercial dry cleaning and metal degreasing industries.Emissions can sometimes lead to high concentrations in groundwater .
Tetrachloroethene in anaerobic groundwater may degrade to more
toxic compounds, including vinyl chloride. It is not classified as a
carcinogen. It can cause depression of the CNS, and cause irritation of
the skin, eyes, and upper respiratory tract. Very high exposure cancause death. Concentrations in drinking water are generally below 3
µg/l, although much higher concentrations have been detected in well
water (23 mg/l) and in contaminated groundwater (1 mg/l) (WHO2006).

The WHO and USEPA guidance values for THMs and maximum
contaminant levels for chlorinated VOCs in drinking water arepresented in Tables 4.16 and 4.17 respectively. None of the THMsdetected in the samples from this study exceeded WHO and USEPAlevels for drinking water , though the USEPA does set a contaminantlevel goal for bromoform and bromodichloromethane as zero (WHO2006, USEPA 2006).
In contrast, several chlorinated ethenes that were found in the samples
collected from CEPZA IE site exceeded WHO and/or USEPA levels(WHO 2006, USEPA 2006). Concentrations of trichloroethene wereabove USEPA levels in three samples MI06073 (2.5 times higher),MI06074 (abou t 1.3 ti mes h igher) and MI06078 (2.9 times higher).
The concentration of 1,1-dichloroethene exceeded the USEPA level by
2.5 times in one sample (MI06078). However , the most significantcontam ination was d etected for tetrachloroethene in this same sample,
which exceeded both the WHO guidance value by almost 9 times, and
USEPA maximum contaminant level by 70 times.
64CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
300
100
100
60
n/an/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
80n/a
0
60
0
n/aTHM
Chlor oform
Bromoform
Dibromochloromethane
Bromod ichlor omethane
Total THMs (TTHMs)table 4.16 :: guidance values and maximum contaminant levels for THMs in drinking water (WHO 2006, USEPA 2006)
WHO GUIDANCE
VALUE,µg/lUSEPA MAXIMU M CON TAMINANT
LEVEL, µg/lUSEPA MAXIMU M CON TAMINANT
LEVEL GOAL, µg/l
30
305050204020n/a
7
70
100
555VOC
1,1-Dichlor oethane
1,1-Dichlor oethene
cis-1,2-Dichloroethene
trans-1,2-Dichloroethene
Dichlor omethane
Tetrachloroethene
Trichloroethenetable 4.17 :: guidance values and maximum contaminant levels for chlorinated VOCs in drinking water (WHO 2006, USEPA 2006)
WHO GUIDANCE VALUE,µg/l USEPA MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL, µg/l

Many of the compounds that were detected in the samples of
groundwater can affect the central nervous system, liver , and kidneys. Anumber of health studies of workers involved in the manufacture ofelectronics, including semiconductor materials and chips, havehighlighted elevated incidence of certain diseases amongst workers (Zhu1998, Brumfiel 2004, LaDou 2006), particularly some forms of cancersincluding cancer of the brain, central nervous system and kidney,melanoma of the skin, pancreatic cancer , and cancer of lymphatic and
hematopoietic tissue (Clapp 2006). Due to certain limitations in the
data available, some studies were not able to draw direct links betweenthose diseases with elevated incidences and specific work activities or
exposure to specific chemicals. However , the study conducted in Chinaamong workers of electronics and metal sectors of the industry with
previous excellent health has clearly linked allergic skin diseases andhepatitis with occupational exposure to the chlorinated solventtrichloroethene (Zhu 1998). More information on THMs and chlorinated
solvents is pres ented i n Box E and Bo x F respec tively.
In add ition to VOC contam ination, elevated levels of metals were found
at all of the sites i n the Philippines, primarily zinc. No elevated metal
levels were found in the sample from Kemet, Mexico. At the On Semicon
site,the distribution of high zinc levels suggest that On Semicon is
contributing to elevated levels of zinc in the groundwater at this site. A
sample collected 100m to the north of the facility (MI06065) containedthe highest level of all samples (852 µg/l), more than ten times typical
background levels of less than 50 µg/l (ATSDR 2005c).
High levels of zinc and other metals were also present in some sample
associated with the Gateway IE and CEPZA IE sites, though the
distribution patterns do not suggest impacts from facilities within these
Industrial Estates on groundwater metal levels. At the CEPZA IE site,
all samples that contained elevated concentrations were those collected
outside, or on the edges of the Industrial Estate. No elevated levels ofmetals were found in any of the samples collected within the centre of
the Industrial Estate, i.e. those samples which did show significant VOC
contamination, as discussed above. At the Gateway IE site, the zinclevels were lower and there was no clear distribution pattern. One
sample contained an elevated copper level, the highest level for all
samples in this sector (233 µg/l), but this could be a result of the use ofplumbi ng materials containing copper , which are able to cause such
water levels (WHO 2006).The almost identical levels of vanadium in all
four samples from this site suggests that the higher than normalbackground levels of vanadium in these samples is due to an elevatedbackground level of vanadium in this area.
For all sites, the elevated levels of metals found were below levels
generally accepted to be a risk to human health (WHO 2006), though
collectively they do indicate inputs to the groundwater aquifers sampled.Any on going inputs are likely to result in increasing levels over time.4.3 :: COMPONENT ASSEMBLY; MEXICO
4.3.1 :: Facilities in Mexico
A total of 15 samples associated with component assembly were
collected from two areas in Mexico,Tijuana and Guadalajara. Samplesincluded 13 groundwater samples and 2 wastewater samples. VOCs were
detected in 3 of the 13 groundwater samples collected and in both
wastewater samples. A list of organic compounds identified in the
wastewater samples, and the quantitative results for VOCs analysis are
presented in Tables 4.18 and 4.19 respectively. Results for metal
analysis of these samples are presented in Tables 4.20 and 4.21.
Tijuana
VOCs we re detected in two of the four groundwater samples collected
from the two sites in Tijuana, though in both cases only THMs, rather
than chlorinated industrial solvents, were found. Sample MI06081,collec ted fr om an open well near the Sanyo Video facility, contained only
chloroform and then only at trace level.This groundwater was the only
sample with any elevated metal levels for groundwater , containing anickel concentration of 150 µg/l. Sample MI06083 from a pumping
station near the Sony facility contained four THMs – bromoform,
chloroform, bromodichloromethane and dibromochloromethane – atconcentrations in the range 0.6-1.3 µg/l.
Guadalajara
9 groundwater samples and 2 wastewater samples were collected
around the Guadalajara area. Among these, VOCs were detected only inone groundwater sample, MI06087, collected 2 km northeast of the
Flextronics IE. Once again, this sample contained only THMs –chloroform, bromodichloromethane, and dibromochloromethane at
concentrations 6.3 µg/l, 2.9 µg/l and 1.5 µg/l respectively. Bromoformwas present at trace level only.
Groundwater (MI06012) colleted from a tap within the Flextronics
facility contained copper at a concentration (226 µg/l) above typical
background level. Elevated metal concentrations were also found in two
samples collected to the northeast of the Flextronics IE. One sample
(MI06086) collec ted 0.5 km fr om the es tate contained high
concentrations of zinc (492 µg/l) and nickel (129 µg/l). A second
sample (MI06087) collected slightly further away (2 km to the
northeas t) contained only nickel, at a slightly lower level (106 µg/l). In
contrast, high metal levels were not found in two further groundwater
samples collected at the entrance of the estate (MI06085), and 300 m
north of the es tate (MI06084).
At a d ifferent site, a groundwater sample collected 2 km east of the
Solec tron fac ility (MI06089) contained a similarly elevated level of zinc
(579 µg/l), as well as somewhat higher lead level than found in all other
samples (59 µg/l). No VOCs were detected in this sample. No other
groundwater samples we re collected within the vicinity of this site.
65
© GREENPEACEGreenpeace
labelling a water
sample from a well
near the Sanyo
plant in Tijuana.
June 2006.

66CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
MI06091
WW
68
14 (21%)
-
(1)(1)
111
1
-
251MI06092
WW
32
9 (28%)
(2)
1
(1)
---
-
1
--
4LOCATION
SAMPLE#
SAMPLE TYPE
No. of organic compounds isolated 
No. reliably identified (% of total)PBDEsBenzene, 1,4-dichloro-TrihalomethanesDEHPPhenolPhenol, nonyl-, mix isomers
Phenoxyethanol, nonyl-
Diphenyl etherAlcohols Fatty ac ids
Aliphatic hydr ocarbonstable 4.18 :: organic chemicals identified in wastewater (WW) samples from the IBM Site, Guadalajara, Mexico. The number of
compounds reliably identified is presented for each group; (#) - signifies compounds identified at trace levels using a selective SIM
method; ( - ) – not detected 
IBM SITE, GUADALAJARA
MI06081
GW
-
<0.5
--Bromoform
Chloroform
Methane, bromodichloro-
Methane, dibromochloro-MI06083
GW
0.6
1.3
0.80.9MI06087
GW
<0.5
6.3
2.91.5MI06091
WW
-
<0.5
--MI06092
WW
-
<0.5
--LOCATION
SAMPLE#
SAMPLE TYPE
COMPOUNDS
THMStable 4.19 :: Volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) quantified in groundwater (GW) samples from Tijuana and wastewater (WW) samples
from Guadalajara, Mexico. ( - ) - not detected.
CONCENTRATION,µg/lTIJUANA GUADALAJARA

Both wastewater samples from the IBM site (MI06091 & MI06092)
contained only one VOC, the THM chloroform, and even then at onlytrace levels. However , a range of extractable organic compounds wasalso detected in both samples.The wastewater that included dischargefrom the wastewater treatment plant (MI06091) containeddiethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP), phenol, a mixture of nonylphenol (NP)isomers, nonylphenoxyethanol, octanol and decanol, several fatty acids,and a trace amount of dichlorobenzene.The second wastewater sample
from the IBM site, MI06092, contained (other than dichlorobenzene)
different organic compounds to those detected in sample MI06091,namely two PBDEs at trace levels (BDE-47 and BDE-99), diphenyl
ether and several aliphatic hydrocarbons. Neither wastewater containedhigh metal concentrations.
67
© GPI
Sanm ina
MI06011
GW
µg/l
-
132
-
----
-
-
362
-
42
---Flextronics
MI06012
GW
µg/l
-
9
-----
226
---
28
---Flextronics IE
MI06084
GW
µg/l
-------
-
------
35Flextronics IE
MI06085
GW
µg/l
-------
-
-------Flextronics IE
MI06086
GW
µg/l
-------
-
---
129
--
492Flextronics IE
MI06087
GW
µg/l
-
18
-----
-
---
106
---Jabil
MI06088
GW
µg/l
-
21
-----
29
------
66Solectron
MI06089
GW
µg/l
-
13
-----
38
59
-----
579HP
MI06090
GW
µg/l
-
40
-----
-
-
36
-
30
---
AREA
LOCATIONSAMPLE#SAMPLE TYPEMET AL
Antimony
Barium
BerylliumBismuthCadmiumChromiumCobalt
Copper
LeadManganeseMolybdenum NickelTinVanadiumZinctable 4.20 :: metals quantified in groundwater (GW) samples from sites in Guadalajara, Mexico. ( - ) - not detected.
GUAD ALAJ ARA
© GREENPEACEWater sample collected
from a wastewater
channel on the IBM site
in Guadalajara, Mexico.
June 2006.

4.3.2 :: Discussion
The majority of groundwater samples that were collected close to the
assembly facilities in both Tijuana and Guadalajara did not show any
significant level of contamination with VOCs, containing only THMs at
trace levels. Just under half of the samples, 5 out of 13, did contain
high leve ls of some metals, principally nickel and zinc.
In Tijuana, water from one well (MI06081) adjacent to the Sanyo
Video facility contained nickel at a level of concern as the water from
this well is used for drinking.The concentration of nickel in this samplewas 150 µg/l, the highest value among all groundwater samples from
all sites in all countries considered in this study and more than two
times higher than the WHO guideline value of 70 µg/l for nickel indrinking water . For comparison, concentrations of nickel in groundwater
are normally less than 10 µg/l (ATSDR 2005b, WHO 2006).Three samples associated with the Flextronics IE contained high metal
concentrations. One sample collected from a tap within the FlextronicsIE contained a high copper level (226 µg/l), though this level of copperdoes not pose a risk to health. Elevated levels of nickel, both above the
WHO guideline value, were also detected in two more groundwater
samples collected close to the Flextronics IE (MI06086 & MI06087),both collected to the northeast of the estate (129 and 106 µg/l).The
sample with the highest nickel level (MI06086) also contained zinc at
a level (492 µg/l) almost ten times levels typically found ingroundwater , which are generally below 50 µg/l (ATSDR 2005c). A
similar level of zinc was also present in groundwater close to the
Solectron facility (MI06089, 579 µg/l).
Of these levels, the samples with elevated nickel levels are of greatest
concern. Exposure to high concentrations of nickel can results in toxiceffects,and some n ickel compounds are carcinogenic (ATSDR 2005b,
IARC 1990). More information on the uses and effects of nickel and
zinc is given in Box C. Nickel and zinc, in water soluble forms, can bereasonab ly mobi le in the environment and have the potential to leach
into groundwater . It is not possible to pinpoint the exact sources of
nickel and zinc to the groundwater samples that contain elevated levels,but their pr oximity to the assembly facilities suggest that releases from
68CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
Sanyo
MI06080
GW
µg/l
-
183
-------
963
-
41
---Sanyo
MI06081
GW
µg/l
-
153
-
------
128
-
150
--
17Sanyo
MI06082
GW
µg/l
-
221
-
------
1125
-
21
--
32Sony
MI06083
GW
µg/l
-
59
-
------------Sony
MI06083
GW
µg/l
-
59
-
------------IBM Site
MI06091
WW
µg/l
-
53
-
----
15
-
50
-
31
--
96IBM Site
MI06092
WW
µg/l
-
77
-
----
17
-
962
-
35
--
119
AREA
LOCATIONSAMPLE#SAMPLE TYPEMETAL
Antimony
BariumBerylliumBismuthCadmiumChromiumCobalt
Coppe r
LeadManganese
Molybdenum 
Nickel
Tin
VanadiumZinctable 4.21 :: metals quantified in groundwater (GW) samples from Tijuana and wastewater (WW) samples from Guadalajara, Mexico.
( - ) - not detected.
TIJUANA GUADALAJARA

these facilities may be contributing to the elevated levels found.
Additional sources cannot be discounted, however , including the use of plumbing materials that can contain copper , nickel of zinc, which are able to cause elevated drinking water levels (WHO 2006).It was not possible to ascertain whether such materials were present at these locations.
The THMs detected in some groundwater samples from both Tijuana
and Guadalajara sites are most certainly be due to the use of chlorine-
based disinfectant materials. It was known from the local people thatsuch materials are applied directly to some wells in the Guadalajara
area investigated.The concentrations of THMs in all samples were
below WHO g uideline values.
In addition to the groundwater samples, two wastewater samples
(MI06091 & MI06092) we re collec ted from one site in Guadalajara,
Mexico where IBM was involved in the assembly of PCs and Thinkpad
computers at the time of sampling.The levels of metals in thesesamples i n gene ral were not elevated, though they did contain several
classes of organic compounds of environmental concern.
Amon g the compounds re liably identified in the sample of treated
wastewater MI06091 collected from an open channel within the IBM
site was nonylpheno xyethanol, a member of a group of chemicals
known as nonylphenol etho xylates (NPEs). Also identified were a
mixture of nonylphenol isomers, known degradation products of NPEs.
NPs are pe rsistent, bioaccumulative and toxic to aquatic life (OSPAR
2001). Phenol, a parent compound, was also d etected in this sample. It
is difficult to specify the precise source of these chemicals in this
treated was tewater sample as NPEs have been used in various
industrial and consume r appl ications (OSPAR 2001), though their
principle uses are as surfactants and emulsifiers.The use of
nonylphenol derivatives as antioxidants in some plastics has also been
repor ted (Guenthe r et al. 2002). Numerous studies (Jobling et al.
1995, 1996, 2002,Thomas & Dong 2006, Razia et al. 2006) confirm
that degradation products of NPEs, including nonylphenol, possess the
ability to m imic natural hormones by interacting with the estrogen
receptors.Toxic effects of nonylphenol to human health have also been
reported (Chitra et al. 2002, Adeoya-Osiguwa et al. 2003, Harreus et
al.2002). More i nformation on NPEs, NPs and related compounds is
presented in Box G.The wastewater sample MI06091 also contained a phthalate ester ,
diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP), one of the most frequently detectedenvironmental pollutants (Peijnenburg & Struijs 2006) and for whichtoxic effects to reproductive development in mammals, have beenconfirmed (Swan et al. 2005).The main use of DEHP is as aplasticizer in various plastics including PVC. Plasticizers are notchemically bound to plastics and able to leach (Loff et al. 2000).Therefore, waste streams containing DEHP are frequently reported
and, if discharged into natural watercourses with industrial or sewage
effluents, may exert a deleterious impact on aquatic life (Forget-Lerayet al. 2005). See more information on DEHP and other plasticizers in
Box B.
The second wastewater sample MI06092 was also collected within the
IBM site but from a different open channel to that from which sample
MI06091 was tak en.It is unkno wn if th is was tewate r had been treated
within the site.Two congeners of brominated flame-retardants PBDEs
were detected in this sample. As was discussed in previous sections of
the repor t (see 4.1.3 and Bo x A) PBDEs are to xic, persistent and
bioaccumulative chemicals. Diphenyl ether , also reliably identified in
this sample, is the parent molecule of PBDEs. It has various industrial
uses such as a h igh bo iling solvent to purify pharmaceuticals, as a
starting material for the preparation of heat transfer fluid, speciality
surfactants, and blowing agents.
69

CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
BOX G :: SURFACTANTS AND RELATED
COMPOUNDS
Nonylphenol (NP) is a non-halogenated chemical, commonly found as
an isomeric mixture, manufactured almost exclusively to producenonylphenol ethoxylates (NPEs), a group of non-ionic surfactants.Once released to the environment, NPEs can degrade back tononylphenol, which is persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic to aquaticlife. NPEs have been used as surfactants, emulsifiers, dispersants
and/or wetting agents in a variety of industrial and consumer
applications (OSPAR 2001). Nonylphenol derivatives are reportedlyalso used as antioxidants in some plastics (Guenther et al.2002).
As a result of their widespread use, nonylphenol and its derivatives
have become wi dely distributed in fresh and marine waters,
accumulati ng in particular in sediments. Research into levels in wildlife
remains very limited, although there have been reports of significant
levels in fish and aquatic birds do wnstream from sites of manufacture
and/or use of NPEs. Nonylphenol is known to accumulate in the
tissues of fish and other organisms, and to biomagnify through the food
chain (OSP AR 2001). Nonylphenol resi dues have recently been
reported in house dust and indoor air (Butte and Heinzow 2002, Rudel
et al.2003, Saito et al.2004), possib ly relating to use in consumer
products. NP has also been detected in samples of human umbilical
cord b lood (Tan and Mohd 2003).The main hazards associated with NPEs result from their partial
degradation to shorter-chain ethoxylates and to the parent
nonylphenol, both of which are toxic to aquatic organisms and tohigher organisms through secondary poisoning (i.e. resulting from theaccumulation through the food chain).The most widely recognisedeffects are undoubtedly oestrogenic activity, i.e. the ability ofnonyphenol to mimic natural oestrogen hormones, leading to alteredsexual development in some organisms, most notably the feminisation
of fish (Jobling et al.1995, 1996, 2002). Hazards to human health
remain unclear , although recent studies have highlighted concernsdirectly relevant to humans. For example, Chitra et al.(2002) and
Adeoya-Osiguwa et al.(2003) describe effects on mammalian spermfunction, while DNA damage in human lymphocytes has also recently
been documented (Harreus et al.2002).
Nonylphenol has been included as a “priority hazardous substance”
under the EU Water Framework Directive, such that action to preventreleases to water within 20 years will be required throughout Europe
(EU 2001). It is still included into Annex 2 List of Chemicals for
Priority Action of the OSPAR Strategy with regard to HazardousSubstances (OSPAR 2006). Moreover , according to Directive
2003/53/EC, as of January 2005 products containing greater than
0.1% NP or NPEs may no longer be placed on the market withinEurope, with some minor exceptions principally for “closed-loop”
industrial systems (EU 2003b).

Additionally, both wastewater samples contained trace amounts 
of chloroform and 1,4-dichlorobenzene. It is unknown if thesewastewaters originally contained any other volatile organic compounds(VOCs) as they flow through the open channels within the site and anyVOCs, if present, might quickly evaporate.
In general, the wastewater from a channel originating from the IBM
Site in Guadalajara is a source of contamination by persistent organic
compounds such as PBDEs, nonylphenols (NPs), and phthalates which
could be linked to the electronics manufacture at this site.This wouldappear to contradict the ‘Supplier Conduct Principles Guidelines’ of
IBM that states that suppliers should operate in a manner that is
protective of the en vironment. (IBM 2004).Though groundwater
samples collec ted ar ound the Tijuana and Guadalajara sites did not
show any significant contamination by organic compounds that could be
linked to the ass embly of PCs and other electronic devices, high
concentr ations of some metals (principally nickel and zinc) in
groundwater sources close to a number of facilities suggest that 
their ac tivities may be i mpac ting groundwater aquifers. For those
groundwater sources that contain levels of nickel above acceptable safe
drinking water levels, the consumption of the water from these wells for
drinking purposes should be discontinued.
71
© GREENPEACE
A farmer sitting by the well from
which the local commun ities pump
water for their homes. Their homes
are near the Compeq F actory, one of
the electronics facilities in the
Guan gdong Province, China.
October 2006.

72CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
5 :: Conclusions
Although this study is not an exhaustive investigation into
environmental impacts resulting from the manufacture of computers and their peripheral equipment (and was not intended to be), the results nonetheless highlight releases of hazardous chemicalswithin each of the three sectors investigated; printed wiring board(PWB) manufacture, semiconductor chip manufacture and component assembly.
For many of the locations investigated this study demonstrates
discharges to and/or contamination of the immediate environmentsaround manufacturing facilities with a range of hazardous chemicals
used to form the product or in the manufacturing processes employed.
Within each s ector,some similar patterns of contamination were seen
at the sites of d ifferent facilities. It was not possible to collect samples
from all waste streams generated by each facility and therefore
additional chem ical re leases to the en vironment may be occurring
undetected, either intentionally or as fugitive releases. Further 
research would be necessary to identify and quantify the full
environmental i mpac t of each sector , with the full cooperation of 
the manufac turing facilities.
Where wastewaters and associated samples could be collected, from
PWB manufacturers and one assembly site, analysis showed a wide
range of chemicals being discharged, many with known toxiccharacteristics and some of which are environmentally persistent.For some of the chemicals identified, such as the photoinitiators-related
chemicals used in PWB manufacture, very little information is
available on their possible impacts on human health and theenvironment, presumably largely as a result of rapidly changing
manufacturing processes and the chemicals employed. Furthermore, a
large proportion of the compounds isolated from these samples simply
could not be identified and therefore their properties and potential
impacts remain unknown. It was not possible to collect samples ofwastewaters from the semiconductor facilities and therefore no
conclusions can be drawn on potential impacts from such wastestreams
from the facilities at the sites investigated. However , contamination ofgroundwater aquifers with toxic chlorinated chemicals, many of 
which have known uses as industrial solvents, was detected at some 
of the sites.Some chemicals incorporated into electrical and electronic devices
during manufacture were common to samples collected from manysites. Most noteworthy were PBDEs, a group of brominated chemicalswidely used as flame retardants, and phthalate esters (phthalates),chemicals used in a wide range processes and materials though mostcommonly as plasticisers (softeners) in plastics.These two chemicalgroups both contain chemicals that are known to be toxic, and someare also persistent in the environment; certain PBDEs are also known
to bioaccumulate (build up in animals and humans). PBDEs were
particularly widespread, being present in wastewaters and othersamples from the majority of sites investigated. Discharged wastewater
from one PWB manufacturing facility (EETH,Thailand) also containedchlorinated VOCs, a group of chemicals widely used as solvents and
more commonly reported as contaminants in groundwater samplescollected near semiconductor chip manufacturing facilities.
Wastewaters from PWB facilities also commonly contained high levels
of metals, particularly copper , nickel and zinc. Soluble copper
compounds are wi dely used in PWB manufacture, particularly where
the electroless copper process is used. From information available at
the time of writing, this still appears to be the case at the EETH
facility in Thailand, where the highest concentrations of copper in all
sampled wastewaters was found, exceeding the maximum allowed level
for industrial effluents in Thailand.The presence of soluble copper inwastewaters can have serious environmental impacts, as many aquatic
organisms are highly sensitive to soluble copper even at very low doses.High leve ls were also f ound i n was tewate rs discharged to waterways
from both facilities in China.
Where wastewaters undergo treatment prior to discharge to the wider
environment, the processes typically employed are simply unable to deal
with many of the hazardous chemicals identified in the wastewaters,
such as the persistent brominated flame-retardants and toxic metals.At best these treatment processes simply scavenge such chemicals from
wastewaters only to generate an additional contaminated wastestream
in the form of sludges, as this study has demonstrated for some PWBmanufac turers where it was possible to collect samples throughout
wastewater disposal networks.
Wastewate r discharged from the IBM site in Guadalajara, Mexico
contained other hazardous compounds not found at other sites. Of
particular concern is the presence of a nonylphenol ethoxylate (NPE)
and a r ange nonylphenols (NPs), degradation products NPE. NPs are
persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic chemicals that are commonly
used as surfactants.These chemicals are prohibited from marketing 
and us e throughou t Europe because of the health and environmental
concerns they present.

Contamination of groundwater aquifers with toxic chlorinated 
volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) and toxic metals including nickel was identified at a number of sites, particularly in the vicinity ofsemiconductor manufacturers. Contamination of groundwater is ofparticular concern as in many places local communities use thisresource for drinking water . At one Industrial Estate in the Philippines(CEPZA IE) housing a number of semiconductor chips manufacturingfacilities, safe drinking water levels set by the WHO and/or USEPA
levels were exceeded for chlorinated VOCs, a group of chemicals some
of which have been reported to be used as solvents in the manufactureof semiconductor chips. One sample from this site contained three
VOCs at levels above one or more of these limits, withtetrachloroethene at a level 9 times the WHO guidance value and 70
times the USEPA maximum contaminant level.The limited scope of thisstudy inevitably means that hotspots of higher contamination levels,such as may e xist in regions of aquifers directly beneath storage tanks
or othe r industrial fac ilities, may have gone undetected.
High leve ls of metals, particular ly copper , nickel and zinc were also
found in some groundwaters. At two sites, one involved in PWB
manufacture (Hi-Tech,Thailand) and one in component assembly
(Sany o Video, Mexico), levels of nickel were above the WHO drinking
water guideline value, and that from Thailand exceeded the Thai
groundwater quality level.
Although it is not possible to pinpoint the exact source or sources of
the contaminants found in groundwater in the vicinity of these facilities,
it seem likely that the use of these chemicals in the manufacturingprocesses is contributing to chemical inputs to the aquifers either by
intentional or fugitive releases.
The data from this study provide a compelling case for the substitution
of hazardous chemicals in the products manufactured and the
process es used by the s ectors investigated, either by direct replacement
with non-hazardous alternatives or through the altering the processes
to eliminate the need for such chemicals.
73
© GREENPEACE
Agricultural fields near
electronics factories in the
Guangdong Province,
China. October 2006.

74CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION
6 :: References
Adachi, Y.,Takashima, K., Ushio, A. & Matsui, S. (2005) Method of coating a plastic
molding, ultraviolet-curable under coating for metal evaporation, and plastic moldings.
United States Patent 6916508. http://www.freepatentsonline.com/6916508.html
Adeoya-Osiguwa, S.A., Markoulaki, S., Pocock,V., Milligan, S.R. & Fraser , L.R. (2003) 17-
beta-estradiol and environmental estrogens significantly effect mammalian sperm function.
Human Reproduction 18(1): 100-107
Alaee, M., Arias, P ., Sjödin, A & Bergman, A. (2003). An overview of commercially used
brominated flame retardants, their applications, their use patterns in different
countries/regions and possibly modes of release. Environment International 29 (6):
Allchin, C. & Morris, S. (2002) The determination and occurrence of three groups of
brominated flame retardants (polybrominated diphenyl ethers, tetrabromobisphenol A andhexabromocyclododecane) in samples of aquatic origin from the UK. In: Readman,J.;Worsfold, P ., eds. Proceedings of ISEAC 32, International Symposium on theEnvironment and Analytical Chemistry, Plymouth, 17-20 June 2002: 15
Allen, N. S., Edge, M., Catalina, F ., Corrales,T., Blanco-Pina, M. & rthur Green, A. (1997)
Photochemistry and photocuring activities of novel substituted 4?-(4-methylphenylthio)
benzophenones as photoinitiators. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A:
Chemistry 110(2): 183-190
Allen, N. S., Lam E., Kotecha J. L.,. Green, W. A,Timms, A., Navaratnam, S. & Parsons, B.
J.(1990) Photochemistry of novel 4-alkylamino benzophenone initiators: a conventional
laser flash photolysis and mass spectrometry study. Journal of Photochemistry and
Photobiology A: Chemistry 54(3): 367-388
Allen, N. S., Chen, W., Catalina, F ., Green, P . N. & Green, A. (1988) Photochemistry of
novel water-soluble para-substituted benzophenone photoinitiators: A polymerization,
spectroscopic and flash photolysis study. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A:
Chem istry 44(3): 349-360
Amini, N. and Crescenzi, C. (2003) Feasibility of an on-line restricted access material/liquid
chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry method in the rapid and sensitive determinationof organophosphorus triesters in human blood plasma. Journal of Chromatography B
795(2): 245-256
Anderson, D.G., Davidson, R.S. & Elvery, J.J (1996)  Thioxanthones: their fate when used
as photoinitiators. Polymer 37(12): 2477-2484 
Asha, S.K., Thirumal, M., Kavitha, A. & Pillai, C.K.S. (2005)  Synthesis and curing studies
of PPG bas ed teleche lic urethane methacr ylic macromonomers. European Polymer Journal
41(1): 23-33
Asplund, L., Athanasiadou, M., Sjödin, A., Bergman, Å. & Borjeson, H. (1999b)
Organohalogen substances in muscle, egg and blood from healthy Baltic salmon (Salmosalar) and Baltic salmon that produced offspring with the M74 syndrome. Ambio 28(1):67-76
Asplund, L., Hornung, M., Peterson, R.E,Turesson, K. & Bergman, Å. (1999a) Levels of
polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) in fish from the Great Lakes and Baltic Sea.
Organohalogen Compounds 40:351-354
ATSDR (2003) Toxicological profile for tin, United States Public Health Service, Agency
for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
ATSDR (2004) Toxicological profile for copper . Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry, US Public Health Service, http://www.atsdr .cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp132-c6.pdf
ATSDR (2005a) Toxicological profile for bromoform and chlorodibromomethanne. Agency
for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, US Public Health Service,
http://www .atsdr .cdc.g ov/toxprofiles/tp130.html
ATSDR (2005b) Toxicological profile for nickel. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry, US Public Health Service, http://www.atsdr .cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp15-c6.pdfATSDR (2005c) Toxicological profile for zinc. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry, US Public Health Service, http://www.atsdr .cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp60-c6.pdf
ATSDR (2005d) Toxicological profile for tin. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry, US Public Health Service, http://www.atsdr .cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp60-c6.pdf
Birnbaum, L.S. & Staskal, D.F . (2004). Brominated flame retardants: cause for concern?
Environmental Health Perspectives 112 (1): 9-17
Blount, B.C., Silva, M.J., Caudill, S.P ., Needham, L.L., Pirkle, J.L., Sampson, E.J., Lucier ,
G.W., Jackson, R.J. & Brock, J.W. (2000) Levels of seven urinary phthalate metabolites in
a human reference population. Environmental Health Perspectives 108(10): 979-982
Boorman, G.A. (1999) Drinking water disinfection byproducts: review and approach to
toxicity evaluation. Environmental Health Perspectives 107(Suppl 1):207 –217
Branchi I., Capone F ., Alleva E. & Costa L.G. (2003). Polybrominated Diphenyl ethers:
neurobehav ioural effects following developmental exposure. NeuroToxicology 24 (3): 449-
462
Brigden, K., Labunska, I., Santillo, D. & Allsopp, M. (2005)  Recycling of electronic wastes
in China and India: workplace and environmental contamination. Greenpeace Research
Laboratories Technical Note 09/2005; www.greenpeace.to/publications
Brigden, K. & Santillo, D. (2006)  Determining the presence of hazardous substances in five
brands of laptop compu ters. Greenpeace Research Laboratories Technical Note 05/2006;
www.greenpeace.to/pub lications
Brigden, K., Santillo, D., Labunska, I. & Johnston, P . (2006)  The toxic legacy: “e-waste”
recycl ing in China and Ind ia. Public Service Review: International Development 1: 84-86 
Brumfiel, G. (2004) Semiconductor industry: Chipping in. Nature 431(7009): 622-623
Bryan, G.W. and Langston, W.J. (1992). Bioavailability, accumulation and effects of heavy
metals in sediments with special reference to United Kingdom estuaries: a review.
Environmental Pollution 76: 89-131
Budavari, S.M., O’Neil, J., Smith A. and Heckleman P .E. [Eds] (1986) The Merck index: an
encyclopaedia of chemicals, drugs and biologicals. 11th Edn Merck and Co, Inc., NewJersey, USA
Butte,W. & Heinzow, B. (2002) Pollutants in house dust as indicators of indoor
contam ination. Reviews in Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 175: 1-46
Cantor , K.P . (1997) Drinking water and cancer . Cancer Cause Control 8(3):292 –308
Carlsson, H., Nilsson, U. and Östman, C. (2000) Video display units: an emission source of
the contact allergenic flame retardant triphenyl phosphate in the indoor environment.Environmental Science and Technology 34(18): 3885-3889
Carlsson, H., Nilsson, U., Becker , G. and Östman, C. (1997) Organophosphate ester flame
retardants and plasticizers in the indoor environment: Analytical methodology and
occurrence. Environmental Science & Technology 31(10): 2931-2936
CEC (2006)  Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on
environmental quality standards in the field of water policy and amending Directive
2000/60/EC, COM(2006) 397 final, Presented by the Commission of the European
Communities, Brussels, 17.7.2006: 25 pp. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2006:0397:FIN:EN:PDF 
Chan g, L-Y. (1995) A waste minimization study of a chelated copper complex in
wastewater – treatability and process analysis. Waste Management 15:209-220
Chein,H.M. & Chen, T.M.(2003) Em ission characteristics of volatile organic compounds
from semiconduc tor manufac turing. Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association
53:1029-1036

Chen, P-C., Hsieh, G-Y., Wang, J-D. & Cheng,T-J. (2002) Prolonged time to pregnancy in
female workers exposed to ethylene glycol ethers in semiconductor manufacturing.
Epidemiology 13(2):191-196
Chitra, K.C., Latchoumycandane, C. & Mathur , P .P . (2002) Effect of nonylphenol on the
antioxidant system in epididymal sperm of rats. Archives of Toxicology 76(9): 545-551
Cho, J.-D., Kim, H.-K., Kim, Y.-S., Hong, J.-W. (2003) Dual curing of cationic UV-curable
clear and pigmented coating systems photosensitized by thioxanthone and anthracene.
Polymer Testing 22(6): 633-645
CKL (2007) Capabilities, Product & Special Processes, CKL Electronics website;
www.cklpcb.com/
Clapp, R.W. (2006) Mortality among US employees of a large computer manufacturing
company: 1969–2001. Environmental Health: A Global Access Science Source  5: 30-40
Cobbing, M. (2006) Cleaning up our chemical homes; changing the market to supply toxic-
free pr oducts. Greenpeace International;
www..greenpeace.org/raw/content/international/press/reports/chemical-home-company-
progress.pdf
Colon, I., Caro, D., Bourdony, C.J. & Rosario, O. (2000) Identification of phthalate esters in
the serum of young Puerto Rican girls with premature breast development. Environmental
Health Perspectives 108(9): 895-900
Corrales,T., Catalina, F . , Peinado, C. &Allen, N.S. (2003) Free radical
macr ophoto initiators: an overview on recent advances. Journal of Photochemistry and
Photobi ology A:Chemistry 159:103–114
CSTEE (2001) EC Scientific Committee on Toxicity, Ecotoxicity and the Environment,
Opinion on the results of the Risk Assessment of: 1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid, di-C8-10-branched alkyl esters, C9-rich and di-”isononyl” phthalate - Report version (Human HealthEffects): Final report, May 2001. Opinion expressed at the 27th CSTEE plenary meeting,Brussels, 30 October 2001: 7 pp. http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/fs/sc/sct/out120_en.pdf
Dalgaard, M.,Nellemann, C.,Lam, H.R., Sorensen, I.K. & Ladefoged, O. (2001) The acute
effects of mono(2-ethylhe xyl)phthalate (MEHP) on tes tes of prepube rtal Wistar
rats.Toxicolog y Lette rs 122: 69-79
Darnerud, P .O. (2003).Toxic effects of brominated flame retardants in man and in wildlife.
Environment International 29 (6): 841-853
de Boer , J.,Wester , P .G., Klamer , H.J.C., Lewis, W.E. & Boon, J.P . (1998) Do flame
retardants threaten ocean life? Nature 394 (2 July): 28-29
DEFRA (2006). Update on on going work on individual chemicals: Vinylneodecanoate,
HBCD, TBBP A,HMDS. UK Chemicals Stakeholder Forum, 25th Meeting, 11 July 2006;
www.defra.gov.uk/environment/chemicals/csf/060711/pdf/csf0631.pdf
DHHS (2005) Nickel compounds and metallic nickel, 11th Report on Carcinogens, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. www.ehp.niehs.nih.gov/roc/Dudareva, N.,
Murfitt, L. M., Mann, C. J. , Gorenstein, N., Kolosova, N., Kish, C. M., Bonham, C., andWood K. (2000) Developmental Regulation of Methyl Benzoate Biosynthesis and Emission
in Snapdragon Flowers. Plant Cell 12: 949-961
Dietrich, J.M. (2004) Life cycle process management for environmentally sound and cost
effective semiconductor manufacturing. IEEE International Symposium on Electronics and
the Environment 2004 Conference Record. ISSN: 1095-2020
EC (2003) Directive 2002/95/EC of the European Parliament and the Council, 27 January
2003, on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and
electronic equipment. Official Journal L037, 13/02/2003: 19-23
EC (2005) Commission Directive 05/747/EC of 21 October 2005 amending Directive
2002/95/EC of 27 January 2003 on the restriction of the use of certain hazardoussubstances in electrical and electronic equipmentEC (2005)  Directive 2005/84/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14
December 2005 amending for the 22nd time Council Directive 76/769/EEC on the
approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States
relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and
preparations (phthalates in toys and childcare articles). Official Journal of the European
Communities L344, 27.12.2005: 40-43 http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2005:344:0040:0043:EN:PDF 
EC (2006) 2,2’,6,6’-Tetrabromo-4,4’-isopropylidene diphenol (tetrabromobisphenol-a or
TBBP-A). Part II – Human Health. Summary Risk Assessment Report. © EuropeanCommunities, 2006. http://ecb.jrc.it/documents/existing-
chemicals/risk_assessment/summary/tbbpahhsum402.pdf
EEC (1976) Council Directive 76/769/EEC of 27 July 1976 on the approximation of laws,
regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to restrictions on
the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations. OJ L 262: 201-
203
EEC (1979) Council Directive 80/68/EEC of 17 December 1979 on the protection of
groundwater against pollution caused by certain dangerous substances. OJ L 020: 43-48
EEC (1991) Council Directive 91/692/EEC of 23 December 1991 standardizing and
rationalizing reports on the implementation of certain Directives relating to theenvironment. OJ L 377: 48-54
EEC (1996) Comm ission Directive 96/55/EEC of 4 September 1996 adapting to technical
progress for the 2nd time Annex I to Council directive 76/769/EEC of 27 July 1976 on the
approximation of lows, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States
relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances andpreparations (chlorinated solvents). OJ L 231: 20-21
EETH (2006)  PCB F abrication, Slide 6. Elec & Eltek International Holdings Limited
website; www.eleceltek.com/jsp/eeic/eeic_fabrication.jsp
Ema, M. & Miyawaki, E. (2002) Effects on development of the reproductive system in male
offspring of rats given butyl benzyl phthalate during late pregnancy. Reproductive Toxicology
16: 71-76
Eriksson, P ., Viberg, H., Jakobsson, E., Orn, U., Fredriksson, A. (2002) A brominated flame
retardant, 2,2 ‘,4,4 ‘,5-pentabromodiphenyl ether: Uptake, retention, and induction of
neurobehavioral alterations in mice during a critical phase of neonatal braindevelopment.Toxicological Sciences 67(1): 98-103
Eriksson, P.,Viberg, H., Ankarberg, E., Jakobsson, E., Örn, U. & Fredriksson, A. (2001)
Polybrominated diphenylethers (PBDEs): a novel class of environmental neurotoxicants in
our en vironment. In:Asplund, L.; Bergman, Å.; de Wit, C., et al. eds. Proceedings of the
Second Inte rnational Workshop on Brominated Flame Retardants, BFR 2001, Stockholm,
May 14-16 2001: 71-73
ERTC (2001) Contamination of Chlorinated Ethylene in Soil and Groundwater and a Case
Study in Thailand. Environmental Research and Training Center (ERTC), Department of
Environmental Quality Promotion, Government of Thailand;
www.ertc.deqp.go.th/other/ertcwt441.asp
EU (2001) Decision No 2455/2001/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
20 November 2001 establishing the list of priority substances in the field of water policyand amending Directive 2000/60/EC, Official Journal L 249, 17/09/2002: 27-30
EU (2002a) Direc tive 2002/95/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27
Januar y 2003 on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and
electronic equipment. Official Journal L 037, 13/02/2003: 19-23
EU (2002b) Directive 2002/96/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27
January 2003 on waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) – Joint declaration ofthe European Parliament, the Council and the Commission relating to Article 9. Official
Journal L 037, 13/02/2003: 24–39
75

EU (2003b) Directive 2003/53/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council Of 18
June 2003 Amending For The 26th Time Council Directive 76/769/EEC Relating To
restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations
(nonylphenol, nonylphenol ethoxylate and cement).
http://europa.eu.int/eurlex/pri/en/oj/dat/2003/l_178/l_17820030717en00240027.pdf
EU (2004) Commission Decision 2004/781/EC amending Decision 1999/815/EC
concerning measures prohibiting the placing on the market of toys and childcare articles
intended to be placed in the mouth by children under three years of age made of soft PVCcontaining certain phthalates. Official Journal L 344, 20.11.2004:35-36
Eustis, S., Krylova, G., Smirnova, N., Eremenko, A.,Tabor ,C., Huang, W.Y., El-Sayed, M.A.
(2006) Using silica films and powders modified with benzophenone to photoreduce silvernanoparticles Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A-Chemistry 181 (2-3): 385-
393
Forget-Leray, J., Landriau, I., Minier , Ch. & Leboulenger , F . (2005) Impact of endocrine
toxicants on survival, development, and reproduction of the estuarine copepod Eurytemora
affinis (Poppe). Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 60(3):288-294
Fowler , B., LaDou, J., Osorio, A.M., Paul, M., Swan, S.H., & Teitelbaum, D.T. (1999)
Spontaneous abortion in the British semiconductor industry (letter). American Journal ofIndustrial Medicine. 36: 584-5.
Fries, E. & Puttmann, W. (2003) Monitoring of the three organophosphate esters TBP ,
TCEP and TBEP in river water and ground water (Oder , Germany). Journal of
Environmental  Monitoring  5:346 – 352
Fromme H., Lahrz T., Piloty M., Gebhart H., Oddoy A. & Rüden H. (2004) Occurrence of
phthalates and musk fr agrances in indoor air and dust from apartments and kindergartens
in Berlin (Germany). Indoor Air 14 (3): 188-195
Fukuda, N., Ito, Y., Yamaguchi, M., Mitumori, K., Koizumi, M.,. Hasegawa, R., Kamata, E.
and Ema, M. (2004) Unexpected nephrotoxicity induced by tetrabromobisphenol A in
newborn rats.Toxicol. Let. 21:145–155
Gerhardt, A. (1993) Review of impact of heavy-metals on stream invertebrates with special
emphasis on acid conditions. Water air and soil pollution, 66(3-4): 289-314
Goyer,R.A. (1996) Toxic effects of metals. In Casarett & Doull’s Toxicology.The Basic
Science of P oisons, Fifth Edition, Klaassen, C.D. [Ed]. McGraw-Hill Health Professions
Division,ISBN 0071054766
Graves, C.G., Matanoski, G.M., (2001) Weight of evidence for an association between
adverse reproductive and developmental effects and exposure to disinfection by-products: a
critical review. Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology 34(2): 103–124
Guenther , K., Heinke,V.,Thiele, B., Kleist, E., Prast, H. & Raecker ,T. (2002) Endocrine
disrupting nonylphenols are ubiquitous in food. Environmental Science and Technology36(8): 1676-1680
Harrad,S.,Wijesekera, R., Hunter , S., Halliwell, C. & Baker R. (2004). Preliminary
assessment of UK human d ietary and inhalation exposure to polybrominated dipehyl ethers.
Environmental Science and Technology 38 (8): 2345-2350
Harreus, U.A.,Wallner , B.C., Kastenbauer , E.R. & Kleinsasser , N.H. (2002) Genotoxicity and
cytotoxicity of 4-nonylphenol ethoxylate on lymphocytes as assessed by the COMET assay.
International Journal of Environmental Analytical Chemistry 82(6): 395-401
Hartmann, P .C., Burgi, D. &  Giger , W. (2004)  Organophosphate flame retardants and
plasticizers in indoor air . Chemosphere 57(8):781-787 
Hites, R.A. (2004). Polybrominated Diphenyl ethers in the environment and in people: A
meta-analysis of concentrations. Environment, Science and Technology 38 (4): 945-956Honkakoski, P ., Palvimo, J.J., Penttila, L.,Vepsalainen, J. and Auriola, S. (2004) Effects of
triaryl phosphate’s on mouse and human nuclear receptors. Biochemical Pharmacology
67(1): 97-106
Hsieh, G-Y., Wang, J-D., Cheng,T-J. & Chen P-C. (2005) Prolonged menstrual cycles in
female workers exposed to ethylene glycol ethers in the semiconductor manufacturing
industry. Occupational and Environmental Medicine 62:510-516
Hui, I.K., Li, C.P . & Lau, H.C.W. (2003) Hierarchical environmental impact evaluation of a
process in printed circuit board manufacturing. International journal of production
research. 41:1149-1165
IARC (1999) Some Chemicals that Cause Tumours of the Kidney or Urinary Bladder in
Rodents, and Some Other Substances. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of CarcinogenicRisks to Humans. ISBN 92 832 1273 8, Vol. 73, 674 pages
IARC (1990) Nickel and certain nickel compounds. In: International Agency for Research
on Cancer (IARC) monographs on the evaluation of the carcinogenic risk of chemicals tohumans. Volume 49; Chromium, Nickel and Welding. ISBN 9283212495 
IBM (2004) Suppl ier Conduct Principles: Guidelines. Provision 9 Protection of the
Environment. IBM Corporation USA; www-
03.ibm.com/pr ocurement/proweb.nsf/objectdocswebview/fileibm+supplier+
conduc t+principles+-+guidelines/$file/scpg-v2.0.pdf
Ikonomou, M.G., Rayne, S. & Addison, R.F . (2002) Exponential increases of the brominated
flame retardants, polybrominated diphenyl ethers, in the Canadian Arctic from 1981 to2000. Environmental Science and Technology 36(9): 1886-1892
IPCS (1991) Triphenyl Phosphate, Environmental Health Criteria 111, International
Programme on Chemical Safety. UNEP/ILO/WHO, ISBN 92 4 157111 X IPCS (1998)
Polybrominated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans, Environmental Health Criteria, No.
205, International Programme on Chemical Safety, UNEP/ILO/WHO, ISBN 92 4 157205
1: 303 pp.
Jiang, X., Wang, W., Xu, H. & Yin, J. (2006) Water-compatible dendritic
macrophotoinitiator containing thioxanthone. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology
A: Chemistry 181(2-3): 233-237
Jobling,S., Coey, S.,Whitmore, J.G., Kime, D.E., van Look, K.J.W., McAllister , B.G.,
Beresford,N.,Henshaw , A.C., Brighty, G.,Tyler , C.R. & Sumpter , J.P . (2002) Wild intersex
roach (Ru tilus rutilus) have reduced fertility. Biology of Reproduction 67(2): 515-524
Jobling, S., Reynolds,T.,White, R., Parker , M.G. & Sumpter , J.P . (1995) A variety of
environmentally persistent chemicals, including some phthalate plasticizers, are weakly
estrogenic. Environmental Health Perspectives 103(6): 582-587
Jobling, S., Sheahan, D., Osborne, J.A., Matthiessen, P . & Sumpter , J.P . (1996) Inhibition of
testicular growth in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) exposed to estrogenicalkylphenolic chemicals. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 15(2):194-202
Jonsson, O.B., Dyremark, E. and Nilsson, U.L. (2001) Development of a microporous
membr ane liquid-liquid extractor for organophosphate esters in human blood plasma:
identification of triphenyl phosphate and octyl diphenyl phosphate in donor plasma. Journal
of Chr omatog raphy B 755(1-2): 157-164
Kawamura, Y., Ogawa, Y., Nishimura,T., Kikuchi, Y., Nishikawa, J., Nishihara,T.,Tanamoto,
K. (2003) Estrogenic activities of UV stabilizers used in food contact plastics and
benzophenone derivatives tested by the yeast two-hybrid assay. Journal of Health Science 49(3): 205-212 
KCE (2007) Cur rent Technolog y Capability and Future Development. KCE Electronics
Public Co. website; www.kce-hq.com/kce/hom_capupdate.htm
76CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION

Koivusalo, M., & Vartiainen,T. (1997) Drinking water chlorination byproducts and cancer .
Reviews Environmental Health 12:81–90
LaDou, J. (2006) Printed circuit board industry. International Journal of Hygiene and
Environmental Health 209: 211–219
Lassen, C., Lokke, S. & Hansen, L.I. (1999) Brominated Flame Retardants: substance flow
analysis and substitution feasibility study. Danish Environmental Protection Agency
Environmental Project No. 494, Copenhagen, ISBN 87-7909-415-5: 240 pp.
Lau, J.H., Wong, C.P ., Lee, N.C. & Ricky Lee, S.W. (2003) Electronics Manufacturing with
Lead-Free, Halogen-Free & Conductive-Adhesive materials. McGraw-Hill ISBN:0-07-
138624-6
Legler , J. & Brouwer , A. (2003). Are brominated flame retardants endocrine disruptors?
Environmental International 29 (6): 879-885
Leonards, P.E.G., Santillo, D., Brigden, K., van der Ween, I., Hesselingen, J.v., de Boer , J. &
Johnston, P . (2001)  Brominated flame retardants in office dust samples. In: Asplund, L.;
Bergman, Å.; de Wit, C., et al. eds. Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on
Brominated Flame Retardants, BFR 2001, Stockholm, May 14-16 2001: 299-302
Lewis, R.J. (2004) Sax’s dangerous properties of industrial materials. 11th Edition. ISBN
0 471 47662 5. Publ. John Willey & Sons, Inc. Vol.2, 1891pp.
Liao,Ch-S., Yen, J-H., Wang, Y-Sh. (2006) Effects of endocrine disruptor di-n-butyl
phthalate on the g rowth of Bok choy (Brassica rapa subsp. chinensis). Chemosphere 65
(2006) 1715–1722
Lindstrom,G.,van Bave l, B., Hardell, L. & Liljegren, G. (1997) Identification of the flame
retardants polybrominated diphenyl ethers in adipose tissue from patients with non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma in Sweden. Oncology Reports 4(5): 999-1000
Liu,V.A.& Bhatia, S.N. (2002) Three-dimensional photopatterning of hydrogels containing
living cells. Biomedical Microdevices 4(4): 257-266 
Loff, S., Kabs, F ., Witt, K., Sartoris, J., Mandl, B., Niessen, K.H. & Waag, K.L. (2000)
Polyvinylchloride infusion lines expose infants to large amounts of toxic plasticizers. Journal
of Pediatric Surgery 35(12): 1775-1781
Lovekamp-Swan,T. & Davis, B.J. (2003) Mechanisms of phthalate ester toxicity in the
female reproductive system. Environmental Health Perspectives 111 (2): 139-145
Mance ,G.,Brown, V.M. & Yates, J. (1984). Proposed environmental quality standards for
List II subs tances i n water . Copper . Water Research Centre Technical Report TR210
Mariussen, E. & Fonnum, F . (2003) The effect of brominated flame retardants on
neurotransmitter uptake into rat brain synaptosomes and vesicles. Neurochem. Int. 43:533–542
Marklund, A., Andersson, B. & Haglund, P . (2003) Screening of organophosphorus
compounds and their distribution in various indoor environments. Chemosphere 53(9):
1137-1146
Matsumoto, H., Adachi, S. & Suzuki, Y. (2005) Estrogenic activity of ultraviolet absorbers
and the related compounds. Yakugaku Zasshi-Journal Of The Pharmaceutical Society Of
Japan 125 (8): 643-652
Meerts, I.A.T.M., Letcher , R.J., Hoving, S., Marsh, G., Bergman, Å., Lemmen, J.G., van der
Burg, B. & Brouwer , A. (2001)  In vitro estrogenicity of polybrominated diphenyl ethers,hydroxylated PBDEs and polybrominated bisphenol A compounds. Environmental Health
Perspectives 109(4): 399-407
Meerts, I.A.T.M., Letcher , R.J., Hoving, S., Marsh, G., Bergman, Å., Lemmen, J.G., van der
Burg, B. & Brouwer , A. (2001) In vitro estrogenicity of polybrominated diphenyl ethers,
hydroxylated PBDEs and polybrominated bisphenol A compounds. Environmental Health
Perspectives 109(4): 399-407Meerts, I.A.T.M., Marsh, G., van Leeuwen-Bol, I., Luijks, E.A.C., Jakobsson, E., Bergman,
Å. & Brouwer , A. (1998)  Interaction of polybrominated diphenyl ether metabolites (PBDE-
OH) with human transthyretin in vitro. Organohalogen Compounds 37: 309-312
Meerts, I.A.T.M., Marsh, G., van Leeuwen-Bol, I., Luijks, E.A.C., Jakobsson, E., Bergman,
Å. & Brouwer , A. (1998) Interaction of polybrominated diphenyl ether metabolites (PBDE-
OH) with human transthyretin in vitro. Organohalogen Compounds 37: 309-312
Meironyte, D., Noren, K. & Bergman, Å. (1999) Analysis of polybrominated diphenyl ethers
in Swedish human milk. A time-related trend study, 1972-1997. Journal of Toxicology and
Environmental Health - Part A 58(6): 329-341
Meneses, M., Wingfors, H., Schuhmacher , M., Domingo, J.L., Lindstrom, G. & von Bavel, B.
(1999) Polybrominated diphenyl ethers detected in human adipose tissue from Spain.Chemosphere 39(13): 2271-2278
Mijangos, I., Navarro-Villoslada, F ., Guerreiro, A., Piletska, E., Chianella, I., Karim, K.,
Turner , A. & Piletsky, S. (2006) Influence of initiator and different polymerisationconditions on performance of molecularly imprinted polymers. Biosensors and Bioelectronics22: 381–387
Mylchrees t, E., Sar , M.,Wallace, D.G. & Foster , P .M.D. (2002) Fetal testosterone
insufficiency and abnormal proliferation of Leydig cells and gonocytes in rats exposed to
di(n-butyl) phthalate. Reproductive Toxicology 16: 19-28
Nor , Y.M. (1987) Ecotoxicity of copper to aquatic biota: a review. Environmental Research,
43: 272-282
OECD (2003) Technical guidance for the environmentally sound management of specific
waste streams: used and scrap personal computers. Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Deve lopment (OECD) Working Group on Waste Prevention and Recycling.
ENV/EPOC/WGWP R(2001)3/FINAL.
Olsen, C.M., Meussen-Elholm, E., Samuelsen, M., Holme, J.A. and Hongslo, J.K. (2003)
Effects of the environmental oestrogens bisphenol A, tetrachlorobisphenol A,
tetrabromobisphenol A, 4-hydroxybiphenyl and 4,4?-dihydroxybiphenyl on oestrogenreceptor binding, cell proliferation and regulation of oestrogen sensitive proteins in the
human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. Pharmacol.Toxicol. 92:180–188
OSPAR (2001) Nonylphenol/nonylphenoletho xylates, OSPAR Pr iority Subtances Series,
OSPAR Con vention for the Pr otection of the Marine Environment of the North-East
Atlantic, OSPAR Comm ission,London, ISBN 0-946956-79-0: 18 pp.
OSPAR (2006) OSPAR List of Chemicals for Priority Action. OSPAR Convention for the
Protection of the Marine Environment of the North East Atlantic. (Update 2006)
http://www.ospar .org/eng/html/sap/strategy_hazardous_substances.htm 
Otake,T., Yoshinaga, J. & Yanagisawa, Y. (2001) Analysis of organic esters of plasticizer in
indoor air by GC-MS and GC-FPD. Environmental Science and Technology 35(15): 3099-3102
PCD (2000) Gr oundwater Quality Standards, Pollution Control Department, Ministry of
Natur al Resour ces and En vironment, Government of Thailand. Summarised from
Notif ication of the National Environmental Board No. 20, B.E. 2543 (2000), issued under
the Enhancement & Cons ervation of National Environment Quality Act B.E. 2535 (1992),
published in the Royal Government Gazette, Vol. 117 Special part 95 D, dated September
15 ,B.E. 2543 (2000). www.pcd.go.th/info_serv/en_reg_std_water03.html#s1
PCD (2004) Industrial Effluent Standards, Pollution Control Department, Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environment, Government of Thailand. Summarised fromNotification of the Ministry of Science,Technology and Environment, No. 3, B.E.2539(1996) issued under the Enhancement and Conservation of the National Environmental
Quality Act B.E.2535 (1992), published in the Royal Government Gazette, Vol. 113 Part 13D, dated February 13, B.E.2539 (1996). www.pcd.go.th/info_serv/en_reg_std_water04.html
77

PCTT (2006) Manufacturing Process. PCTT website; www.pctt.com/process.asp
Peijnenburg, W.J.G.M. & Struijs, J. (2006) Occurrence of phthalate esters in the
environment of the Netherlands. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 63(2): 204-215
Peltola, J. & Yla-Mononen, L. (2001) Pentabromodiphenyl ether as a global POP .
TemaNord 2001:579, Nordic Council of Ministers, Copenhagen, ISBN 92-893-0690-4: 78
pp.
PEZA (2007) Public Ecozones, Philippines Economic Zone Authority website;
www.peza.gov.ph/firms_public.htm
Pullen, S., Boecker , R. and Tiegs, G. (2003) The flame retardants tetrabromobisphenol A
and tetrabromobisphenol A-bisallylether suppress the induction of interleukin-2 receptor
alpha chain (CD25) in murine splenocytes.Toxicology 184:11–22
Razia, S.,Maegawa, Y.,Tamotsu, S. & Oishi,T. (2006) Histological changes in immune and
endocr ine organs of quail embryos: Exposure to estrogen and nonylphenol. Ecotoxicology
and En vironmental Safety 65(3): 364-371 
Ronisz, D., Finne, E.F ., Karlsson, H. and Förlin, L. (2004) Effects of the brominated flame
retardants hexabromocyclododecane (HBCDD), and tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA), on
hepatic enzymes and other biomarkers in juvenile rainbow trout and feral eelpout. Aquat.
Toxicol. 69: 229–245
Rudel R.A., Camann D.E., Spengler J.D., Korn L.R. & Brody J.G. (2003). Phthalates,
alkylphenols, pesticides, polybrominated diphenyl ethers, and other endocrine-disrupting
compounds i n indoor air and dus t. Environmental Science and Technology 37 (20): 4543-
4553
Saito I., Onuki A. & Seto H. (2004). Indoor air pollution by alkylphenols in Tokyo. Indoor
Air 14 (5): 325-332
Salomons, W.and F orstner , U. (1984). Metals in the hydrocycle. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Heidelberg, New York,Tokyo, ISBN 3540127550
Samuelsen, M., Olsen, C., Holm, e.J.A., Meussen-Elholm, E., Bergmann, A. and Hongslo,
J.K.(2001)  Estrogen-like properties of brominated analogs of bisphenol A in the MCF-7
human breast cancer cell line, Cell Biol.Toxicol. 17: 139–151
Sanchez, C., Ericsson, M., Carlsson, H. and Colmsjo, A. (2003) Determination of
organophosphate esters in air samples by dynamic sonication-assisted solvent extraction
coupled on-line with large-volume injection gas chromatography utilizing a programmed-
temperature vaporizer . Journal of Chromatography A 993(1-2): 103-110
Santi llo,D., Labunska, I., Davidson, H., Johnston, P ., Strutt, M. & Knowles, O. (2003a)
Consum ing Chemicals: Hazardous Chemicals in house dust as an indicator of chemical
exposure i n the home: Part I - UK. Greenpeace Research Laboratories Technical Note
01/2003, April 2003: 74 pp.
Santillo, D., Labunska, I., Fairley, M. & Johnston, P . (2003b) Hazardous chemicals in house
dusts as indicators of chemical exposure in the home: Part II – Germany, Spain, Slovakia,
Italy and France. Greenpeace Research Laboratories Technical Note 02/2003, December2003: 96 pp.
Schenker , M. B., Gold, E.B, Beaumont, J.J., Eskenazi, B., Hammond, S.K., Lasley, B.L.,
McCurdy, S.A., Samuels, S.J., Saiki, C.L. and Swan, S.H. (1995) Association of
spontaneous abortion and other reproductive effects with work in the semiconductor
industry. American Journal of Industrial Medicine 28(6): 639-659
Segurola, J., Allen, N., Edge, M., Parrondo, A. & Roberts, I. (1999) Photochemistry and
photoinduced chemical crosslinking activity of several type II commercial photoinitiators in
acrylated prepolymers. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry 122(2):115-125Seidl, B., Liska, R. & Grabner , G. (2006) New photocleavable structures III:
Photochemistry and photophysics of pyridinoyl and benzoyl-based photoinitiators. Journal
of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry 180(1-2): 109-117 
Sellstrom, U. & Jansson, B. (1995) Analysis of tetrabromobisphenol A in a product and
environmental samples. Chemosphere 31: 3085-3092
SEPA (1996) Integrated wastewater discharge standard GB 8978-1996 issued by Division
of Technology Policies and Standards, Department of Science,Technology and Standards,
Sates Environment Protection Administration of China 
Shaw, J.M., Gelorme, J.D., LaBianca, N.C., Conley, W.E. & Holmes, S.J. (1997) Negative
photorestists for optical lithography. IBM Journal of Research and Development. 41:81-94
She, J.,Winkler , J.,Visita, P ., McKinney, M. & Petreas, M. (2000) Analysis of PBDEs in seal
blubber and human breast adipose tissue samples. Organohalogen Compounds 47: 53-56
Silva, M.J., Barr , D.B., Reidy, J.A., Malek, N.A., Hodge, C.C., Caudill, S.P ., Brock, J.W.,
Needham, L.L.& Calafat, A.M. (2004) Urinary levels of seven phthalate metabolites in the
U.S. populati on from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)
1999-2000. Environmental Health Perspectives 112 (3): 331-338 
Sjödin, A., Patterson, D.G. and Bergman, A. (2003). A review on human exposure to
brominated flame retardants – particularly polybrominated diphenyl ethers. Environment
International 29: 829-839
Sjödin,A., Carlsson, H.,Thuresson, K., Sjolin, S., Bergman, Å. & Ostman, C. (2001) Flame
retardants i n indoor air at an e lectronics recycling plant and at other work environments.
Environmental Science and Technology 35(3): 448-454
Strandman,T., Koistinen, J., Kiviranta, H., Vuorinen, P .J.,Tuomisto, J. & Vartiainen,T.
(1999) Levels of some polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) in fish and human adiposetissue in Finland. Organohalogen Compounds 40:355-358
Swan, S.H., Main,K.M., Liu, F ., Stewart, S.L., Kruse, R.L., Calafat, A.M., Mao, C.S.,
Redmon, J.B., Ternand, C.L., Sullivan, S. & Teague, J.L. (2005) Decrease in anogenital
distance amon g male i nfants with prenatal phthalate e xposure. Environmental Health
Perspectives 113 (8): 1056-1061
Tada, Y., Fujitani,T., Ogata, A. & Kamimura H. (2006) Flame retardant
tetrabromobisphenol A induced hepatic changes in ICR male mice. Environmental
Toxicology and Pharmacology, In Press, Corrected Proof, Available online 30 August 2006.http://www.sciencedirect.com/
Tan, B.L.L. & Mohd, M.A. (2003). Analysis of selected pesticides and alkylphenols in
human cord blood by gas chromatograph-mass-spectrometer .Talanta 61 (3): 385-391
Tardiff, R.G., Carson, M.L.& Ginevan, M.E. (2006) Updated weight of evidence for an
assoc iation between adve rse reproductive and developmental effects and exposure to
disinfection by-products. Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology 45:185–205
Temel, G., Arsu, N. & Yagci, Yu. (2006) Polymeric Side Chain Thioxanthone Photoinitiator
for Free Radical Polymerization. Polymer Bulletin 57(1): 51-56
Thomas, P . and Dong, J. (2006) Binding and activation of the seven-transmembrane
estrogen receptor GPR30 by environmental estrogens: A potential novel mechanism of
endocrine disruption.The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 102(1-5):
175-179
Thomsen, C., Lundanes, E. & Becher , G. (2002) Brominated flame retardants in archived
serum samples from Norway: A study on temporal trends and the role of age.
Environmental Science and Technology 36(7): 1414-1418
Timms, P .L. (1999) The chemistry of volatile waste from silicon wafer processing. Dalton
Transactions 815-912
78CUTTING EDGE CONTAMINATION

Torbiero, B., Pourciel-Gouzy, M.L., Humenyuk, I., Doucet, J.B., Martinez, A.,Temple-Boyer ,
P. (2006)  Mass patterning of polysiloxane layers using spin coating and photolithography
techniques. Microelectronics Journal 37:133–136
Umarji, G.G., Ketkar , S.A., Phatak, G.J., Giramkar , V.D.,Mulik , U.P ., Amalnerkar , D.P .
(2005) An aqueous developable photoimageable silver conductor composition for high
density electronic packaging. Microelectronics Reliability 45: 1903–1909
UNEP (1993). Preliminary assessment of the state of pollution of the Mediterranean Sea
by zinc, copper and their compounds and proposed measures. Mediterranean Action Plan
UNEP (OCA)/MED/WG.66/Inf.3, Athens 3-7 May 1993
UNEP (1997) The 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer , as
adjusted and amended by the second Meeting of the Parties (London, 27-29 June, 1990),and by the fourth Meeting of the parties (Copenhagen, 23-25 November 1992), and furtheradjusted by the seventh Meeting of the Parties (Vienna, 5-7 December 1995), and furtheradjusted and amended by the ninth Meeting of the Parties (Montreal, 15-17 September
1997)
UNEP (2006)  Advance Report of the second meeting of the Persistent Organic Pollutants
Review Committee (POPRC), 6 -10 November 2006, Geneva, Switzerland: 48 pp.
http://www.pops.int/documents/meetings/poprc_2/meeting_docs/report/default.htm 
US DHHS (2000) NTP Technical Report on the Toxicity Studies of Benzophenone
Administered in Feed to F344/N Rats and B6C3F1 Mice.Toxicity Report Series Number
61,NIH Publication No. 00-3943, pp.8
USEPA (1995) Printed Wiring Board Industry and Use Cluster Profile 
EPA-744-R-95-005
USEPA (1998) Printed Wiring Board Pollution Prevention and Control Technology:
Analysis of Updated Survey Results EPA-744-R-98-003
USEPA (2000) Acetophenone. Hazard Summar y. Created in April 1992, Revised in
Januar y 2000. Available at http://www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/hlthef/acetophe.html
USEPA (2000) Flexographic Ink Options: A Cleaner Technologies Substitutes Assessment
(DRAFT). EPA/744-R-00-004A&B Vol. A& #151, pp.400
USEPA (2001) Printed Wiring Board Surface Finishes: Cleaner Technologies Substitutes
Assessment, Volumes 1 and 2. EPA-744-R-01-003A and B
USEPA (2006) Nati onal Primary Drinking Water Regulations.
http://www .epa.g ov/safewater/mcl.html#dbps , Updated October 2006
USEPA (2000) Flexographic Ink Options: A Cleaner Technologies Substitutes Assessment
(DRAFT). EPA/744-R-00-004A&B Vol. A& #151, pp.400
Viberg, H., Fredriksson, A., Eriksson, P . (2004) Investigations of strain and/or gender
differences in developmental neurotoxic effects of polybrominated diphenyl ethers in mice.
Toxicological Sciences 81(2): 344-353
Vinceti, M., Fantuzzi, G., Monici, L., Cassinadri, M., Predieri, G. &  Aggazzotti, G. (2004) A
retrospective cohort study of trihalomethane exposure through drinking water and cancermortality in northern Italy. Science of The Total Environment 330(1-3): 47-53  
Walters, A., Santillo, D., Labunska, I. & Brigden, K. (2006)  Background documents on
three key elements of the electronics manufacturing sector: semiconductors, printed wiring
(circuit) boards and TFT-LCD screens. Greenpeace Research Laboratories Technical Note08/2006; www.greenpeace.to/publications
Williams, E. (2003) Environmental impacts in the production of personal computers. In.
Kuehr R & Williams E (Eds) Computers and the Environment: Understanding and
Manag ing their Impacts. Kluwer Academic Publishers - Dordrecht ISBN: 1-4020-1680-8Williams, E. (2004) Environmental impacts of microchip manufacture.Thin Solid Films,
461: 2– 6
WHO (2006) Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality. First Addendum to Third Edition Vol. 1
Recommendations. World Health Organization 2006, ISBN 92 4 154696 4, pp. 595
Xiao, J., Hu, Y., Yang, L., Cai, Y., Song, L., Chen Z. & Fan, W. (2003)  Fire retardant
synergism between melamine and triphenyl phosphate in poly(butylenes terephthalate).
Polymer Degradation and Stability 91(9):2093-2100
Yilmaz, F ., Cianga, L., Guner , Y.,Topppare, L. & Yagci, Y. (2004) Synthesis and
characterization of alternating copolymers of thiophene-containing N-phenyl maleimide and
styrene by photoinduced radical polymerization and their use in electropolymerization.
Polymer 45: 5765–5774
WHO (2006) Guidelines for drinking-water quality, Volume 1, recommendations; 3rd
edition. World Health Organization (WHO). ISBN 9241546964.
www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/dwq/gdwq0506.pdf
Zhu, M.A.Z., Xiaorong, X.,Tianlun, Z., Lizhi, H., Qi, Z & Jiebing B. (1998)  Allergic skin
disease and hepatitis following trichloroethylene exposure: of 15 patients, 5 died.Toxicology
Lette rs 95, Suppl 1: 174 
79