# Archivo original: deception-by-the-numbers.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:55 -03 2025

Deception by the Numbers
American Chemistry Council claims about chemical 
recycling investments fail to hold up to scrutiny
PUBLISHED: SEPTEMBER 9, 2020
www.greenpeace.org/usa/research/deception-by-the-numbers© Aaron Sprecher / Greenpeace

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 2
1. Introduction  ...................................................................... 3
Key Findings  ................................................................... 4
The Problem  .................................................................. 4
The False Solution  .............................................................. 4
The Quest for Acceptance—and Taxpayer Dollars  .................................. 5
Consumer Goods Companies: Wishcycling Their Recycling Commitments  ............ 6
Petrochemical Companies: Fueling Climate Change  ............................... 6
2. Criteria for Evaluation  ............................................................. 7
Methodology  .................................................................. 7
Criterion 1: Does the Project Actually Recycle Plastic?  .............................. 7
Criterion 2: Are These Investments Viable?  ........................................ 8
Investment Breakdown  ......................................................... 9
Processing Capacity  ............................................................ 9
3. Evaluation of the ACC’s Projects List  ............................................... 10
4. Project and Company Profiles  ..................................................... 16
5. Recommendations  ............................................................... 26
American Chemistry Council  ................................................... 26
Elected Officials  ............................................................... 26
Local Decision-makers  ......................................................... 26
Investors  ..................................................................... 26
Fast-Moving Consumer Goods Companies  ....................................... 27
Endnotes  .......................................................................... 28Contents
AUTHOR
Ivy Schlegel
EDITOR
Perry Wheeler
DESIGNED BY
Kyle McKibbin
PUBLISHED
September  9, 2020
COVER PHOTO
An industrial flare burns off 
waste at a petrochemical 
refining plant in Baytown, 
Texas following Hurricane 
Harvey in 2017.
Greenpeace Inc.
702 H Street, NW, STE 300, 
Washington, D.C. 20001© Bob Pearson / Greenpeace

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 3
“Chemical recycling” is an intentionally vague term used 
by the chemical and plastics industries to refer to myriad 
technologies (many of which remain in the lab or pilot 
phases), all promising to convert plastic waste into its basic 
chemical building blocks and generate ‘“like new” plastic. 
There are two general categories: (1) plastic-to-fuel or waste-
to-fuel,1 which uses a variety of methods, generally involving 
heat and combustion, to turn plastic or mixed waste into 
hydrocarbons, such as gas or oil; and (2) plastic-to-plastic, 
which also uses various methods, including chemical 
solvents, to degrade plastic polymers into its basic building 
blocks. However, the engineering realities of these processes 
make this distinction rather fuzzy.
Without a widely accepted technical definition, the industry 
has often attempted to conflate waste-to-fuel/plastic-to-
fuel and plastic-to-plastic under the respective umbrellas of 
“chemical recycling” and “advanced recycling. ” Waste-to-fuel/
plastic-to-fuel conversion comprises existing technologies  
like pyrolysis and gasification, as well as still-theoretical 
methods. Since these processes produce fossil fuels, energy, 
or petrochemicals, they  should not be considered recycling. 
Plastic-to-plastic methods would theoretically turn plastic 
waste directly into its chemical precursors, but these 
promises may never actually deliver. 
The American Chemistry Council (ACC), a trade association 
that represents manufacturers of petrochemicals and plastics, 
promotes so-called chemical recycling technologies as a 
means to overcome the identified challenges to “traditional” 
mechanical recycling collection, sorting, and reprocessing 
(see 2. Criteria for Evaluation  for definitions). The ACC also 
often and overtly uses “advanced recycling” as a synonym 
for “chemical recycling, ”2 further confusing the issue, as 
“advanced” recycling can also refer to innovative elements of 
mechanical recycling, such as optical sorting. The ACC often promotes the plastics industry’s sizable 
investments in plastics recycling. In April 2020—just one  
day before the debut of the movie The Story of Plastic ,  
which details the environmental and human impacts  
of the lifecycle of plastic—the ACC issued the statement  
“the private sector has invested $4.6 billion in advanced 
recycling technologies to complement and support existing 
recycling systems. ”3 An infographic posted on the ACC’s 
website had an even higher $4.8 billion in investment in 
52 projects supposedly able to divert 3 million tons of  
waste from landfills, and then later updated this to  
$5.2 billion in investments in 62 projects supposedly  
able to divert 3.6 million tons of waste.4 
While the ACC does not promote or publicize the list  
of these projects, we obtained the list of the projects  
used to generate this estimate. We found a range of 
technologies, including so-called “chemical recycling”  
and waste-to-fuel, as well as mechanical recycling 
improvements and upgrades, suggesting that the ACC  
may be trying to conflate unproven technologies and  
false solutions with mere additions and improvements 
to existing systems. We reviewed the various projects, 
technologies, and companies to assess whether these 
investments are actually plastics recycling and whether  
any of them might viably—and urgently—reduce plastic 
production and pollution. We found that many of the 
investments are going into waste-to-fuel projects  
(which is not recycling), that one-third of the total  
projects or companies are likely to not be viable, and  
that none of the plastic-to-plastic projects on this list 
shows promise of becoming viable. This means that  
very little of this investment has a chance of reducing 
plastic production or pollution, and ensures years of  
fossil-based plastic production. 1. Introduction
Despite decades of deceptive industry marketing, we know  
we can’t recycle our way out of the plastic pollution crisis.  
But the companies making and selling plastic—and their trade 
association surrogate the American Chemistry Council—aren’t 
giving up. Instead, they’re doubling down to mislead investors, 
governments, and the public into believing we can. Here’s how 
they’re using the fantasy of chemical recycling to do it. 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 4
Key Findings 
	|Less than 50% of the projects on the ACC’s list of “advanced” recycling met our basic criteria to be deemed credible plastic 
recycling projects; the rest were either waste-to-fuel/plastic-to-fuel (which is not recycling), or other non-reprocessing 
projects. 
	|Of the recycling projects we determined to be  valid mechanical or plastic-to-plastic recycling, we found these would have 
a total processing capacity of 0.2% of the plastic waste generated in 2017. This means that if even these projects are all 
successful and operate at full capacity, this would not address the overproduction of plastic in the U.S. market. 
	|About one-third  of the total proposed recycling projects either is unlikely to be viable or is questionable as to whether they  
will be completed, and all of the plastic-to-plastic projects are considered to be of questionable viability or potentially 
unviable. This means that the promises of plastic-to-plastic recycling show very little likelihood of recycling any plastic.  
	|Taxpayer funding of at least $506 million was identified to be invested in these projects.
	|Almost 90% of the taxpayer funds identified for projects on the ACC’s list went to waste-to-fuel projects, meaning public 
money is being used to produce fuels, waxes, and chemicals for the petrochemical industry. 
The Problem 
To date, only 9% of the plastic ever produced has been 
recycled.5 The Ellen MacArthur Foundation estimated in 
2017 that, globally, 95% of plastic packaging material value 
was lost after a single use, and only 14% was even collected 
for recycling, with a much smaller percentage functionally 
recycled into new plastic packaging.6 In the U.S., only 8% of all 
plastic generated was recycled in 2017.7 
Recent research by Greenpeace revealed that many plastics 
used by food and beverage companies have such a low 
likelihood of being reprocessed in the U.S. by municipal 
collection and waste management systems that “recyclable” 
labels or symbols on packaging can be considered deceptive 
marketing.8 At the same time, in an effort to address public 
concerns about plastic packaging, many large multinational 
food and beverage companies have made “circular economy” 
commitments to increase the use of recyclable and recycled 
content in their plastic packaging.9 The petrochemical and 
plastics industries are at the ready to promote chemical 
recycling as a technical quick fix and silver bullet. 
The False Solution
Many chemical recycling technologies co-opt “circular 
economy” language, but upon investigation, these circular 
claims fall flat. First, waste-to-fuel and plastic-to-fuel using 
heat processes (gasification or pyrolysis) to combust the 
waste or plastic into materials such as diesel jet fuel  
marketed to airlines, waxes, or lubricants, and the 
engineering nature of these processes, do not readily  
produce oil or gas able to be used as a drop-in solution  
for plastic manufacturing. Thus, these products are more 
likely to be combusted rather than recycled.10 This is a bait-and-switch, as the world is already awash in oil 
and gas, and more of it is not needed.  In fact, virgin plastic 
is cheaper than recycled plastic precisely because the fossil 
fuels used to produce it are so plentiful . There is no evidence 
that the marketing of the fuels generated from the burning of 
waste actually reduces oil and gas exploration or production, 
or demand for virgin plastic resin. Plastic-to-fuel does not 
solve a plastic production problem, but instead aims to solve 
a waste management problem. It should be underscored that 
waste-to-fuel and plastic-to-fuel are not “recycling”; rather, 
they are material destruction. 
ACC member Dow Chemical Company, a leading promoter of 
pyrolysis waste-to-fuel processes, initially called its process 
“recycling. ” However, after being pressed by the National 
Recycling Coalition in 2017, Dow leadership replied publicly: 
“We agree. It is not recycling. ”11 Still, the ACC persists in 
using the term “advanced recycling” for chemical recycling, 
even noting on a current regulatory fact sheet that chemical 
recycling facilities, including pyrolysis and gasification, 
“should be regulated not as recycling but new manufacturing. 
These facilities receive plastic feedstock that is converted to 
valuable fuels and petrochemical products, ” and that these 
companies should be considered “producers of alternative 
energy not waste disposal companies. ”12
Plastic-to-plastic technologies, on the other hand, could 
theoretically produce plastic building blocks, like styrene 
or the monoethylene glycol used to make polyethylene 
terephthalate (PET) plastic, which would potentially classify  
it as recycling. However, many of these technologies remain 
proven only in laboratory conditions, which are vastly different  
from real-world conditions. As Global Initiative for Incinerator  
Alternatives (GAIA) has demonstrated in its recent investigation  
on U.S. chemical recycling, there are no plastic-to-plastic 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 5
facilities proven to be currently operational at commercial 
scale, according to publicly available regulatory data.13 Only one  
company, Agilyx, claims to be commercially producing plastic 
monomers from waste plastic; however, investigations by GAIA 
reveals that Agilyx has not yet found an appropriate market 
for the styrene oil, leading to the incineration of the product.14 
And as with plastic-to-fuel, none of these technologies makes 
a credible case for actually reducing production of virgin 
plastic or exploration for and extraction of fossil fuels. 
Finally, recent investigations and technical assessments 
have found that the chemical recycling industry at large 
is characterized by unresolved technical, economic, and 
environmental problems, noting that many methods can 
release toxic chemicals into the environment, as many 
plastics contain additives and chemicals like phthalates 
or bisphenol A (BPA), which are not destroyed in the 
depolymerization processes.15 16 
Evidence on mature technologies such as gasification and 
pyrolysis shows both that they are energy intensive, as is the 
polymerization process to make new plastic, and that the 
chemical conversion itself generates significant quantities of  
carbon dioxide.17 18 And despite industry promotional claims,  
there is no evidence that proposed solvent-based technologies  
(plastic-to-plastic) can deliver a net-positive energy balance.  
It is very difficult to find publicly available information to  
understand the final fate accountability of materials generated  
by these processes that would not end up as marketable fuel 
or plastic, including feedstock that can’t be converted, co-
products like char or chemicals removed from the process, or 
greenhouse gas and volatile organic compound emissions. 
The Quest for Acceptance—  
and Taxpayer Dollars
The ACC also promotes robust growth and investment 
in the manufacturing of petrochemicals.  It often promotes 
$204 billion in petrochemical projects,19 a number that often 
appears as a stand-alone figure in news articles related to  
demand for plastic. Many of these projects would need additional  
financing and a complex series of environmental and land-use  
permits, and given the current economic downturn as well 
as the potential for a reduced demand for plastic, many 
likely will never be built. These projections are intended to 
drive investor confidence and create the impression that this 
money is already spent, suggesting that the buildout is “a 
done deal, ” ultimately serving the ACC’s agenda of influencing 
state and local governments and decision-makers to approve 
fossil fuel, petrochemical, and plastic expansion projects; 
remove regulatory obstacles; and award public monies or tax 
breaks to pass some of this investment on to taxpayers under 
the guise of the public good.  “Chemical recycling” projects may be more likely than 
petrochemical projects to be approved for regulatory relief or  
public funding, as they carry an aura of “green” and “circular, ”  
precisely because they are considered recycling. In many ways,  
“chemical recycling” is similar to “clean coal” or carbon 
capture and storage: a vaguely defined false solution promoted  
by the industry.20 Rather than pouring money into a declining 
oil and gas industry’s self-imagined technological solution, 
money should be invested into a green and just recovery 
prioritizing a transition away from petro-based business models  
toward a climate-safe future with environmental justice. 
In 2019, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) launched a 
“Plastics Innovation Challenge, ” which announced $25 million 
in grants to “position the U.S. as the world leader in advanced 
plastic recycling technologies. ”21 22 In April 2019, Haley 
Stevens (D-MI) convened a DOE hearing on chemical recycling. 
At the hearing Anthony Gonzalez (R-OH) said that “chemical 
recycling is probably ultimately how we get there, ”23 noting 
that Ohio is a center of polymer development and research, 
through the University of Akron’s College of Polymer Science 
and Polymer Engineering.  
Several current pieces of federal legislation include support 
for advanced and chemical recycling. The Realizing the 
Economic Opportunities and Values of Expanding Recycling 
(RECOVER) Act (H.R. 5115) would allocate $500 million 
in federal grants for states, municipalities, and tribal 
governments to expand recycling infrastructure. While the act 
does not specify advanced or chemical recycling, definitions 
of “recycling” in this bill include generation of feedstocks 
for manufacturing.24 The ACC and other trade associations 
support this bill, and a coalition of plastic and petrochemical 
manufacturers—including packaging manufacturer and 
recycler Berry Global (which has a project on the ACC’s list)—
signed a letter to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) and 
others in April 2020, asking her to include the RECOVER Act in 
a coronavirus-related infrastructure package.25 Co-sponsors 
of this bill are Tony Cárdenas (D-CA) and Larry Buchson (R-IN); 
four of the 52 projects on the ACC list are in Indiana (as well as 
another large PET recycling facility not on this list). 
The Plastic Waste Reduction and Recycling Act (H.R. 7728), 
introduced by Reps. Stevens and Gonzalez, includes direction 
to the National Science Foundation, DOE, Environmental 
Protection Agency, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration to support research and other activities on 
advanced recycling technologies.26 This bill is endorsed by the 
ACC.27 Haley Stevens also launched the Congressional Plastics 
Solutions Task Force in December 2019, which will, among 
other activities, look at “new technologies” and “facilitate 
investment in recycling technologies and promote education 
on plastics generation and recovery. ”28 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 6
Consumer Goods Companies: 
Wishcycling Their Recycling 
Commitments
Despite the fact that waste-to-fuel is not recycling, or that  
plastic-to-plastic is not technically or economically viable,29  
and that the plastics industry has yet to prove the environ-  
mental, climate, and health safety of these technologies, 
major food and beverage corporations are eagerly promoting 
them under the guise of “recycling” throughout their 
corporate responsibility materials and “circular economy” 
commitments.30 Many fast-moving consumer goods 
companies have invested in or agreed to purchase material 
generated from these plastic-to-plastic and waste-to-fuel 
/plastic-to-fuel companies and technologies, including 
Nestlé, PepsiCo, and Unilever,31 32 33 and others have publicly 
declared interest in so-called chemical recycling consortiums 
and partnerships with fossil fuel companies. Mars Inc., for 
example, sees pyrolysis as a part of its “circular economy” 
goals and has joined a consortium with petrochemical giant 
Total to develop and expand pyrolysis technologies.34
Companies appear to be relying on the promise of 
“chemically recycled” packaging to satisfy their recycled 
content commitments.35 They face considerable risk of not 
meeting their commitments without significantly investing 
in innovations based on reuse that aim at total reduction 
of single-use plastics. Many fast-moving consumer goods 
companies and retailers —including Coca-Cola, Colgate-
Palmolive, Keurig Dr Pepper, PepsiCo, Procter & Gamble, 
Unilever, and Walmart—are also investing in “chemical recycling” technologies indirectly via their funding of Closed 
Loop Partners’ infrastructure investment fund.36 Closed Loop 
Partners funds several chemical recycling companies, many of 
which appear on the ACC’s list. 
Three of the projects on the ACC’s list are associated with 
major fast-moving consumer goods companies: 
Loop Industries/Indorama: Coca-Cola, Danone, PepsiCo  
PureCycle: Nestlé, L ’Oréal, P&G
BP Infinia: Unilever  
These are the only three projects on the list that would be 
considered plastic-to-plastic, and we determined all three 
to be of questionable viability. 
Petrochemical Companies:  
Fueling Climate Change 
Many of these waste-to-fuel projects are either themselves 
owned by fossil fuel or petrochemical companies, or have 
petrochemical value chain partners and are currently 
supplying them with fossil fuels. Many petrochemical 
companies have announced investments in various “chemical 
recycling” start-ups in Europe and North America.37 Several 
of these smaller companies position themselves as “green 
recycling” or “clean tech” companies, but in reality generate 
fuels and petrochemicals that are bought by companies like 
BP, INEOS , and Shell . At least two companies promise to 
produce jet fuel, which would be used not to make plastic, but 
would be combusted. 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 7
New In vestments in U .S. Plastics R ecycling
Combined projects valued at 
billion3.0 524.8Announced since July 2 017 
projects in the U.S.Potential to divert  
million tons of waste*
from landfills
Advanced Recy cling
Growing in vestmen ts in adv anced r ecycling 
technolog ies ar e also e xpanding the t ypes 
of plastics tha t can be r eused , as w ell as the 
range of outputs tha t can be pr oduc ed, mak ing 
it a pr omising option f or the pa th forward.Traditional Recy cling
Inno vations t o str engthen tr aditional r ecycling 
robotics , near -infr ared optics , etc.) being * Mostly plastic, but includes other waste 
(MSW, cartons, electronics, etc.)$
Circular
EconomyNew Ways to Reuse Plastics
Today a g rowing number of post -use plastics ar e 
being r epur posed t o create a r ange of useful 
produc ts for new manufac turing, from the 
feedst ocks t o create br and new plastics t o 
transpor tation fuels , waxes, and a wide r ange 
of raw ma terials.
RETAIL
USERECOVERY,
RECYCLING,
REUSEMANUFACTURE
REDESIGN
Learn mor e about indus try adv ances at 
plas ticmak ers.com
© 2020 A mer ican Chemistr y Council , Inc.
An Industr y Mo ving F orward
U.S. businesses acr oss a v ariety of sec tors ar e tak ing bold st eps t o help end plastic 
in technology , systems , and infr astruc ture so mor e plastics ar e recovered, recycled , 
and r eused . These in vestmen ts ar e mo ving us closer t o attaining our goal of 
reusing , recycling , or r ecovering all plastic pack aging b y 2040.
Figure 1: ACC Infographic on Investments in Plastics Recycling (2020). 
Methodology 
We obtained the list of projects the ACC used to generate its 
$4.6 billion estimate. This list, presented in section 3, included 
only the project name and cities. Using publicly available 
information, we analyzed these projects to determine if 
they can legitimately be considered plastics recycling, and 
whether the technologies are viable and likely to be built 
or successfully to recycle plastic waste to plastic. We also 
tabulated the known costs of these investments as well as 
any public funds spent. The list we obtained had 52 projects, 
and predated the ACC’s updated infographic (Figure 1). It is 
not clear what criteria the ACC used to put this list together, 
though we noted that of the ACC’s six technology provider 
members of its Advanced Recycling Alliance for Plastics,38 five 
are represented on this list. 
Between June and July 2020, we reviewed a range of 
company websites, news articles, state permitting databases 
(e.g., state environmental permits, air quality permits), the 
CalRecycle public database, corporate registration records, annual reports, and investor information. One of the projects 
was a duplicate, so we analyzed a total of 51 projects. Our 
review included two criteria for meeting the definition of 
plastics recycling, an investment breakdown of the projects, 
and their processing capacity. 
Criterion 1: Does the Project Actually 
Recycle Plastic?
To meet the definition of “plastics recycling, ” the project 
must process plastic waste into plastic resin that can be used 
as feedstock for making a new plastic product. There is no 
standard definition of “advanced” or “chemical” recycling; 
the industry uses them interchangeably and liberally 
as greenwashing terms. We reviewed publicly available 
information about specific technologies and processes in 
use or proposed for each project to determine whether it is 
mechanical recycling, plastic-to-plastic, or waste-to-fuel. 
Mechanical recycling : mehanical recycling is “standard” 
recycling that many of us are familiar with, where plastic 
is washed, chopped, and melted into plastic pellets, which 
are used to make new plastic products. Limitations in this 
process mean that most mechanically recycled plastic 
waste is transformed into material of lesser value, also 
known as downcycling. 
Sorting : We found several examples of projects that were 
expansions of or upgrades to materials recovery facilities 
(MRFs). Projects that simply separate and bale mixed 
curbside materials are not necessarily “plastics recycling, ” 
though upgrades such as robotics and optical sorting may 
theoretically increase the reprocessing capacity. 
Waste-to-fuel/plastic-to-fuel : Existing, pilot, or proposed 
projects and facilities that use any of a variety of methods, 
generally involving heat and combustion, to turn plastic or 
mixed waste into hydrocarbons, such as gas or oil. These 
should not be considered recycling, since those materials 
are ultimately combusted. Twelve of the ACC’s 51 projects 
are waste-to-fuel or plastic-to-fuel. We found one company, 
Aemerge RedPak, that appears to be solely waste-to-
energy, which we noted but included in this category.
Plastic-to-plastic : Pilot or proposed projects or facilities 
that would use any potential method to process plastic 
waste into the chemical precursors used to make plastic, 
or plastic monomers, are classified as plastic-to-plastic. 
This could theoretically be considered a chemical recycling 2. Criteria for Evaluation

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 8
technology if proven to work at commercial scale. 
However, all plastic-to-plastic projects on this list remain 
unproven, and all were all found to be of questionable 
viability (see Criterion 2: Are These Investments Viable? ), 
and those that are proven are only proven in labs. It is 
important to note our classification of the technology as 
plastic-to-plastic does not mean it will automatically end 
up becoming valid plastic recycling.  
Most mechanical recycling is downcycling, where plastics  
are transformed into items of lesser value (e.g., plastic  
bottles reprocessed into carpet fibers). While some of the 
mechanical recycling investments on the ACC list appear  
to have some kind of innovative element (e.g., robotics, 
optical sorting), many of the projects on this list are a 
somewhat low bar for “advanced” innovation. We also  
found that, of the mechanical recycling/downcycling projects, 
many process or intend to process items like windshields, 
agricultural plastic, carpet, car seats and automotive plastic, 
or medical waste. Recycling these items does not address or 
improve the low recyclability of single-use packaging which 
remains the largest end use of plastic,39 40 41 and which  
remains difficult to reprocess. 
A few projects on the ACC list appeared to be in error  
(e.g., duplicate, one company that sold chemically recycled 
plastic but did not produce it). We raise this caution to  
ensure that the ACC is not inflating investment claims for 
“advanced” recycling by including any recycling upgrades. 
Seven of the 51 projects on the ACC’s list were sorting or  
non-recycling. 
Of the total 5142 projects:
	|Almost half are expansion of or upgrades to  
mechanical recycling facilities, including some  
that were sorting facilities or pilot projects. 
	|Almost one-quarter are waste-to-fuel/plastic-to-fuel,  
which is not plastics recycling. The ACC’s inclusion  
of waste-to-fuel conflates generation of fuels from  
plastic waste with recycling. 
	|Seven were difficult to evaluate and define. We  
were unable to determine whether these could  
be classified as mechanical recycling, waste-to-fuel/  
plastic-to-fuel, or plastic-to-plastic, due to lack of  
available public data of the specific processes. 
	|We considered only four to be plastic-to-plastic  
chemical recycling. It is important to note  
that none of these four is considered viable  
(see Criterion 2) nor do we consider this an 
environmentally or economically sound solution  
to plastic waste, for reasons listed above.Criterion 2: Are These Investments 
Viable? 
Announcements about projects are free and easy to make, 
but obtaining the necessary financing or permits to complete 
those projects may be much more difficult. The ACC may 
be publicizing these numbers to lend credibility to these 
companies to gain more private investments, public funds, or  
tax breaks, or more favorable regulatory environments for 
“chemical recycling. ” We reviewed public information about 
each project to determine if the announced investments are  
viable—that is, the projects are likely to be built and successfully  
reprocess plastic—or whether they appear to be in the concept  
phase or otherwise stalled or likely to become stalled. 
Operational : Many facilities appear to be operational, or 
seem likely to be operational by the end of this year. We 
found that 16 of the 51 projects are or appear to be already 
operational; however, this finding may not take into 
account COVID-19–related closures or idling. 
Likely or potentially likely to progress : Facilities seem to 
be progressing through construction, and appear to have 
adequate funding and permits for completion. 
Questionable : We identified many projects as “questionable”  
that may be an investment risk—for example, previous 
failed investments by the company, significant changes in 
the operating environment, or public opposition. 
Unlikely to progress : Projects are unlikely to progress if 
they have had a number of delays, or if completion was 
necessary on permits or additional funding that may be 
difficult to obtain. 
Difficult to evaluate—concept/announcement phase : 
Some projects on this list were difficult to evaluate, as they 
are currently in their concept or announcement phase. 
For projects we determined “unlikely to progress” or 
“questionable, ” we do not believe they are guaranteed to 
fail. Rather, questions must be raised as to the viability of the 
investments, particularly for projects that received public 
funding, like tax abatements or state/county development 
funds. At least one company that appears on the ACC project 
list, Fulcrum Biofuels, has had a project in its announcement 
phase for almost 10 years.
Many “chemical recycling” companies (including those not 
featured on this list) are start-ups, often with proprietary, non-
transparent technology. We note that many of these projects 
seem to be led by serial entrepreneurs who raise endless 
rounds of capital, while failing to deliver products to market. 
Pyrolysis and gasification in particular have been promoted 
as alternatives to waste incineration for decades; however, 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 9
they have a failed track record due to inefficiency, emissions 
pollution, and environmental impact.43 44
Of the 12 waste-to-fuel/plastic-to-fuel projects on the ACC  
list, only 3 are operational, with 7 considered questionable  
or in the announcement/concept phase. Of the four projects 
we determined to be plastic-to-plastic—BP (Naperville, IL),  
Eastman (location TBD), Loop Industries/Indorama 
(Spartanburg, SC), and PureCycle (Ironton, OH)—we found 
that all were either announcement only, and thus difficult 
to evaluate, or questionable. Thus, we determined that no 
plastic-to-plastic projects on this list are likely to actually 
recycle plastic.  
Investment Breakdown
To include project cost estimates, we looked at a range of  
public information. We did not find any financial or investment  
information for 15 of the 51 projects,45 and where found, we 
reported the project cost, often without knowing if this money 
has already been spent, or is an estimated or actual project 
price tag. This would be particularly concerning for projects 
with high price tags that have not demonstrated viability. 
The 36 projects for which we found announced costs totaled 
$2.176 billion.46 Of this amount, we found that $1.25 billion 
(57%) was associated with waste-to-fuel/plastic-to-fuel 
projects, and $145 million was associated with plastic-to-
plastic; the remainder ($542 million) was associated with 
mechanical recycling or sorting. Of the waste-to-fuel/plastic-
to-fuel projects, $600 million was announced for projects 
we determined to be unlikely to be built and viably recycle 
plastic. 
We also searched for publicly available information on the 
amount of public funds spent on these projects; however, 
note that this information is incomplete and the amount 
may be higher. Among the 51 projects, we found that at 
least $506 million had been awarded via public funds since 
2017, including bonds, loans, grants, tax credits, and other 
incentives; this number is likely much higher. The ACC 
typically refers to the wave of investments as private-sector 
investments, meaning that these funds are likely to be in 
addition to  the $4.6 billion of announced investments. 
Of the identified $506 million of taxpayer funds spent on 
projects on this list, 89% was spent on waste-to-fuel/
plastic-to-fuel projects, meaning that taxpayer money was 
directed toward generating fuels for the petrochemical 
industry, not toward recycling plastic . We acknowledge 
that not all of this money is to ultimately be derived from 
taxpayers, as it includes bonds or loans; however, given the 
track record of some companies on this project list, and the questionable viability of many of these projects, there is a risk 
that these companies could fail to or struggle to repay their 
financial obligations. At least one company, Aemerge RedPak, 
has already defaulted on some of those funds; this company 
appears to only produce energy from its combusted waste 
(see findings in 4. Project and Company Profiles ).
We also note that several companies that received taxpayer 
dollars are owned by large waste management companies 
with existing revenue streams. For example, North Gateway 
Transfer Station in Phoenix, Arizona, is a subsidiary of 
Republic Services, one of the largest waste management 
companies in the country; with approximately $10 billion in 
revenue in 2019, it is not clear why this company needed to 
seek taxpayer funds.47
Overall, we found that $270,312,564 in taxpayer funds was spent  
on projects considered questionable or unlikely to be built.
Processing Capacity
To include processing capacity, we reviewed a range of 
publicly available information, mainly through announced 
projects as well as databases, such as CalRecycle grants. 
We are unable to verify whether this processing capacity is 
accurate for the projects now open, or whether the stated 
projects will achieve announced projections. For most of 
the projects, we were able to use stated processing capacity; 
we made a few estimates where we felt we had enough 
information to do so (e.g., size of facility, similar facility/
technology announced by company).48 
We found these 51 projects would add a total of 1,391,937 
tons per year of additional processing capacity, which would 
be 4.02% of 2017’s generation of plastic waste (34.5 million 
tons).49 However, the waste-to-fuel projects—461,750 tons per 
year of announced additional processing capacity, or 0.1% 
of the plastic waste generated in 2017—are not recycling at 
all, so while this amount may be theoretically diverted from 
a landfill, it is transformed into inefficient fuels or (typically 
combusted) or petrochemicals. It is also difficult to ascertain 
how much new fuel and chemical inputs these projects would 
“offset” from existing petrochemical and plastic production. 
It should also be noted that at least two companies—Roy 
Tech Environ and Yunnan Zintongi Plastics Engineering—are 
Chinese-owned and exporting reprocessed plastic to China, as 
a workaround to the legal limitations on the export of plastic 
waste. It is not clear how much, if any , of these companies’ 
recycled plastic is being used in domestic U.S. manufacturing, 
as opposed to being sent to China. We did not find evidence 
of exporting of reprocessed plastic from the remaining 49 
companies on this list, though it could be possible. 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 10
The following table describes our findings. Details and references for these findings follow in 4: Project and Company Profiles .
Name/  
Location Technology TypeLikelihood of Progressing (Viability)
1 bar: difficult to evaluate/announcement phase
2 bars: unlikely
3 bars: questionable
4 bars: potentially likely
5 bars: likely to progress
6 bars: operationalFinancial 
InformationPlastic 
reprocessing 
capacity  
(tons/year)
Agilyx / Ineos 
Styrolution 
Channahon, ILQuestionable. Agilyx plans to 
do plastic-to-plastic styrene 
processing, but issues at its Tigard, 
OR, plant raise questions as to 
whether this is actually plastic-to-
fuel.
?Difficult to evaluate: announcement phase. 
Partnership with INEOS announced in Dec. 
2019. A June 2020 update notes that the 
facility (to be added onto INEOS’’ existing 
facility) is still in the design phase. 
I I I I I INone found
 3,650
Aemerge RedPak
Hesperia, CAWaste-to-energy. Facility performs 
thermal destruction of medical 
waste, generating syngas and char 
for energy.Operational.
I I I I I I$55 million None found
Agilyx
Trainer, PAPlastic-to-fuel. This facility as 
announced would convert plastic 
waste to synthetic crude oil to be 
used by Delta’s jet fuel subsidiary, 
Monroe Energy.Questionable. It is not clear if there has 
been any progress on the Agilyx facility at 
Monroe Energy’s refinery since the Nov. 
2018 announcement, and several analysts 
have raised questions about this refinery’s 
profitability, including the recent COVID-19–
related economic downturn. 
I I I I I INone found None found
Aquafil Carpet 
Recycling
Phoenix, AZPlastic-to-fuel. This facility collects 
and prepares plastic for global 
export to a plastic-to-fuel facility. Operational, since late Dec. 2017.
I I I I I I$10 million None found
Avangard 
Innovative
TBD, NV  Mechanical recycling /downcycling Potentially likely. Announcements as of Sept. 
2019 indicated that the Nevada plant was 
planned for a 4th-quarter 2020 opening. 
However, there is no information as to the 
site’s location or if the project has progressed. 
I I I I I I$30 million 50,000
Avangard 
Innovative
Houston, TXMechanical recycling /downcycling Likely to progress. A Feb. 2020 report noted 
that this facility was set to open in Apr. 2020, 
though no reports of the opening have been 
found. 
I I I I I I$30 million 50,000 
AZEK
Wilmington, OHMechanical recycling /downcycling Operational. TimberTech mechanical 
recycling plant opened in April 2019. 
I I I I I I$25 million 50,000 3. Evaluation of the  
ACC’s Projects List

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 11
Name/  
Location Technology TypeLikelihood of Progressing (Viability)
1 bar: difficult to evaluate/announcement phase
2 bars: unlikely
3 bars: questionable
4 bars: potentially likely
5 bars: likely to progress
6 bars: operationalFinancial 
InformationPlastic 
reprocessing 
capacity  
(tons/year)
Balcones
Dallas, TXSorting. This materials recovery 
facility (MRF) performs separation 
and baling of collected curbside 
materials, including paper, metal, 
glass, and plastic. Operational. 
I I I I I I$6 million None found
Berry Global and 
Georgia-Pacific 
Recycling
TBDMechanical recycling /downcycling Potentially likely. Partnership announced in 
Jan. 2020. 
I I I I I INone found None found
BP Infinia
Naperville, ILPlastic-to-plastic Difficult to evaluate: announcement phase. 
In Oct. 2019, BP announced development 
of a pilot project at its research center, to be 
completed by mid-year 2020.
I I I I I I$25 million Pilot project 
capacity 
assumed to 
be 365 tons/yr 
(10 tons/day).
Brightmark
TBDQuestionable. Specific details have 
not been fully announced. However, 
Brightmark’s plant in Ashley, IN, is 
waste-to-fuel. 
?Questionable. The company announced in 
Nov. 2019 that it would invest $500 million 
to $1 billion to build each of potentially up to 
10 new facilities. However, this is a very early 
announcement, with no further news as to 
cities, sites, agreements, etc. 
I I I I I I$500 million to 
$1 billionNone found
Brightmark 
Energy/
ResPolyflow
Ashley, INWaste-to-fuel Likely. Project was announced to have begun 
operation in late May 2020. 
I I I I I I$262 million, 
including 
$187.5 million 
in taxpayer 
fundingNone found
CarbonLite
Reading, PAMechanical recycling /downcycling Likely. The facility was wrapping up 
construction in Jan. 2020.
I I I I I I$80 million 42,500 to 
75,000. 
CarbonLite
Dallas, TXMechanical recycling /downcycling Operational since late 2017.
I I I I I I$62 million 50,000
East-Terra 
Plastics
Connorsville, INMechanical recycling /downcycling Operational. Moved to expanded facility in 
2018.
I I I I I I$5 million  1,000
Eastman
TBDPlastic-to-plastic
(methanolysis) Difficult to evaluate at time of writing/ 
announcement phase. Eastman estimates 
this would be at scale by 2021 or 2022.
I I I I I INone found None found
Eastman
Kingsport, TNPlastic-to-fuel. Eastman’s “carbon 
renewal” technology is gasification, 
which produces syngas.Questionable. Eastman claims to have 
reached a commercially operational stage, 
but no publicly available data substantiate 
such claims. 
I I I I I INone found None found
 Ecomelida
Orangeburg, SC Mechanical recycling /downcycling Questionable. Project appears delayed. 
I I I I I I $52 million None found

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 12
Name/  
Location Technology TypeLikelihood of Progressing (Viability)
1 bar: difficult to evaluate/announcement phase
2 bars: unlikely
3 bars: questionable
4 bars: potentially likely
5 bars: likely to progress
6 bars: operationalFinancial 
InformationPlastic 
reprocessing 
capacity  
(tons/year)
EFS Plastics 
Hazleton, PAMechanical recycling /downcycling Operational since 2018. Current expansion 
underway. EFS notes that it lost orders in 
Spring 2020. 
I I I I I INone found Estimated 
15,000
EFS Plastics 
TBD, West CoastMechanical recycling /downcycling Difficult to evaluate /announcement phase 
only. 
I I I I I INone found 2,000
Envision Plastics
Chino, CAMechanical recycling /downcycling Likely. Expansion of an existing project.
I I I I I I$2.94 million 3,480 
Far West 
Recycling
Portland, OregonSorting. This was a temporary 
60-day demonstration project of 
sorting and collection, run by Titus 
MRF. No—pilot completed.
I I I I I INone found None found
FCC
Houston, TXSorting. This MRF performs 
separation and baling of collected 
curbside materials (paper, metal, 
glass, and plastic), but does not 
recycle/reprocess them. Operational.
I I I I I I$23 million None found
FDS 
Manufacturing
Pomona, CAQuestionable. Project received a 
Cal Recycle grant for mechanical 
recycling of /downcycling of 
plastic—however, at a different 
location. At least one outlet 
describes the Pomona project as 
processing of agricultural waste 
(nut shells, etc.) into plastic. 
?Difficult to evaluate, as the exact project is 
not clear. 
I I I I I I$2.96 million 2,000
Fulcrum 
BioEnergy
Gary, INWaste-to-fuels. The facility would 
turn municipal solid waste into jet 
fuel. Unlikely. Project was announced in Dec. 2018, 
and does not appear to have progressed past 
announcements. 
I I I I I I$600 million None found
Fulcrum 
BioEnergy
Reno, NVWaste-to-fuels plant. The facility 
would turn household waste (MSW) 
into synthetic crude oil.Unlikely. This facility was originally 
announced as early as 2011, and though 
some constructions appear to have been 
initiated, this project seems stalled. 
I I I I I INone found None found 
GBD International
New Brunswick, 
NJMechanical recycling /downcycling; 
expansion of existing facilities Likely. At least one report suggests this 
expansion may have been completed in 2019. 
I I I I I I$1 million 13,200

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 13
Name/  
Location Technology TypeLikelihood of Progressing (Viability)
1 bar: difficult to evaluate/announcement phase
2 bars: unlikely
3 bars: questionable
4 bars: potentially likely
5 bars: likely to progress
6 bars: operationalFinancial 
InformationPlastic 
reprocessing 
capacity  
(tons/year)
Green Tech 
Solution Inc.
Blacksburg, SCQuestionable. While initial PR 
announcements about this facility 
mention plastics recycling, the 
company’s website currently 
indicates it only accepts electronics 
and ferrous metals for recycling. 
?Unlikely: The project was expected to come 
online by 2019, but the property is currently 
listed as available for lease, and no further 
announcements have been made. 
I I I I I I$75 million None found
GreenMantra
TBDQuestionable. We did not find a 
specific project. The company 
states: “Synthetic waxes are 
GreenMantra’s primary commercial 
product. ”
?Difficult to evaluate: announcement phase. 
No information found for development of a 
plant in the U.S., though the existing facility 
in Canada has been under expansion.
I I I I I I$300 million None found
Inline Plastics
Shelton, CTNot recycling. Inline purchases 
chemically recycled plastic and 
touts the recycled packaging it 
sells but does not actually perform 
recyclingDid not evaluate: not recycling. 
I I I I I INone found None found
J.P . Mascaro 
& Sons/
TotalRecycle
Exeter Township, 
PASorting. This municipal waste MRF 
separates plastic, but does not 
recycle it.Questionable. This MRF invested in a pilot 
project to evaluate film separation, but the 
pilot did not meet its goals, suggesting that 
the improvements may not be successful. 
I I I I I I$2.6 million None found
Loop Industries/
Indorama
Spartanburg, SCPlastic-to-plastic Questionable. There is a site, but facility 
construction has been delayed past expected 
2020 opening and has not yet started. The 
company says it needs additional investment 
to complete the project. 
I I I I I INone found 44,000 
Millville Plastics
Millville, NJQuestionable. Project 
announcements indicate 
the proposed facility would 
mechanically process various 
plastic scrap. However, Millville 
Plastics investor Green EnviroTech 
Holdings appears to only license 
pyrolysis (waste-to-fuel) technology 
for processing rubber tires. 
?Unlikely. Construction of this project is 
contingent upon a number of permits and 
resolution of ownership and tax history of 
the site, which has been ongoing for several 
years. 
I I I I I IPotentially 
$150 million None found
Netafim
Fresno, CAMechanical/ downcycling. 
Expansion of existing facility.Likely. Netafim affirmed its profitability in a 
May 2020 investor call.
I I I I I I$2.0 million Additional 
9,612 
New Hope Energy 
Tyler, TXPlastic-to-fuel (pyrolysis) Questionable. Operational as of 2019; 
however, there was a fire at the facility in May 
2020. Current status is not known. 
I I I I I I$150 million 340,000 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 14
Name/  
Location Technology TypeLikelihood of Progressing (Viability)
1 bar: difficult to evaluate/announcement phase
2 bars: unlikely
3 bars: questionable
4 bars: potentially likely
5 bars: likely to progress
6 bars: operationalFinancial 
InformationPlastic 
reprocessing 
capacity  
(tons/year)
Nexus Fuels
TBD, GAPlastic-to-fuel (pyrolysis) Questionable. The prototype is operational 
at small scale, but no further information has 
been found as to further commercial-scale 
operations. 
I I I I I INone found 18,250 
North Gateway 
Transfer Station
Phoenix, AZSorting. Project is a municipal waste 
transfer station for preliminary 
separation of collected curbside 
recyclable materials, including 
paper, metal, glass, and plastic. Operational.
I I I I I I$4.5 million None found
Peninsula 
Plastics 
Recycling
Turlock, CAMechanical recycling /downcycling Operational as of 2019.
I I I I I I$4 million Additional 
17,000 
PreZero US
Riverside, CAMechanical recycling /downcycling Operational. 
I I I I I I$90 million Additional 
13,000
PreZero US
Westminster, SCMechanical recycling /downcycling Operational. 
I I I I I I$13 million 30,000
PureCycle 
Technologies
Ironton, OHPlastic-to-plastic Questionable. Feedstock evaluation unit 
completed in 2015. Construction was planned 
later in 2020, but has been postponed again 
to 2022.
I I I I I I$120 million 50,000
Quad City 
Innovations
Livonia, MIWaste-to-fuel Difficult to evaluate: announcement/concept 
phase. 
I I I I I I $60 million 100,000
Refined Plastics
Berks County, PAWaste-to-fuel
(pyrolysis)Difficult to evaluate. Project appears to be 
still in announcement/concept phase.
I I I I I I$120 million None found
Regenyx, LLC
TBD, West CoastQuestionable. Regenyx is a joint 
venture that controls an Agilyx 
plant (plastic-to-plastic), though 
current plant outputs have thus 
far been incinerated). It is not clear 
what technology the company 
proposes for future locations.
?Difficult to evaluate. Project appears to be in 
concept phase only. 
I I I I I INone found None found
Renewlogy
Phoenix, AZWaste-to-fuel Questionable. Renewlogy’s other project has 
been shut down due to process issues. 
I I I I I I$5 million 3,000 to 4,000 
Roplast
Oroville, CAMechanical recycling /downcycling. 
Equipment upgrade to existing 
facility.Potentially likely
I I I I I I$2.5 million Additional 
2,500/year

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 15
Name/  
Location Technology TypeLikelihood of Progressing (Viability)
1 bar: difficult to evaluate/announcement phase
2 bars: unlikely
3 bars: questionable
4 bars: potentially likely
5 bars: likely to progress
6 bars: operationalFinancial 
InformationPlastic 
reprocessing 
capacity  
(tons/year)
Roy Tech Environ
Grant, ALMechanical recycling /downcycling Operational as of 2018
I I I I I I$1.6 million 22,000
rPlanet Earth
Vernon, CAMechanical recycling /downcycling Operational as of 2018
I I I I I I$100 million, 
with $37.5 
million in 
taxpayer funds40,000
Shark Glass 
Recycling West
Victorville, CAMechanical recycling /downcycling Likely
I I I I I I$1.3 million Estimated 430
 Sirmax SA
 Anderson, INMechanical recycling /downcycling Potentially likely. Addition to existing facility, 
announced in 2019. The site has been 
purchased and construction appears to be 
progressing; start-up planned by end of 2022.
I I I I I I$18 million 20,000
Titus MRF
Portland, ORNot recycling. This MRF is likely a 
duplicate of the entry for Far West 
Recycling.Duplicate of now-completed pilot (Far West 
Recycling).
I I I I I INone found None found
Yunnan Zintongi 
Plastics 
Engineering  
(UPT Group)
Montezuma, GAMechanical recycling /downcycling Operational.
I I I I I INone found None found 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 16
4. Project and Company Profiles
Aemerge RedPak, Hesperia, CA 
This waste-to-energy facility performs thermal destruction of 
medical waste, generating syngas and char for energy. There 
is no actual on-site plastic reprocessing, though the facility 
processes metal and glass waste, which can then be recycled. 
The company recently undertook a $50 million investment 
in 2017.50 It appears to have received $40 million in various 
taxpayer bonds, and to have defaulted on these in 2019 due 
to regulatory issues with the procurement of medical waste.51 
The company applied for funding from CalRecycle in 2019 for 
components of its waste-to-gas system, but did not receive 
the funding.52 
Agilyx
Agilyx is a thermal conversion technology provider that has  
developed a mixed plastic-to-crude thermal process, and is  
attempting to prove a plastic-to-plastic method.53 Its proprietary  
pyrolysis technology is billed as a “plastic-to-plastic, ” producing  
styrene oil from plastic waste. However, a recent investigation 
by GAIA reveals that styrene oil produced at Agiylx’s Tigard, 
Oregon, facility was later burned, rather than converted into 
new polystyrene.54 This raises questions as to whether Agilyx’s 
other facilities would be considered plastic-to-fuel. Either 
way, pyrolysis is problematic. Agilyx is a member of the ACC’s 
Advanced Recycling Alliance for Plastics.55 
Two Agilyx projects are on the ACC list. The ACC list also 
includes, Regenyx, a joint venture between Agilyx and Americas  
Styrenics (AmSty) that includes Agilyx’s flagship Tigard plant; 
we included this third project as a separate entry. 
Channahon, IL 
This project was announced between INEOS and Agilyx 
in December 2019.56 INEOS has since purchased the 
petrochemical business of BP , including Infinia. The 
INEOS Styrolution site in Channahon is directly adjacent 
to a facility operated by Americas Styrenics, the company 
whose St. James facility accepted styrene oil from Agilyx’s 
Tigard plant.57 A June 2020 update notes that the facility  
(to be added onto INEOS’ existing facility) is still in the 
design phase.58 No financial investment cost has been 
found. Expected capacity is 36,500 tons/year.59 
Trainer, P A 
This facility as announced would be waste-to-fuel, 
converting plastic waste to synthetic crude oil to be  
used by Delta’s jet fuel subsidiary, Monroe Energy.60  It is not clear if there has been any progress at the Agilyx 
facility at Monroe Energy’s refinery since the November 
2018 announcement, and several analysts have raised 
questions about Delta’s ability to make a profit with its 
refinery, including the recent COVID-19–related economic 
downturn.61 We did not find an investment or project cost, 
or the expected capacity at this facility. 
Aquafil Carpet Recycling, Phoenix, AZ 
Aquafil is an Italian nylon manufacturer that recently 
incorporated a chemical recycling process to turn nylon into 
its monomer (caprolactam), which it then uses it to make 
nylon and yarn for the textile and carpet industries,62 for 
customers including Adidas and Volcom.63 Aquafil opened 
its Phoenix location in late December 2017.64 This facility 
recovers and pelletizes carpet, and sends the pellets to 
Aquafil’s Slovenia facility for the depolymerization.65 66 
67 Closed Loop Partners classifies this as plastic-to-fuel 
technology, not plastic-to-plastic.68 
This Phoenix facility benefits from incentives related to 
California’s carpet recycling regulations. Aquafil announced 
$10 million in investment for its Phoenix location.69 The 
company notes a “favorable” business environment and 
support of the city, but we did not find evidence of public 
funds put toward this project. 70
Avangard Innovative
This recycling company is planning to build three facilities—
estimated at $30 million each—in the next few years to 
mechanically process commercial plastic film waste, including  
linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE) and low-density 
polyethylene (LDPE) bags, shrink-wrap. and protective films.71 
It is not clear why the ACC list only includes two facilities. 
TBD, NV
Announcements as of September 2019 indicated that 
the Nevada plant was planned for a fourth-quarter 
2020 opening. In 2020, Dow  has recently signed an 
agreement to purchase post-consumer recycled LDPE 
from Avangard Innovative; this announcement noted that 
the Nevada plant is now planned for 2021.72 However, no 
announcement of site selection or construction progress 
has been found, or progress on the project. Another article 
indicates further progress on Avangard Innovative’s Mexico 
plant.73 The project’s cost is $30 million,74 and its expected 
processing capacity is 50,000 tons/year75 76

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 17
Houston, TX
A February 2020 article noted that this facility was set to 
open in April 2020,77 but we have found no news reports 
about that opening. Like the Nevada plant, this plant is 
expected to cost $30 million,78 and its expected annual 
capacity is 50,000 tons.79 80 Unlike the Nevada plant, a 
facility exists.81
AZEK, Wilmington, OH 
This recycling company’s Wilmington facility processes post-
consumer plastic waste like high-density polyethylene (HDPE) 
jugs into outdoor decking and lumber, sold under the brand 
name TimberTech. The TimberTech mechanical recycling 
plant opened in April 2019,82 and AZEK went public in June 
2020.83 The project was a $25 million investment,84 with a 
50,000-ton/year production goal.85
Balcones, Dallas, TX 
This MRF separates and bails collected curbside materials, 
including paper, metal, glass, and plastic.86 It completed $6 
million in expansion in 2019,87 and was acquired by Closed 
Loop Partners in late 2019, with $2 million in improvements 
planned.88 Closed Loop Partners notes that Balcones is the 
largest privately held recycler in Texas.89 Its current processing 
capacity is 200,000 tons of material annually, 4% of which is 
plastic (the vast majority is paper).90
Berry Global and Georgia-Pacific 
Recycling, Location TBD 
Berry Global is a large plastic packaging manufacturer and 
recycler. Berry announced in January 202091 that it would 
be adding capacity at its existing facility in Victoria, TX;92 
however, the ACC list partnership may have another (or 
several locations).93 Georgia-Pacific intends to procure the 
post-consumer material (apparently polyethylene films), 
and Berry will reprocess it into recycled polyethylene. Costs 
were not disclosed in the partnership announcement.94 No 
production capacity was found. 
BP Infinia, Naperville, IL 
British oil major BP has developed a chemical recycling 
technology called Infinia. In October 2019, BP announced 
development of a $25 million pilot project at its research 
center and development hub95 in Naperville, which is scheduled  
to be completed in 2020.96 The process appears to be 
depolymerization that will break down PET into its precursors 
terephthalic acid (TPA) and monoethylene glycol (MEG).97In June 2020, BP announced the sale of its petrochemical 
business, including the Infinia chemical recycling technology, 
to gas and plastic giant INEOS . There is no indication yet that 
this sale will impact the development of the Infinia facility.  
The company did not announce planned capacity; we estimated  
pilot project capacity of 3,650 tons/year (10 tons/day).98 
A recently announced consortium led by BP involving Infinia 
technology includes consumer goods producers Danone  and 
Unilever , and packaging manufacturer ALPLA,99 who has 
supplied Unilever with plastic packaging for products such 
as Dove body wash containers.100 Unilever’s chairman of the 
board is also on the board of BP .101 
Brightmark
Formerly RESPolyFlow, Brightmark is a plastic-to-fuel company  
headquartered in San Francisco. Brightmark is a member of 
the ACC’s Advanced Recycling Alliance for Plastics.102
Ashley, IN
This facility is waste-to-fuel. The pyrolysis process will  
 turn plastic waste into diesel naphtha and waxes,103  
with no on-site plastics reprocessing. The company  
has received a number of public funds. The initial  
project as announced referred to a $260 million 
investment, including $185 million in Indiana green 
bonds;104 105 a recent investigation by GAIA showed  
the total investment now at $262 million, with 
$187.5 million in total taxpayer funds.106 In April 2020,  
the town of Ashley received a grant from the U.S. 
Department of Commerce’s Economic Development 
Administration for $1.2 million to extend water and  
sewer access for “a major plastics recycling company  
and to provide opportunities for further industrial  
and commercial development” (assumed to be 
Brightmark).107 BP has agreed to purchase fuel products 
from Brightmark Energy’s Ashley plastics-to-fuel plant,  
and AmWax will purchase waxes produced at the Ashley 
plant. This plant is now operational, though many  
delays were noted.108
Location TBD
The company announced in November that it would  
invest $500 million to $1 billion to build each of up 
to 10 new facilities;109 however, this is a very early 
announcement with no further news as to the cities,  
sites, agreements, etc. The specific projects have not  
been fully announced, but it is assumed that they  
would be waste-to-fuel, like Brightmark’s Ashley plant. 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 18
CarbonLite
This mechanical recycling PET company lists Nestlé  among its 
customers.110 Two expansion facilities are planned. 
Reading, P A
This PET recycling project was wrapping up construction in 
January 2020.111 This was a $80 million investment,112 and 
will add processing capacity of 42,500–75,000 tons/year.113 
Dallas, TX
This PET recycling facility opened in late 2017.114 
CarbonLite’s $62 million investment115 added 50,000116 
tons/year of processing capacity.
East-Terra Plastics, Connorsville, IN 
This project is an expansion of a post-industrial plastic 
mechanical recycling plant, which opened in 2018.117 118 The 
company recycles used child car seats collected from retailer 
take-back programs, like Walmart’s incentive-based program, 
and Walmart in turn uses the plastic from the seats to make 
shipping pallets.119 A $5 million investment appears to have 
been made by East-Terra in 2016.120 
Ecomelida, Orangeburg, SC
Plans for a $52 million investment in a carton recycling  
facility were announced by Ecomelida, the U.S. subsidiary  
of Chinese company Zhangzhou Sanlida Environmental 
Technology Corporation.121 122 The process described in  
initial announcements was mechanical recycling of food  
and beverage cartons; later documents suggest this is to  
be LDPE film reprocessing as well.123
Though it appears that the project may start reprocessing 
plastic by the fourth quarter of 2020,124 125 it is not clear why 
it has been delayed; the governor’s office had announced 
in early 2018 that the project would be operational by the 
fourth quarter of 2018, though U.S.–China tariffs may weigh 
on business decisions.126 127 It is also not clear if Ecomelida has 
the necessary permits,128 and it does not have a U.S.-facing 
web or business presence. The company received a $750,000 
Rural Infrastructure Fund grant from the state.129
Eastman
Chemical manufacturer Eastman has two projects on the  
ACC list. 
Kingsport,TN
Eastman’s “carbon renewal” technology is gasification, a  
plastic-to-fuel process that produces syngas.130 In November  
2019, Eastman announced modifications to the front end 
of the existing large-scale system to allow it to accept mixed plastics. Eastman signed a deal to receive carpet 
waste fibers processed in California by Circular Polymer, 
which are then shipped to Tennessee.131 It is not known if 
the process is operational or productive yet. It is possible 
that plans to expand production in 2020 may be threatened 
by the end of California’s carpet recycling subsidy.132
Location TBD
Eastman has announced it is looking into a plastic-to-plastic  
technique called methanolysis, which uses methanol to 
depolymerize plastic into plastic precursors dimethyl 
terephthalate (DMT) and ethyl glycol. The company would 
then use those precursors in the production of its plastic.133 
The likelihood that this project will progress is difficult to  
evaluate at the time of writing. Eastman estimates its 
methanolysis will be “at scale” by 2021 or 2022.134 No 
investment announcement or other information is 
currently available.
EFS Plastic
EFS is a mechanical recycling company with one recent 
expansion and another potentially planned. 
Hazelton, P A
This facility features mechanical recycling of post-
consumer plastics, including rigid packaging and film. 
The facility opened in 2018, with current expansion 
underway.135 EFS notes that it lost orders in the spring of 
2020.136 No investment announcement was found.
Location TBD, West Coast
In February 2019, EFS announced a new facility for 
mechanical recycling of post-consumer plastics, 
including rigid packaging and film.137 Though a January 
2020 report from the Northeast Recycling Council does 
mention Pomona, there are no announcements about site 
placement or progress.138 EFS Plastics’ existing facilities 
suffered a loss of orders in April 2020 when the California 
requirement for recycled content in bags was paused by 
Governor Newsom,139 though that pause has expired.140 No 
investment announcement was found. The two facilities 
have an estimated capacity of 30,000 tons/year.141 142
Envision Plastics, Chino, CA 
This mechanical recycling company is expanding its existing 
facility in Chino, California. Envision Plastics uses a patented 
technology it obtained from The Dow Chemical Company 
subsidiary Union Carbide. This facility will mechanically 
recycle HDPE containers collected curbside, as well as 
agricultural film.143 The project was funded by a $2.94 million 
CalRecycle state grant in 2018/2019.144 Expected additional 
capacity is 3,480 tons/year.145 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 19
Far West Recycling, Portland, OR 
Far West was a temporary 60-day demonstration project of 
sorting and collection, run by Titus MRF. It was funded by 
plastics trade industry associations (the ACC, PLASTICS), and 
manufacturers (AmSty, Berry Global, the Carton Council, 
LyondellBasell, Millikin), as well as Metro (Portland Metro 
Regional Government).146
FCC, Houston, TX 
FCC is a municipal waste material recovery facility (MRF in 
Houston that separates and bales collected curbside materials 
(paper, metal, glass, and plastic), but does not recycle/
reprocess them.147 The $23 million facility was financed by FCC 
(a waste hauling company) in 2018, and began operations in 
2019.148 Houston residents pay for the recycling services.149 
FDS Manufacturing, Pomona, CA
FDS manufactures industrial and agricultural packaging. The  
recycling techniques of this project are not fully clear. One 
article mentions a grant from CalRecycle in 2018/2019 to 
develop the process to turn agricultural waste (nut shells, 
etc.) into plastic at FDS’s Pomona location; however, the 
CalRecycle grant only mentions recycling polypropylene 
(PP) and polyethylene (PE) plastic waste at FDS’s Fresno 
and Riverside locations.150 FDS received a U.S. Department 
of Agriculture grant (amount undisclosed) to research the 
pelletization process, as well as a $2.96 million grant from the 
state of California.151 The CalRecyle grant lists a capacity of 
2,000 tons/year152
Fulcrum Biofuels 
This thermal waste-to-energy company had originally made 
an initial public offering (IPO) in 2011 to build a municipal 
solid waste (MSW)-to-ethanol plant in Nevada (see below). 
The company cancelled the IPO in 2012, citing “market 
conditions. ” A cursory review of the company’s history reveals 
many municipal bonds for biofuels projects over the years. In 
2016, BP (which has an 8% interest in Fulcrum) invested $30 
million in Fulcrum,153 as did United Airlines and Cathay Pacific 
Airways, and in October 2018, BP and chemicals firm Johnson 
Matthey signed an agreement with Fulcrum BioEnergy to 
license Fulcrum’s Fischer-Tropsch technology.154 
Two projects are on the ACC list for Fulcrum. 
Gary, IN
This project as proposed is a waste-to-fuel plant, not a 
recycling plant. The facility would turn household waste 
(MSW) into jet fuel. Announced in December 2018,155 the project does not appear to have progressed past 
announcements,156 though the company’s major investors 
include United Airlines, BP , Waste Management (WM), 
and the U.S. military.157 Fulcrum promised to invest $600 
million in this plant.158 The company has received at least 
$2.1 million from the Indiana Economic Development Corp. 
for this project 159
Reno, NV
Fulcrum Biofuels had originally made an IPO in 2011 to 
build an MSW-to-ethanol plant in Nevada, but shifting 
market conditions appear to have stalled this project. In 
2017, Fulcrum announced it had secured financing for the 
Nevada plant and construction had started again, though a 
company representative noted the plant would need to be 
operational for the company to receive cellulosic biofuels 
credits from the U.S. government.160 The company secured 
at least $200 municipal green bonds from the state of 
Nevada in 2019.161 
The plant appears to now be intended to convert MSW to 
synthetic crude oil (“syncrude”), which would be purchased 
by Marathon Petroleum for its refinery in Martinez, 
California;162 the Martinez refinery, idled since April 2020,  
is now set to be decommissioned.163WM and Waste 
Connections have long-term agreements to provide MSW  
to Fulcrum. Waste Dive notes this is an opportunity to  
“extend the life of the Lockwood Regional Landfill” and  
“could be a business opportunity for additional waste 
industry partners, ”164 suggesting that Fulcrum is not in the 
recycling business but is rather a manufacturer for the 
petroleum industry, as well as a company that resolves the 
issues of the waste management industry. 
The plant appears to still be under the initial construction 
stages. Announcements that it could be operational by 2020 
have not been substantiated, and given Fulcrum’s track 
record, it would not be surprising if challenging market 
conditions again disrupt necessary financing. 
GBD International, New Brunswick, NJ 
A 2018 announcement indicated the New Jersey company 
was undertaking a $1 million expansion of post-industrial 
film recycling in 2018;165 166 at least one report suggests this 
expansion may have been completed in 2019.167 This was 
reported as an increase in capacity of 13,200 tons/year.168 
This recycler had been threatened by the pause in California’s 
recycled content law,169 which has since expired. Shipments of 
various scrap and some reprocessed plastic pellets have been 
observed in export records from the U.S. overseas. 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 20
Green Tech Solution Inc., Blacksburg, SC
Green Tech Solution is a U.S. subsidiary of Chinese investment 
firm Tianjin Sheng Xin Non-Financing Guarantee Co.170 
Headed by the chairman of the Carolinas Chinese Chamber 
of Commerce,171 Green Tech announced a $75 million project 
investment in 2018, with appreciation from local and state 
government officials.172 However, since then, there have been 
no further announcements on progress, and the proposed site 
is currently listed for lease.173 
While initial PR announcements about this project mention 
plastics recycling,174 Green Tech Solution’s website 
currently indicates the company only accepts electronics 
and ferrous metals for recycling.175 It is possible that this 
project was intended to accept mixed plastic waste but has 
not progressed. As scrap from Green Tech Solutions’ other 
sites are sent to Malaysia for processing, it is likely that any 
pellets or scrap that would be generated from this site would 
be intended solely for export, not retained for domestic 
reprocessing or manufacturing.176 
GreenMantra Technologies,  
Brantford, Ontario
GreenMantra is a Canadian chemical recycling company. 
Closed Loop Partners classifies this work as both plastic-
to-plastic and plastic-to-fuel. However, GreenMantra’s 
technology appears to primarily produce polymers that can 
be added to other polymers for applications like roofing 
or asphalt: “Synthetic waxes are GreenMantra’s primary 
commercial product. ”177 One of GreenMantra’s offtake 
partners is Sun Chemical;178 INEOS Styrolution is also 
evaluating whether it will offtake GreenMantra’s sytrene 
liquid.179 GreenMantra is a member of the ACC’s Advanced 
Recycling Alliance for Plastics.180
It is not clear if this project is the expansion of the Ontario 
plant, or a new facility within the U.S. Closed Loop Fund 
invested $3 million for expansion of the company’s Bradford 
plant.181 The ACC list seems to indicate a different plant, as it is 
listed as TBD; however, we used the $3 million to estimate the 
investment. 
Inline Plastics, Shelton, CT
This packaging producer manufactures Safe-T-Fresh brand 
food containers for the food service/retail sector. It purchases 
“chemically recycled” plastic from Octal Extrusion Corp., 
an Oman-based PET sheet supplier.182 Inline advertises the 
recycled packaging it sells,183 but does not actually recycle 
plastic. The method that Octal uses to chemically recycle its plastic is also not disclosed.184 There is no indication of Inline 
Plastics’ investment in Octal Extrusion or other facilities.
J.P . Mascaro & Sons/Total Recycle, 
Exeter Township, PA
This facility was a year-long project to assess the viability 
of flexible plastic packaging. The facility itself was a sorting 
facility with no site processing capacity.185 Upon completion 
of the initial yearlong pilot, the project did not ultimately 
demonstrate the intended 99% capture rate (74% at the end 
of the project).186 This project received a $2.6 million grant 
from Materials 
Recovery for the Future, an ACC project that also includes 
consumer goods companies, and other trade associations. 187
Loop Industries/Indorama, 
Spartanburg, SC
This Canadian thermal decomposition company has 
formed a joint venture with global PET and polyester 
producer Indorama, using carpet as feedstock188 for its 
depolymerization chemical recycling. Announcements dating 
back to 2018 indicated that the Spartanburg facility would be 
up and running by the second half of 2020;189 however, the 
project is still in the engineering phases, with the company 
still trying to finalize a fixed-price construction contract.190 
Initial capacity was announced to be fully subscribed by 
fast-moving consumer goods company customers PepsiCo , 
Nestlé , Danone , and Coca-Cola , but interest from other 
customers led the company to decide to expand the facility.191 
The company is also looking for other joint venture partners 
and financing for the Spartanburg location. Indorama remains 
committed, but the project clearly needs additional investors 
to continue, which could be challenging amidst COVID-19–
related economic downturns.192 
In a 2018 press release, PepsiCo  touted its intentions to 
incorporate Loop’s PET into its packaging by 2020.193 Delays 
put PepsiCo’s self-imposed 2025 deadline of increasing 
recycled content at risk—a point that is beside the fact that 
chemical recycling is a false solution that companies should 
not be using to meet their plastic reduction commitments. 
The total cost of the facility retrofit and expansion is not clear; 
however, Loop and Indorama jointly invested $1 million in 
2018.194 A 2019 investment infusion into Loop totaled $45 
million, intended to cover the costs of construction as well as 
other costs.195

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 21
Millville Plastics, Millville, NJ
Millville Plastics is a project formed by several investors, 
attempting to retrofit an old glass factory in Millville into 
a plastics recycling plant. While initial descriptions of the 
project suggest this would be mechanical recycling of 
plastic, Millville Plastics’ principal investor, Green EnviroTech 
Holdings,196 appears to only license pyrolysis technology for 
processing a singular feedstock, rubber tires.197 In its 2019 
filings to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Green 
EnviroTech notes that it is “currently not profitable and may 
never become profitable. ”198 
Construction of the Millville Plastics project is contingent 
upon a number of permits and resolution of the ownership 
and tax history of the site. There is local opposition to the 
project, and a solar company has also made a bid to develop 
the site.199 The project cost was estimated to be $150 million, 
and moving ahead is contingent on getting Grow New Jersey 
program tax credits to complete its financing. To date, it has 
not gotten those credits.200 This project seems unlikely to 
move forward. No processing capacity has been announced. 
Netafim, Fresno, CA
This irrigation company is a subsidiary of Orbia, formerly 
Mexichem chemical company, which has a partnership with 
Occidental Chemical (Oxy). Orbia appears to source Oxy’s raw 
materials, including ethylene and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 
materials.201 The company launched a recycling company, 
and received a $2 million grant from CalRecycle to install 
new equipment at an existing facility to process agricultural 
plastic irrigation tubing into new plastic tubing.202 The project 
seems likely to proceed or be operational,203 and the company 
affirmed Netafim’s profitability in a May 2020 investor call.204
New Hope Energy, Tyler, TX 
New Hope Energy, is a provider of pyrolysis technology. In 
2019, it opened a $150 million commercial-scale plastic-to-
fuel facility in Tyler, Texas.205 The company accepts mostly 
bulk post-industrial and post-consumer plastic, which it 
converts to fuels, naphtha, asphalt, and paraffin. New Hope 
Energy does not make new plastic; rather, it produces and 
markets petrochemical products, particularly marine fuel.206 
The company also sells the patented technology to bolt onto 
existing MRFs, which it describes as “micro-refineries. ”207 
At full capacity, New Hope Energy estimates 340,000 tons/
year,208 but it is not clear how the company will collect 
feedstock. At least one load of plastic waste was shipped 
from the Omaha recycling center initially responsible for 
“recycling” the “difficult to process” waste from the Hefty Energy Bag pyrolysis program.209 A Hawaiian beach cleanup 
nonprofit sent New Hope Energy a donated shipping 
container full of plastic bottle caps gathered and cleaned by 
children.210 There was a fire at the facility in May 2020.211 
New Hope Energy is a member of the ACC’s Advanced 
Recycling Alliance for Plastics,212 and the ACC’s Plastics-to-
Fuel and Petrochemistry Alliance.
Nexus Fuels, Atlanta, GA
Nexus Fuels is a “waste management and energy production 
company”213 operating a recently opened plastic-to-fuel 
plant in Atlanta. The 50-ton/day pyrolysis plant (18,250 tons/
year) began commercial production in 2019, using thermal 
decomposition to turn polyethylene (PE) into produce diesel 
and other fuels. Nexus said in January 2020 that it only  takes 
post-industrial waste due to “contamination levels” of post-
consumer waste.214 
Shell has received and used Nexus Fuels’ liquid fuel in its 
Norco, Louisiana, refinery, where it manufactures a range 
of fuel products as well as ethylene and propylene.215 Nexus 
Fuels says it has other customers who use its products 
either as repurposed fuel or as feedstock to make plastic;216 
however, it does not disclose those customers. ACC director 
Kieth Christman pointed to Nexus Fuels as one of a few 
plastic-to-fuel companies mentioned in a March 2020 
Congressional hearing on recycling, noting that it sells its fuel 
to Shell.217
North Gateway Transfer Station, 
Phoenix, AZ
North Gateway Transfer Station is owned by the City of 
Phoenix, and it houses an MRF where recyclables are sorted 
and baled, though not reprocessed on-site. The total cost 
of this was $4.5 million; $3 million was invested by Closed 
Loop Partners, and the City of Phoenix and the City of 
Peoria invested $1.5 million.218 The MRF is operated by a 
subsidiary, Republic Services (ReCommunity).219 Republic 
is one of the largest waste management companies in the 
country, controlling about 20% of landfill capacity,220 with 
approximately $10 billion in revenue in 2019.221
Peninsula Plastics Recycling,  
Turlock, CA
A subsidiary of Merlin Plastics of Canada, Peninsula Plastics 
Recycling added a 17,000-ton/year expansion to its existing 
PET reprocessing facility, intended to process plastics #1-7 
and improve the existing PET recycling system.222 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 22
PreZero US
PreZero US is a recycling company which has just opened 
two mechanical recycling facilities in the US in 2020 - in 
California and South Carolina. They are a subsidiary of 
German supermarket chain Schwarz Group. Schwarz owns 
Lidl grocery store which has been expanding in the US, and 
Schwarz acquired California’s Resource Management Group 
(RMG) recycler.223 PreZero US has an operational partnership 
with ACI plastics 
The ACC has two PreZero projects on its list. 
Riverside, CA
This new $90 million facility will process plastic film to 
meet California’s SB270 plastic bag recycled content 
requirement. It began operation in June 2020 with 
commissioning, and is likely to be fully operational at the 
time of writing.224 The company will mainly process film 
from retail distribution centers and other large-volume 
suppliers, though not store drop-off.225 
Westminster, SC
PreZero is expanding onto an existing ACI Plastics facility 
to reprocess mixed rigid plastics.226 Initial announcements 
said the facility would be open by mid-year 2020, but the 
company says progress has been delayed by COVID-19–
related issues.227 
PureCycle, Ironton, OH
PureCycle is constructing a gas solvent chemical recycling 
plant in Ohio. The technology was invented and licensed 
to PureCycle by Procter & Gamble , and is intended to use 
polypropylene (PP) material to make PP polymer. PureCycle’s 
Ohio plant has an expected investment total of $120 million;228 
Closed Loop Partners provided a $3 million loan for the plant.229 
PureCycle has received state bond money for the facility. 
For example, the Lawrence County Economic Development 
Corporation and the Southern Ohio Port Authority coordinated  
on $300 million bonds for construction of PureCycle, though 
the Lawrence County Commissioners suggest that bonds will 
be paid by the company, not the taxpayers.230
Several news reports state that this plant is at “the old” or 
“former” Dow site, suggesting perhaps that a former chemical 
plant is being retrofitted into a “recycling” facility; however 
the PureCycle facility appears to be adjacent to or located 
at an existing Americas Styrenics (AmSty) Sty polystyrene 
(PS) plant.231 AmSty is a 50–50 joint venture between 
ChevronPhillips and Trinseo (a former Dow subsidiary, now its 
own company). When the joint venture was formed in 2007, 
Dow allotted the PS plant to AmSty;232 The Dow facility was announced as decommissioned in 2016,233 at which time Dow 
gave a 101,000-square-foot building to the Lawrence County 
Economic Development Corporation.234 AmSty identifies this 
as an existing (not closed) plant,235 so it appears that Dow 
may have closed part of this parcel, while the existing AmSty 
PS plant continues producing virgin PS. No promotional 
or business materials identify a link between AmSty and 
PureCycle. AmSty does have a chemical recycling joint 
venture with Agilyx, called Regenyx (see below). 
Fast-moving consumer goods companies that have already 
signed offtake agreements for PureCycle PP include Nestlé  
and L ’Oréal , as well as packaging company Aptar, which 
supplies major FMCGs, and petrochemical giant Total . 236 237 238 
The facility is estimated to produce 50,000 tons/year of 
P P.239 Pilot production produced the first PP in September 
2019, and PureCycle estimates commercial scale phase-up 
will start in mid-2021.240 241 PureCycle could expand into 
Europe with agreements from Total and L’Oréal.242 A May 
2020 announcement from investment firm Graf Industrial 
suggested that it may be aiming to acquire PureCycle.243 
Quad City Innovations, Livonia, MI
Quad City Innovations (QCI) has proposed a waste-to-fuel 
facility in Livonia, Michigan. The QCI website markets a range 
of fuels, and a replacement for carbon black.244 In late 2019, 
the Michigan Strategic Fund board gave $60 million in state-
funded bonds to finance the project—apparently the entire 
amount needed for the project.245 While a site appears to have 
been selected,246 it is not known how far construction has 
progressed or how successful the technology may be. QCI has 
also entered into negotiations for other locations.247
ReFined Plastics, Berks County, PA
ReFined Plastics was formed in 2015. In 2020, the company 
announced its intention to buy and develop the former Titus 
coal-fired power plant facility to open a pyrolysis plant, 
potentially using waste from an adjacent landfill.248 The 
president and chief technology officer of ReFined Plastics has 
estimated the project will cost $120 million and is seeking 
investors.249 The company received a U.S. Department of 
Commerce grant, with Secretary Wilbur Ross noting that this 
would “invigorate” the area following the 2013 closure of the 
coal-fired power plant.250 ReFined Plastics notes that revenues 
would at least initially come from leasing parcels on the 
facility to industrial tenants.251 It is not clear if the company 
has relevant permits for the project.252 This project seems to 
be in the concept phase only for now, despite public funds; 
however, “pre-order” of processed pellets are available on the 
ReFined Plastics website.253

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 23
Regenyx, Location TBD
Regenyx is the joint venture between Agilyx and Americas 
Styrenics (AmSty), itself a JV between AmySty plastic 
manufacturer Trinseo (a former Dow subsidiary) and 
ChevronPhillips. Regnyx controls the Tigard, Oregon, facility 
(Agilyx’s only operational plant), though this is often referred 
to in industry news as simply Agilyx’s plant, rather than 
Regenyx. A “west coast” project was mentioned in the initial 
announcement, but this specific project appears to be in the 
concept/announcement stage only. 
Agilyx’s proprietary pyrolysis technology is billed as “plastic-
to-plastic, ” producing styrene oil from plastic waste. However, 
recent investigation by GAIA reveals that styrene oil produced 
at Agiylx’s Tigard facility was later burned, rather than 
converted to new polystyrene.254 This raises questions as to 
whether Agiklx’s other facilities would be considered plastic-
to-fuel. Either way, pyrolysis is problematic.
This project is referenced in the initial October 2019 
announcement about the formation of the joint venture.255 
With no project cost or specific site, this JV appears to be still 
in the concept stage only. 
Renewlogy, Phoenix, AZ
Renew Phoenix is a joint venture between Generated 
Materials Recovery and Renewlogy, the Salt Lake City 
waste-to-fuel company that used pyrolysis to process 
mixed plastic waste collected through the Hefty Energy Bag 
program.256 Renewlogy’s own website states that its thermal 
depolymerization process produces fuel, including naptha, 
noting that the infrastructure (reformer and recracker) emits 
non-condensate gas (10–25%) and char (5%). This facility is 
assumed to be plastic-to-fuel. 
The Phoenix project was announced in April 2019, and 
there have been no further announcements. However, the 
Renewlogy facility in Salt Lake City has been shut down since 
January 2019 due to process issues.257 
The initial project announcement in early 2019 specified a 
cost of $5 million, and a city-estimated capacity of 3,000–
4,000 tons/year.258 Renewlogy received a grant from the 
Arizona Commerce Authority in 2017 to study the Phoenix 
project, and is part of a venture partnership with the City of 
Phoenix. 259 Renewlogy is a member of the ACC’s Advanced 
Recycling Alliance for Plastics.260 It also has projects in Asia 
with the Alliance to End Plastic Waste,261 an organization 
promoted by the ACC and composed of ACC petrochemical 
and plastic company members.262 263Roplast Industries, Oroville, CA
Roplast Industries manufactures plastic bags. An equipment 
upgrade and expansion (including de-inking) at its existing 
facility will provide an additional 2,500 tons/year of LDPE.264 
The company received a $2.5 million grant from CalRecycle in 
2018/2019.265
Roy Tech Environ, Grant, AL
Roy Tech Environ is a U.S. subsidiary of Chinese firm Shanghai 
Roylai Metal Products Co. The company was formed in 2015, 
but had previously bought scrap in the U.S. for reprocessing 
in China. Roy Tech announced it would open a $1.6 million 
facility in Grant, Alabama. The U.S. recycling facility appears 
to have begun operations at least as early as 2019. Exports 
of plastic to Singapore and Hong Kong regularly have been 
observed through 2020.266 
rPlanet Earth, Vernon, CA
This new PET bottle mechanical recycling facility began 
operation in 2018. The facility and its equipment had a $100 
million price tag, and the company received at least $37.5 
million in government tax breaks, grants, and loans: $20.5 
million in low-cost debt financing through the U.S. Treasury 
Department’s New Market Tax Credit program, $10 million 
in sales tax breaks via the California Alternative Energy and 
Advanced Transportation Financing Authority, $4 million in 
loans, a $3 million grant from CalRecycle, and a $1.5 million 
loan from Closed Loop Fund.267 The announced capacity is 
40,000 tons/year.268
Sirmax North America, Anderson, IN
This Italian company, with U.S. headquarters in Indiana, 
produces primarily automotive plastic. This project involves 
a mechanical process to pelletize and process plastic scrap 
and make some recycled-content resin.269 The new facility for 
processing industrial plastic scrap was announced in 2019. 
The site has been purchased, with a start-up planned by the 
end of 2022.270 Construction appeared to be progressing as of 
February 2020.271
The company will spend approximately $18 million, and will 
receive $2 million in public funding, including $1.5 million 
for development of a brownfield site and $650,000 for 
infrastructure, such as a rail spur and utility expansion.272 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 24
Shark Glass Recycling, Victorville, CA
This Danish-owned company recovers both plastic  
and glass from windshields, sending the polyvinyl butyral 
(PVB) film from the windshields to a facility in Georgia  
to be used as a PVC replacement in carpets and other 
applications. The company (which has existing facilities  
in Los Angeles and Georgia), received a $1.28 million  
grant from CalRecycle in 2018/2019 to build a new facility  
in Victorville, California. The facility is estimated to process 
5,329 tons/year.273 About 8% of an average windshield  
consists of PVB, yielding approximately 430 tons of  
recycled plastic.274Titus MRF , Portland, OR
This is a duplicate from the Far West entry (the ACC appears  
to have counted this twice). 
Yunnan Zintongi Plastics Engineering 
(UPT Group)
Yunnan Zintongi Plastics Engineering is a subsidiary of  
Chinese UPT Group. This project was announced in 
September 2018275 to reprocess plastic waste for export  
to Chinese manufacturing firms.276 Since then, there have 
been no further news articles, and the company does not 
appear to have a U.S.-facing web presence. 
U.S.–China tariffs have also cancelled  
other planned investments by Chinese  
firms in the southeastern United States.277 
A search for state air permits yielded none 
obtained by Yunnan Zintongi.278 The site  
was previously a frozen foods canning  
plant. However, between October 2019  
and June 2020, as observed in customs 
records, there have been three shipments 
from UPT Group in Montezuma, Georgia,  
to Mexico (via truck), and three maritime 
exports of PET pellets to Malaysia. This 
project also appears on a Northeast 
Recycling Council list of recycling projects  
as of February 2020, with a “projected”  
open date of 2019.279
Dow Chemical facility in Freeport, Texas, Dow’s largest integrated site.
© Bob Pearson / Greenpeace

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 25
5. Recommendations
We believe that mechanical recycling is environmentally 
preferable to any of the “chemical recycling” methods. 
However, current U.S. reprocessing capability is so low that 
only PET and HDPE are functionally recyclable, so the role 
of mechanical recycling for plastic waste is very limited.280 
Investments in mechanical recycling should not substitute  
or outpace investments into infrastructure, innovations,  
and alternative business models that ultimately reduce  
plastic production.  
American Chemistry Council 
The ACC should cease using “advanced recycling” as a 
synonym for “chemical recycling, ” and stop promoting 
“chemical” recycling as a solution to the plastic pollution 
issue. The ACC and its plastics and packaging manufacturer 
members should cease distracting and confusing legislators 
and the public with false solutions and bait-and-switch PR 
tactics, and should instead focus on fostering investments in 
reducing the harmful impacts of plastic on Americans’ health 
and environment. 
Elected Officials
Elected officials, such as state and federal legislators, who 
take policy action to respond to plastic pollution issues 
should not get distracted by the promises of “advanced” or 
“chemical recycling” technologies. Particularly amidst the 
need for a green and just recovery, federal, state, and local 
governments should not spend limited resources funding 
these technologies without thorough environmental, safety, 
and economic reviews. 
Public officials should not consider waste-to-energy, waste-to-
fuel or plastic-to-fuel projects as energy recycling, and instead 
clarify that this is petrochemical manufacturing (and subject 
to appropriate manufacturing permitting and classification), 
and should consider this part of the fossil fuel industry. They 
should seriously examine the viability of the companies 
and their ability to develop the requisite technology before 
approving taxpayer funds under the guise of “recycling, ” 
“sustainability, ” or “job creation. ” Public officials should reject demands from petrochemical 
trade associations such as the ACC, or companies associated 
with it or its various umbrella groups, for public subsidies, 
relaxed regulatory consideration, or other special privileges. 
Regulatory clarity should be developed and enforced 
regarding safety and economic considerations for the storage, 
marketing, and disposal of feedstock, marketable products, 
and by-products of these processes, and “closed loop” claims 
by companies promoting their technology should not be 
accepted in lieu of regulation and disclosure.
Local Decision-makers 
Public officials responsible for permitting chemical recycling 
projects or allocating economic development funds for 
chemical recycling projects should interrogate “advanced” 
or “chemical recycling” technologies vigorously to determine 
their methods, their environmental impacts, and whether 
they are proven to reduce plastic production (not just divert 
plastic from landfills). Officials should require transparency 
on these technologies’ processes and emissions, and the 
chemicals used and stored for projects seeking public 
financing, tax abatements, or relevant permits, and they must 
make this information available to other decision-makers 
and the public at large. Local decision-makers, like all public 
officials, should require companies seeking public funds or a 
relaxed permitting process to provide evidence of the viability 
of these projects, and the potential for these technologies to 
reduce plastic pollution. 
Investors
Investors should support due diligence in ensuring that 
new technologies and facilities do not pose health and 
environmental risks, by driving disclosures and transparency 
of these technologies. Investors should not fund waste-to-
energy, waste-to-fuel or plastic-to-fuel projects, particularly 
not if portraying them as investments in plastics recycling. 
Investors in the fast-moving consumer goods sector could 
consider giving preference to investment opportunities for 
companies that avoid false solutions in their commitments to 
reduce plastic and instead urgently reduce their use of plastic 
packaging in favor of reuse and refill. 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 26
Fast-Moving Consumer  
Goods Companies 
Fast-moving consumer goods companies adopting and 
aiming to meet goals related to reducing plastic packaging 
should not consider “chemical recycling”—and especially 
not waste-to-energy, waste-to-fuel or plastic-to-fuel—as 
valid pathways to meet commitments to plastic reduction. 
FMCGs should not invest in, agree to offtake plastic from, or 
join development consortiums with “chemical recycling” and petrochemical companies. Companies like Coca-Cola, 
Danone, Mars, Mondeléz, PepsiCo, Procter & Gamble, Nestlé, 
and Unilever need to drop these false solutions entirely and 
focus their investments and efforts on reducing plastic and 
urgently accelerating innovation into reuse. Stakeholders 
such as the Ellen MacArthur Foundation could help to clarify 
how companies should be considered validly meeting 
voluntary agreements like the New Plastics Economy to 
deter use of “chemical recycling” to meet any virgin plastic 
reduction commitments. 
Activists hold up letters spelling out the words Break Free From Plastic near the US Capitol in Washington, D.C. U.S. Senator Tom Udall (D-N.M.) and U.S. Representative Alan Lowenthal 
(D-Calif.), have introduced their landmark legislation, the Break Free from Plastic Pollution Act.© Tim Aubry / Greenpeace

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 27
1 In this report, we attempt to be as specific as possible when describing 
the technologies. “Waste-to-energy” refers to mixed waste treated with 
a variety of methods of energy recovery (e.g., biomass incineration, 
co-incineration in cement kilns, landfill gas recovery). “Waste-to-fuel” 
or “plastic-to-fuel” primarily  generates hydrocarbons, with “plastic-
to-fuel” describing methods where the feedstock is exclusively plastic. 
However, given the lack of publicly available information on many of the 
technologies associated with specific projects, we at times either use the 
terms together or, when referring to specific projects, use the broader 
“waste-to-fuel” inclusive of all potential feedstocks. Some waste-to-fuel 
or plastic-to-fuel projects may have energy recovery associated with 
them.
2 See, for example, American Chemistry Council (ACC), “What Are 
Advanced Recycling Technologies and How Should They Be Regulated?” 
https://plastics.americanchemistry.com/advanced-recycling-regulatory-
guidance.pdf . Accessed August 5, 2020. Also ACC, “What Is Advanced 
Recycling?” https://plastics.americanchemistry.com/what-is-advanced-
recycling/ . Accessed August 5, 2020
3 ACC. “Innovation and Partnership at the Core of Solving the Plastic 
Waste Problem. ” April 21, 2020. https://www.americanchemistry.com/
Media/PressReleasesTranscripts/ACC-news-releases/Innovation-and-
Partnership-at-the-Core-of-Solving-the-Plastic-Waste-Problem.html . 
Accessed August 5, 2020.
4 ACC. “New Investments in Advanced Plastics Recycling in the U.S. ’” 2020. 
https://plastics.americanchemistry.com/advanced-recycling-resources/
investments-in-advanced-recycling-us.pdf . Accessed August 20, 2020. 
5 Geyer, R., J. Jambeck, and Kara Lavender Law. “Production, Use, and 
Fate of All Plastics Ever Made. ” Science Advances, vol. 3 (2017), no. 7. 
https://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/7/e1700782 . 
6 Ellen MacArthur Foundation. ‘The New Plastic Economy: 
Rethinking the Future of Plastics, ” page 26. Jan. 19, 2016. 
https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/downloads/
EllenMacArthurFoundation_TheNewPlasticsEconomy_Pages.pdf . 
7 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). “National Overview: Facts 
and Figures about Materials, Wastes and Recycling. ” https://www.epa.
gov/facts-and-figures-about-materials-waste-and-recycling/national-
overview-facts-and-figures-materials#Recycling/Composting . Accessed 
July 13, 2020. Note that the most recent data available are generated 
from 2017 ACC data. 
8 Greenpeace US. “Circular Claims Fall Flat. ” Jan. 2020. https://www.
greenpeace.org/usa/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Greenpeace-Report-
Circular-Claims-Fall-Flat.pd f.
9 Ellen MacArthur Foundation. The New Plastics Economy Global 
Commitment 2019 Progress Report. Oct. 2019. https://www.
newplasticseconomy.org/assets/doc/Global-Commitment-2019-
Progress-Report.pdf .
10 Rollinson, A. and J. Oladejo. Chemical Recycling: Status, Sustainability, 
and Environmental Impacts. Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives. 
2020. https://www.no-burn.org/wp-content/uploads/CR-Technical-
Assessment_June-2020.pdf . 
11 Tullo, A.H. “Should Plastics Be a Source of Energy?” Chemical 
Engineering News. Sept. 24, 2018, vol. 96, no. 38. https://cen.acs.org/
environment/sustainability/Should-plastics-source-energy/96/i38 .
12 ACC. “What Are Advanced Recycling Technologies and How Should They 
Be Regulated?”13 ‘Commercial scale’ is generally accepted to be 300-400 tons per day, 
while demonstration plants are generally 100-150 tons per day. See, for 
example, SloanVazquez LLC and Clements Environmental “Waste Stream 
Study & Waste Conversion Technologies Review. ” Prepared for the City 
of Fort Collins, January 2012  https://www.fcgov.com/recycling/pdf/fort-
collins-wsa-ct-report-final-draft-with-appx.pdf?1340300350
14 Global Initiative for Incinerator Alternatives (GAIA). All Talk and No 
Recycling: An Investigation of the U.S, “Chemical Recycling” Industry. 
July 2020. https://www.no-burn.org/wp-content/uploads/All-Talk-and-
No-Recycling_July-28.pdfbriefing . 
15 Rollinson and Oladejo. Chemical Recycling: Status, Sustainability, and 
Environmental Impacts. 
16 GAIA. “Chemical Recycling: Distraction, Not Solution. ” June 2020. https://
www.no-burn.org/wp-content/uploads/CR-Briefing_June-2020.pdf .
17 Ibid. 
18 Rollinson and Oladejo. Chemical Recycling: Status, Sustainability,and 
Environmental Impacts. 
19 ACC. “U.S. Chemicals Trade by the Numbers. ” June 2020. https://www.
americanchemistry.com/Policy/Trade/US-Chemicals-Trade-by-the-
Numbers.pdf . Accessed July 13, 2020.
20 Greenpeace US. “Carbon Capture and Storage: A Corporate Boondoggle 
That Shortchanges Environment, Consumers, Says New Greenpeace 
Report. ” July 6, 2010. https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/news/carbon-
capture-and-storage-a/ .
21 Staub, Colin. “Federal Effort Supports Energy-Efficient Recycling Tech. ” 
Resource Recycling. December 4, 2019. https://resource-recycling.com/
plastics/2019/12/04/federal-effort-supports-energy-efficient-recycling-
tech/ .
22 U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). “Department of Energy Announces 
$25 Million for Plastics Recycling R&D, Launches Upcycling Consortium. ” 
March 16, 2020. https://www.energy.gov/articles/department-energy-
announces-25-million-plastics-recycling-rd-launches-upcycling-
consortium .
23 “Closing the Loop: Emerging Technologies in Plastics Recycling. ” 
Hearing before the House Subcommittee on Research and Technology 
(Committee on Science, Space, and Technology). Apr. 30, 2019. https://
science.house.gov/hearings/closing-the-loop-emerging-technologies-in-
plastics-recycling .
24 U.S. Congress. “Realizing the Economic Opportunities and Value of 
Expanding Recycling Act” (“RECOVER Act”). H.R. 5115, 116th Congress 
(2019–2020). https://www.congress.gov/116/bills/hr5115/BILLS-
116hr5115ih.pdf .
25 Letter submitted to Nancy Pelso et al. from American Chemistry Council 
et al. Apr. 16, 2020. Retrieved from https://www.documentcloud.org/
documents/6877535-RECOVER-Coalition-Letter.html .
26 U.S. Congress. “Plastic Waste Reduction and Recycling Act. ” H.R.7228, 
116th Congress. June 15, 2020. https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-
congress/house-bill/7228?s=1&r=3 .
27  Stevens, Haley. “Stevens Introduces Bipartisan Legislation to Reduce 
Plastic Waste. ” June 16, 2020. https://stevens.house.gov/media/press-
releases/stevens-introduces-bipartisan-legislation-reduce-plastic-waste . 
Accessed August 5, 2020.Endnotes

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 28
28 Straub, Colin. “Federal Lawmakers Launch Plastics Recycling Task Force. ” 
Plastics Recycling Update. Dec. 11, 2019. https://resource-recycling.com/
plastics/2019/12/11/federal-lawmakers-launch-plastics-recycling-task-
force/ .
29 Lemonick, Sam. “Chemistry May Have Solutions to Our Plastic Trash 
Problem. ” Chemical & Engineering News. June 15, 2018, vol. 96, no. 25. 
https://cen.acs.org/environment/pollution/Chemistry-solutions-plastic-
trash-problem/96/i25 .
30 See, for example, PureCycleTechnologies, “PureCycle Technologies 
Partners with Millikin, Nestlé to Accelerate Revolutionary Plastics 
Recycling, ” Mar. 13, 2019. https://purecycletech.com/2019/03/
purecycle-technologies-partners-with-milliken-nestle-to-accelerate-
revolutionary-plastics-recycling/ . Also Nestlé, “Nestlé Accelerates Action 
to Tackle Plastic Waste, ” Jan. 15, 2019. https://www.nestle.com/media/
pressreleases/allpressreleases/nestle-action-tackle-plastic-waste . 
31 Closed Loop Partners. Accelerating Circular Supply Chains for Plastics: 
A Landscape of Transformational Technologies That Stop Plastic Waste, 
Keep Materials in Play and Grow Markets, page 16. 2019. http://www.
closedlooppartners.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/CLP_Circular_
Supply_Chains_for_Plastics.pdf . 
32 Ibid.
33 Unilever. “Unilever to Pioneer Breakthrough Food Packaging Technology 
Together with Ioniqa & Indorama Ventures. ” Apr. 4 2018. https://
www.unilever.com/news/press-releases/2018/unilever-to-pioneer-
breakthrough-food-packaging-technology-together-with-ioniqa-and-
indorama-ventures.html . 
34 Plastics News Europe. “Cross-Industry Consortium to Study Plastic 
Chemical Recycling in France. ” Dec. 10, 2019 https://www.plasticsnews.
com/news/cross-industry-consortium-study-plastic-chemical-recycling-
france .
35 Closed Loop Partners. Accelerating Circular Supply Chains for Plastics. 
36 Closed Loop Partners “Fortune 500 Brands & Corporate Foundations 
Extend Over $54 Million in Capital Commitments with Closed Loop 
Partners. ” June 30, 2020. https://www.closedlooppartners.com/fortune-
500-brands-corporate-foundations-extend-over-54-million-in-capital-
commitments-with-closed-loop-partners/ .
37 Paben, Jared. “Recycling Startups Ink Deals with Virgin Plastics Makers. ” 
Plastics Recycling Update. May 4, 2018. https://resource-recycling.com/
plastics/2018/05/04/recycling-startups-ink-deals-with-virgin-plastics-
makers/ . 
38 ACC. “Advanced Recycling Alliance for Plastics. ” https://plastics.
americanchemistry.com/Advanced-Recycling-Alliance-for-Plastics.html .
39 Jambeck, J.R., et a.l. “Plastic Waste Inputs from Land into the Ocean. ’ 
Science. Feb. 3 2015, vol 347, no. 6223. https://science.sciencemag.org/
content/347/6223/768.full .
40 PlasticsEurope. Plastics—The Facts 2018. 2018. https://www.
plasticseurope.org/application/files/6315/4510/9658/Plastics_the_
facts_2018_AF_web.pdf .  
41 Ellen MacArthur Foundation. “The New Plastics Economy: Rethinking the 
Future of Plastics, ” page 18.
42 The ACC had one project listed twice under different names; we removed 
the duplicate, yielding a total of 51 projects. 
43 Zero Waste Europe. El Dorado of Chemical Recycling: State of Play and 
Policy Challenges. Aug. 2019. https://zerowasteeurope.eu/wp-content/
uploads/edd/2019/08/2019_08_29_zwe_study_chemical_recycling.pdf .
44 GAIA. “Waste Gasification & Pyrolysis: High Risk, Low Yield Processes 
for Waste Management. ” Mar. 2017. https://www.no-burn.org/report-
reveals-billions-wasted-on-gasification-over-30-years-of-failures/ .
45 We acknowledge that this information may be publicly available and just 
not found via our search methods. 46 We do note that Brightmark’s announced projects had a range of $500 
million to $1 billion each for up to 10 plants. Unable to determine which 
range or number of plants the ACC estimated for this list, we estimated 
only one Brightmark plant in our analysis. We acknowledge this is a 
conservative estimate, though it is unclear if even the ACC views these 
projects as viable, given that Brightmark’s potential investment figures 
do not seem to be fully incorporated into the ACC’s total investment 
claims.
47 Republic Services. 2019 Summary Annual Report. 2020. https://
investor.republicservices.com/static-files/032aa1b1-81cc-4bb8-b5c1-
000d6e8e361e .
48 We noted in each company profile whether we derived this from an 
announcement or estimate. For CarbonLite in Reading, PA, the company 
had an estimated range for capacity; while we noted the range in the 
table, for the purposes of totaling, we used a midpoint.
49 EPA. “Plastics: Material-Specific Data. ” https://www.epa.gov/facts-and-
figures-about-materials-waste-and-recycling/plastics-material-specific-
data .
50 Aemerge RedPak. “Aemerge RedPak Opens First-of-Its-Kind Medical 
Waste Treatment Center, in Hesperia, California. ” Dec. 6, 2017. https://
www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/aemerge-redpak-opens-first-of-its-
kind-medical-waste-treatment-center-in-hesperia-california-300567293.
html .
51 California Pollution Control Financing Authority. “Minutes. ” July 23, 2019. 
https://www.treasurer.ca.gov/cpcfa/meeting/2019/20190723/minutes.
pdf.
52 Staub, Colin. “Plastics Recovery Efforts Receive Millions in State Funding. ” 
Resource Recycling. May 21, 2019. https://resource-recycling.com/
recycling/2019/05/21/plastics-recovery-efforts-receive-millions-in-state-
funding/ .
53 Closed Loop Partners. Accelerating Circular Supply Chains for Plastics. 
54 GAIA. All Talk and No Recycling, page 16. 
55 ACC. “Advanced Recycling Alliance for Plastics. ”
56 Agilyx. “INEOS Styrolution and Agilyx Advance Polystyrene Chemical 
Recycling Plant in Channahon, Illinois. ” Dec. 9, 2019. https://www.
prnewswire.com/news-releases/ineos-styrolution-and-agilyx-advance-
polystyrene-chemical-recycling-plant-in-channahon-illinois-300971066.
html .
57 GAIA. All Talk and No Recycling, page 16.
58 Smalley, Marge. “A Partnership Centered on Polystyrene Recycling. ” 
Recycling Today. June 22, 2020. https://www.recyclingtoday.com/article/
ineos-agilyx-partnership-polystyrene-recycling-facility-chicago/ .
59 Agilyx. “INEOS Styrolution and Agilyx Advance Polystyrene Chemical 
Recycling Plant in Channahon, Illinois. ” 
60 Agilyx. “Agilyx Enters into Collaboration with Monroe Energy to Produce 
Lower-Carbon Crude Oil for Jet Fuel Production. ” PR Newswire. Nov. 15, 
2018. https://www.agilyx.com/newsroom/agilyx-enters-collaboration-
monroe-energy-produce-lower-carbon-crude-oil-jet-fuel-production .
61 See, for example, Sanicola, Laura. “Delta Airlines Exploring ‘All Options’ 
for Trainer Refinery. ” Reuters. July 14, 2020. https://www.reuters.com/
article/us-delta-airlines-trainer/delta-airlines-exploring-all-options-for-
trainer-refinery-idUSKCN24F24V .
62 Aquafil Global. “Who We Are. ” http://www.aquafil.com . Accessed July 28, 
2020. 
63 Closed Loop Partners. Accelerating Circular Supply Chains for Plastics, 
page 22. 
64 Wiles, Russ. “This Phoenix Recycling Plant Is Where Old Carpet Goes to 
Get New Life. ” Dec. 19, 2018. https://www.aquafil.com/localnews/this-
phoenix-recycling-plant-is-where-old-carpet-goes-to-get-new-life/ .

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 29
65 Paben, Jared. “Q&A: How Facility Will Recover Nylon 6 from Carpet. ” 
Plastics Recycling Update. Sept. 29, 2017. https://resource-recycling.
com/plastics/2017/09/29/qa-facility-will-recover-nylon-6-carpet/ .
66 Goldsberry, Clare. “Italian Company Opens First U.S. Carpet Recycling 
Recycling Facility in Phoenix. ” Plastics Today. Nov. 15, 2017. https://www.
plasticstoday.com/recycling/italian-company-opens-first-us-carpet-
recycling-facility-phoenix . 
67 Aquafil Global. “Where We Are. ” https://www.aquafil.com/where-we-are/
usa/ . Accessed July 28, 2020
68 Closed Loop Partners. Accelerating Circular Supply Chains for Plastics. 
69 Goldsberry. “Italian Company Opens First U.S. Carpet Recycling Facility 
in Phoenix. ” .
70 Paben, Jared. “Q&A: How Facility Will Recover Nylon 6 from Carpet. ” 
Plastics Recycling Update. Sept. 29, 2017. https://resource-recycling.
com/plastics/2017/09/29/qa-facility-will-recover-nylon-6-carpet/ .
71 Staub, Colin. “Avangard to Build Three $30 Million Film Facilities Next 
Year. ” Plastics Recycling Update. Sept. 11, 2019. https://resource-
recycling.com/plastics/2019/09/11/avangard-to-build-three-30-million-
film-facilities-next-year/ .
72 Waste 360. “Dow, Avangard Innovative to Advance Plastic Circularity. ” 
Feb. 10, 2020. https://www.waste360.com/plastics/dow-avangard-
innovative-advance-plastic-circularity .
73 Paben, Jared. “Avangard Details Its Upcoming PCR Projects. ” Plastics 
Recycling Update. Feb. 5, 2020. https://resource-recycling.com/
plastics/2020/02/05/avangard-details-its-upcoming-pcr-projects/ .
74 Staub. “Avangard to Build Three $30 Million Film Facilities Next Year. ” 
75 Staub, Colin. “US and Canada to Add Major Processing Capacity. ” 
Plastics Recycling Update. Jan. 29, 2020. https://resource-recycling.
com/plastics/2020/01/29/us-and-canada-to-add-major-processing-
capacity/#:~:text=The%20North%20American%20plastics%20
recycling%20sector%20is%20poised,America%2C%20including%20
both%20new%20facilities%20and%20plant%20expansions .
76 Staub. “Avangard to Build Three $30 Million Film Facilities Next Year. ” 
77 Paben. “Avangard Details Its Upcoming PCR Projects. ” 
78 Staub. “Avangard to Build Three $30 Million Film Facilities Next Year. ” 
79 Staub. “US and Canada to Add Major Processing Capacity. ”
80 Staub. “Avangard to Build Three $30 Million Film Facilities Next Year. ” 
81 The facility is identifiable on Google maps. Search performed July 2020. 
82 Huffenberger, Gary. “TimberTech Recycling Plant in Wilmington to 
Help Turn Waste into a Thing of Beauty. ” News Journal. Apr. 24, 2019. 
https://www.wnewsj.com/news/103360/timbertech-recycling-plant-in-
wilmington-to-help-turn-waste-into-a-thing-of-beauty .
83 Paben, Jared. “AZEK Discloses Plastics Recycling Details. ” Plastics 
Recycling Update. June 17, 2020. https://resource-recycling.com/
plastics/2020/06/17/azek-discloses-plastics-recycling-details/ .
84 Kavanaugh, Catherine, “Azek Opens $25 Million Recycling Plant, ” Plastics 
News, Apr. 24, 2019, https://www.plasticsnews.com/article/20190424/
NEWS/190429964/azek-opens-25m-recycling-plant . Also Huffenberger, 
“TimberTech Recycling Plant in Wilmington to Help Turn Waste into a 
Thing of Beauty. ”
85 Kavanaugh. “Azek Opens $25 Million Recycling Plant. ” 
86 Paben, Jared. “What New Ownership Means for Balcones Resources. ” 
Resource Recycling. Oct. 8, 2019. https://resource-recycling.com/
recycling/2019/10/08/what-new-ownership-means-for-balcones-
resources/ .
87 Paben, Jared. “Facility Focus: Balcones Resources. Resource Recycling. 
Feb. 14, 2020. https://resource-recycling.com/recycling/2020/02/14/
facility-focus-balcones-resources/ .88 Staub, Colin. “The Plan to Strengthen Recycling on the Ground in Texas. ” 
Resource Recycling. Jan. 28, 2020. https://resource-recycling.com/
recycling/2020/01/28/the-plan-to-strengthen-recycling-on-the-ground-
in-texas/ .
89 Closed Loop Partners. Building the Circular Economy: Closed 
Loop Partners 2019 Impact Report. 2020. https://www.
closedlooppartners.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Closed-
Loop-Partners-2019-Impact-Report-1.pdf?utm_campaign=June%20
Newsletter&utm_medium=email&_hsmi=90503138&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-
87Xi9bJQH6bppQfhgsPlR_jezn5alW1naEEkdbp3nDDWRj4Xc7BmbB
VN9tE65mjqgLFMlmhJMLdE0DMPNwnjXF223MSiGI6SIm-1cXSbzzm-
ECn4c&utm_content=90503138&utm_source=hs_email .
90 Ibid., page 30.
91 Berry Global Group, Inc. “Berry Global and Georgia Pacific Team Up to 
Facilitate the Collection and Repurpose of Post-Consumer Materials. ” 
Businesswire. Jan. 30, 2020. http://ir.berryglobal.com/news-releases/
news-release-details/berry-global-and-georgia-pacific-team-facilitate-
collection-and .
92 Paben, Jared. “Berry Global to Process Film Bales at Texas Plant. ” 
Plastics Recycling Update. Feb. 5, 2020. https://resource-recycling.com/
plastics/2020/02/05/berry-global-to-process-film-bales-at-texas-plant/ .
93 Solid Waste Recycling. “Berry Global and Georgia-Pacific Collaborating 
on Resin Lifecycle. ” Feb. 13, 2020. https://www.solidwastemag.com/
circular-economy/berry-global-and-georgia-pacific-collaborating-on-
resin-lifecycle/1003283351/ .
94 Berry Global Group, Inc. “Berry Global and Georgia Pacific Team Up to 
Facilitate the Collection and Repurpose of Post-Consumer Materials. ”
95 Note that this campus was the site of a mysterious brain cancer cluster 
in the late 1980s and early 1990s among researchers in BP’s chemical 
business. The building has since been demolished, and some acres of the 
campus have been sold.
96 BP . “BP’s New Technology to Enable Circularity for Unrecyclable PET 
Plastic Waste. ” Oct. 24, 2019. https://www.bp.com/en/global/corporate/
news-and-insights/press-releases/bp-new-technology-to-enable-
circularity-for-unrecyclable-pet-plastic-waste.html .
97 Ibid. 
98 Estimated using a typical range of pilot plants, as well as the pilot plant 
capacity for Agilyx. See Plastics Technology, “Plastics-to-Oil Recycler 
Finds New Niche in Polystyrene, ” Apr. 27, 2018, https://www.ptonline.
com/articles/plastics-to-oil-recycler-finds-new-niche-in-polystyrene .
99 Qureshi, Waqas. “Unilever, Britvic and Danone Work with BP on rPET . ” 
Packaging News. Dec. 19, 2019. https://www.packagingnews.co.uk/top-
story/unilever-drinks-giants-bp-pet-recycle-19-12-2019 .
100 Based on previous supply chain research, as of 2016.
101 Unilever. “Unilever Chairman Announcement. ” Nov. 13, 2019. https://
www.unilever.com/news/press-releases/2019/unilever-chairman-
announcement.html .
102 ACC. “Advanced Recycling Alliance for Plastics. ” 
103 Business Wire. “Brightmark Closes $260M in Financing for Nation’s First 
Commercial-Scale Plastics-to-Fuel Plant. ” Apr. 11, 2019. https://www.
businesswire.com/news/home/20190411005170/en/Brightmark-Energy-
Closes-260M-Financing-Nation%E2%80%99s-Commercial-Scale .
104 Ibid.
105 GAIA. All Talk and No Recycling, page 20.
106 Ibid., page 21.
107 U.S. Economic Development Administration. “U.S. Department of 
Commerce Invests $1.2 Million to Provide Critical Water and Sewer 
Infrastructure to Serve Businesses in Ashley, Indiana. ” Apr. 7, 2020. 
https://www.eda.gov/news/press-releases/2020/04/07/ashley-in.htm .

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 30
108 GAIA. All Talk and No Recycling, page 20.
109 Rinker, Brian. “HQ2 for Recycling? S.F. Company Invites Cities to Apply for 
Up to $1B Recycling Plants. ” San Francisco Business Times. Nov. 7, 2019. 
https://www.bizjournals.com/sanfrancisco/news/2019/11/07/hq2-for-
recycling-s-f-company-invites-cities-to.html .
110 Nestlé Waters. “Nestlé Waters North America Signs Agreement with 
Recycled PET Supplier CarbonLITE. ” Nov. 15, 2018. https://www.nestle-
watersna.com/en/nestle-water-news/pressreleases/nestle-waters-
carbonlite-rpet-agreement .
111 Vasil, Jim. “CarbonLITE to Add 130 Jobs; 2nd Facility Also Possible. ” 
WFMZ-TV 69 News. Jan. 16, 2020. https://www.wfmz.com/news/area/
berks/carbonlite-to-add-130-jobs-2nd-facility-also-possible/article_
bfad1e88-38a9-11ea-a091-ef9ee6174117.html .
112 CarbonLITE Recycling. “CarbonLITR Opens New Facility & rings 100+ 
Jobs. ” http://www.carbonliterecycling.com/carbonlite-opens-new-
facility-brings-100-jobs/ .
113 A January 2020 list published by Northeast Recycling Council (NERC) 
and Northeast Waste Management Officials Association (NEWMOA) 
Regional Recycling Markets Committee estimated 75,000 tons/year, 
but an October 2019 announcement suggested capacity would be 
42,500. For calculations of processing capacity, we used a midpoint. 
See NERC and NEWMOA, “North American Recycled Plastic Processing 
Capacity Increases—New Report Published, ” Feb. 2020, https://nerc.
org/documents/North%20American%20Recycled%20Plastic%20
Processing%20Capacity%20Increases%20-%20January%202020.pdf . 
And Staub, Colin, “Upcoming CarbonLite Operation Is Company’s Largest 
Yet, ” Plastics Recycling Update, Oct. 20, 2019, https://resource-recycling.
com/plastics/2019/10/30/upcoming-carbonlite-operation-is-companys-
largest-yet/ .
114 Toto, DeAnne. “CarbonLite to Build PET Recycling Plant in Dallas. ” 
Recycling Today. Jan. 11, 2018. https://www.recyclingtoday.com/article/
carbonlite-dallas-pet-recycling-plant-feature-amut-equipment/ .
115 Ibid.
116 Ibid.
117 East-Terra Plastics. http://east-terra.com/index.html . Accessed July 13, 
2020. 
118 Smalley, Megan. “East-Terra Plastics Expands to New Site. ”Recycling 
Today. Sept. 20, 2018. https://www.recyclingtoday.com/article/east-
terra-plastics-expands-operations/ .
119 Hansen, Bob. “Connersville-based East-Terra Plastics Is Receiving 
40 Semi Loads of Child Safety Seats Six Days a Week for 
Recycling. ” Connorsville News-Examiner. Oct. 23, 2019. https://
indianaeconomicdigest.com/Content/Most-Recent/Fayette/Article/
Connersville-based-East-Terra-Plastics-is-receiving-40-semi-loads-of-
child-safety-seats-six-days-a-week-for-recycling/31/174/97782 .
120 East-Terra Plastics. “About Us. ” http://east-terra.com/ . Accessed July 13, 
2020. 
121 Wren, David. “Trade Concerns, While Unspoken, Still Weigh Heavily on 
SC-China Relationship. ” The Post and Courier. Sept. 20, 2018. https://
www.postandcourier.com/business/trade-concerns-while-unspoken-
still-weigh-heavily-on-sc-china/article_b38241e2-bb4b-11e8-a417-
afb40a3bc89a.html .
122 The Central SC Alliance (CSCA). “Ecomelida Launching Its First North 
American Operations in Orangeburg County. ” Mar. 8, 2019. https://www.
centralsc.org/news/ecomelida-launching-its-first-north-american-
operations-in-orangeburg-county#:~:text=Ecomelida%20launching%20
its%20first%20North%20American%20operations%20in,its%20first%20
North%20American%20operations%20in%20Orangeburg%20County .123 South Carolina Department of Commerce. “SC Recycling Market 
Development. ” https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.ameripen.org/resource/
resmgr/2019annualmeeting/State_Perspectives_Panel_-_R.pdf .
124 Staub. “US and Canada to Add Major Processing Capacity. ” 
125 South Carolina Department of Commerce. “SC Recycling Market 
Development. ” 
126 CSCA. “Ecomelida Launching Its First North American Operations in 
Orangeburg County. ”
127 Wren. “Trade Concerns, While Unspoken, Still Weigh Heavily on SC-China 
Relationship. ” 
128 South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC). 
https://epermweb.dhec.sc.gov/ncore/external/publicnotice/search . 
Search performed July 13, 2020. No permit information found.
129 Boteler, Cody. “Chinese-Owned Firm to OpenCarton Recycling 
Facility in South Carolina. ” WasteDive. Mar. 21, 2018. https://www.
wastedive.com/news/Ecomelida-open-carton-recycling-facility-south-
carolina/5195018 55/.
130 Siegel, R.P . “Eastman Advances Two Chemical Recycling Options. ” 
GreenBiz. Aug. 7, 2019. https://www.greenbiz.com/article/eastman-
advances-two-chemical-recycling-option .
131 Eastman. “Eastman to Recycle Discarded Carpet into New Materials.“ 
Nov. 5, 2019. https://www.eastman.com/Company/News_Center/2019/
Pages/Eastman-to-recycle-discarded-carpet-into-new-materials.aspx .
132 Paben, Jared. “Carpet Producers to End Voluntary Recycling Subsidies. ” 
Resource Recycling. May 5, 2020. https://resource-recycling.com/
recycling/2020/05/05/carpet-producers-to-end-voluntary-recycling-
subsidies/ .
133 Siegel. “Eastman Advances Two Chemical Recycling Options. ”
134 Nexstar Broadcasting. “Eastman’s Chemical Recycling Technology Begins 
Commercial Operation. ” Oct. 23, 2019. https://www.wjhl.com/news/
local/eastmans-chemical-recycling-technology-begins-commercial-
operation/ .
135 Staub, Colin. “Here’s a Domestic Outlet Hungry for 3-7 Plastics. ” 
Resource Recycling. Feb. 12, 2019. https://resource-recycling.com/
recycling/2019/02/12/heres-a-domestic-outlet-hungry-for-3-7-plastics/ .
136 Denne, Luke. “Coronavirus Pandemic Threatens to Undo Progress on 
Plastic Pollution. ” NBC News. May 5, 2020. https://www.nbcnews.com/
science/environment/coronavirus-pandemic-threatens-undo-progress-
plastic-pollution-n1207231 .
137 Staub. “Here’s a Domestic Outlet Hungry for 3-7 Plastics. ”
138 NERC and NEWMOA Regional Recycling Markets Committee. “North 
American Recycled Plastic Processing Capacity Increases—New 
Report Published. ” Feb. 2020. https://nerc.org/documents/North%20
American%20Recycled%20Plastic%20Processing%20Capacity%20
Increases%20-%20January%202020.pdf .
139 Staub, Colin. “Pause on Bag Law Is a Hit to Some Recyclers. ” Plastics 
Recycling Update. Apr. 29, 2020. https://resource-recycling.com/
plastics/2020/04/29/pause-on-bag-law-is-a-hit-to-some-recyclers/ .
140 Staub, Colin. “California Reinstates Bag Ban and PCR Requirements. ” 
Plastics Recycling Update. June. 24, 2020. https://resource-recycling.
com/plastics/2020/06/24/california-reinstates-bag-ban-and-pcr-
requirements/ .
141 In our table, for ease of reading, we attributed 15,000 tons/year to each of 
EFS’s facilities. However, we do not know the actual capacity per facility, 
though the distribution is unrelated to our tabulation of processing 
capacity. 

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 31
142 NERC and NEWMOA. “North American Recycled Plastic Processing 
Capacity Increases. ” 
143 CalRecycle. “California Boosts Recycling Infrastructure to Curb 
Plastic and Glass Waste. ” May 7, 2019. https://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/
NewsRoom/2019/05may/13/ .
144 Ibid.
145 Ibid.
146 Plastics Industry Association. “Pacific Northwest Recycling Project 
Releases Results from 60-Day Pilot. ” Nov. 21, 2019. https://www.
plasticsindustry.org/article/pacific-northwest-recycling-project-releases-
results-60-day-pilot .
147  FCC. Type V Municipal Solid Waste Processing Facility Registration with 
the Texas Commision on Environmental Quality, http://fccenvironmental.
com/files/TCEQ/Part_I_with_check.pd f. Accessed July 15, 2020. 
148 Rosengren, Cole. “FCC Environmental Officially Kicks Off Houston 
Recycling Contract. ” WasteDive. Apr. 8, 2019. https://www.wastedive.
com/news/fcc-environmental-houston-recycling-contract/552207/ .
149 Rosengren, Cole. “FCC Environmental Moving to Houston after Long-
Awaited $37M Contract Win. ” WasteDive. Jan. 11, 2019. https://www.
wastedive.com/news/fcc-environmental-moving-to-houston-after-long-
awaited-37m-contract-win/514546/ .
150 CalRecycle. “California Boosts Recycling Infrastructure to Curb Plastic 
and Glass Waste. ” 
151 McCaffrey, Zach, Leonard Torres, Delliah Wood, and William Orts. 
“Sustainable Plastics from Agricultural Coproducts: Seven Things to 
Know. ” Plastics Today. Oct. 24, 2019. https://www.plasticstoday.com/
packaging/sustainable-plastics-agricultural-coproducts-seven-things-
know .
152 CalRecycle. “California Boosts Recycling Infrastructure to Curb Plastic 
and Glass Waste. ” 
153 Rosengren, Cole. “BP Invests $30M in Company Making Jet Biofuel from 
Waste. ” WasteDive. Nov. 9, 2016. https://www.wastedive.com/news/bp-
invests-30m-in-company-making-jet-biofuel-from-waste/430005/ .
154 BP . Growing the Business and Advancing the Energy Transition. BP 
Annual Report and Form 20-F, page 46. 2018. https://www.bp.com/
content/dam/bp/business-sites/en/global/corporate/pdfs/investors/bp-
annual-report-and-form-20f-2018.pdf . 
155 Fulcrum Bioenergy. “Fulcrum Targets Northwest Indiana for the Location 
of Its Nest Waste-to-Fuel Plant. ” Dec. 13, 2018. http://fulcrum-bioenergy.
com/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/2018-12-13-Fulcrum-Centerpoint-
Announcement-FINAL.pdf .
156 McAdams, Michael. “One Person’s Trash Is the Biofuel Industry’s 
Treasure. ” RealClear Energy. May 11, 2020. https://www.realclearenergy.
org/articles/2020/05/11/one_persons_trash_is_the_biofuel_industrys_
treasure_491324.html .
157 Hertzberg, Richie. “How to Turn Household Trash into Jet Fuel. ” The 
Hill. Dec. 3, 2019. https://thehill.com/changing-america/sustainability/
energy/472588-how-to-turn-household-trash-into-jet-fuel .
158 Pete, Joseph S., and Lauren Cross. “Latest Trash-to-Fuel Project Promises 
to Invest $600 Million and Hire 160 in Gary. ” nwi.com. Dec. 20, 2019. 
https://www.nwitimes.com/business/local/latest-trash-to-fuel-project-
promises-to-invest-600-million-and-hire-160-in-gary/article_26de4afc-
b71d-529e-ae25-f34797a509d8.html .
159 Brown, Alex. “$600M Waste-to-Fuel Plant Coming to Gary. ” Inside Indiana 
Business. Dec. 13, 2018. https://www.insideindianabusiness.com/
story/39636900/600m-waste-to-fuel-plant-coming-to-gary .
160 Levinthal, Dave. “Congress Packed Budget with Special Breaks for 
Washington Insiders. ” The Center for Public Integrity. Mar. 13, 2018. 
https://apps.publicintegrity.org/tax-breaks-the-favored-few/ .161 MorganStanley. ”Using Green Bonds to Turn Garbage into Jet Fuel. ” 
https://www.morganstanley.com/ideas/fixed-income-finances-fulcrum-
bioenergy .
162 Fulcrum Bioenergy. “Sierra Biofuels Plant Bright Future. ” http://fulcrum-
bioenergy.com/facilities/ .
163 Goldberg, Tec. “Shutdown of Marathon’s Martinez Refinery Prompts Calls 
for ‘Just Transition’ for Oil Workers. ” KQED. Aug. 3, 2020. https://www.
kqed.org/news/11831607/shutdown-of-marathons-martinez-refinery-
prompts-calls-for-just-transition-for-oil-workers .
164 Rosengren. “BP Invests $30M in Company Making Jet Biofuel from 
Waste. ”
165 Toto, DeAnne. “Taking the Next Step. ” Recycling Today. Apr. 10, 2018. 
https://www.recyclingtoday.com/article/gdb-international-plastic-
recycling-profile/ .
166 Johnson, Jim. “Recyclers Invest in US Processing in Wake of National 
Sword. ” Plastics News. Mar. 14, 2019. https://www.plasticsnews.com/
article/20190314/NEWS/190312228/recyclers-invest-in-us-processing-in-
wake-of-national-sword .
167 NERC. “‘North American Recycled Plastic Processing Capacity Increases. ” 
168 Toto. “Taking the Next Step. ” 
169 Toloken, Steve. “Plastic Recyclers Say Suspending California Bag Ban 
‘Evaporated’ Film Market. ” Plastics News. June 11, 2020. https://www.
plasticsnews.com/news/plastic-recyclers-say-suspending-california-bag-
ban-evaporated-film-market .
170 Staub, Colin. “Chinese Company to Open South Carolina Recycling 
Facility. ” Plastics Recycling Update. Sept. 12, 2018. https://resource-
recycling.com/e-scrap/2018/09/13/chinese-company-to-open-south-
carolina-recycling-facility/ .
171 Ibid.
172 South Carolina Department of Commerce. “Green Tech Solution, Inc 
Launching New Cherokee County Operations. Recycling Plant to Create 
Approximately 200 Jobs. ” Sept. 6, 2018. https://www.sccommerce.
com/news/green-tech-solution-inc-launching-new-cherokee-county-
operations .
173 LoopNet. “210 Henson Rd.: 150,000 SF of Industrial Space Available in 
Blacksburg, SC. ” https://www.loopnet.com/Listing/210-Henson-Rd-
Blacksburg-SC/19090044/ .
174 South Carolina Department of Commerce. “Green Tech Solution, Inc 
Launching New Cherokee County Operations. ”
175 Green Tech Solution. “About Us. ” https://greentechsolutioninc.com/ . 
Accessed July 13, 2020. 
176 NERC and NEWMOA. “North American Recycled Plastic Processing 
Capacity Increases. ”
177 Karadis, Arlene. “GreenMantra Forges New Plastics Market via Chemical 
Recycling. ” Waste 360. Aug. 24, 2020. https://www.waste360.com/
recycling/greenmantra-forges-new-plastics-markets-chemical-recycling .
178 Closed Loop Partners. Accelerating Circular Supply Chains for Plastics.
179 Karadis. “GreenMantra Forges New Plastics Market via Chemical 
Recycling. ” 
180 ACC. “Advanced Recycling Alliance for Plastics. ” 
181 GreenMantra Technologies. “Closed Loop to Invest up to $3 Million in 
GreenMantraTM Technologies. ” June 26, 2017. https://www.prnewswire.
com/news-releases/closed-loop-fund-to-invest-up-to-3-million-in-
greenmantra-technologies-300494427.html .
182 Sloan, Erin. “Thermoformer Inline Plastics Turns to Chemical Recycling. ” 
Plastics News. Mar. 12, 2020. https://www.plasticsnews.com/news/
thermoformer-inline-plastics-turns-chemical-recycling .

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 32
183 Inline Plastics. “Inline Plastics—First USA Manufacturer to Infuse 
All Produces with Post Consumer Content Derived from Chemical 
Recycling. ” Mar. 12, 2020. https://www.perishablenews.com/produce/
inline-plastics-first-usa-manufacturer-to-infuse-all-products-with-post-
consumer-content-derived-from-chemical-recycling/ .
184 Park, Emily. “Inline Plastics to Infuse All Packaging with Chemically 
Recycled Material. ” Bake. Mar. 5, 2020. https://www.bakemag.com/
articles/13147-inline-plastics-to-infuse-all-packaging-with-chemically-
recycled-material .
185 Smalley, Megan. “J.P . Mascaro & Sons Adds Township to Flexible 
Packaging Recycling Program. ” Waste Today. Dec. 30, 2019. https://www.
wastetodaymagazine.com/article/jp-mascaro-fpp-recycling-pottstown/ .
186 Staub, Colin. “The Takeaways from Over a Year of Flexible Film Sortation. ” 
Plastics Recycling Update. June 17, 2020. https://resource-recycling.
com/plastics/2020/06/17/the-takeaways-from-over-a-year-of-flexible-
film-sortation/ .
187 Smalley. “J.P . Mascaro & Sons Adds Township to Flexible Packaging 
Recycling Program. ”
188 Helm, Darius. “Recycling Update: Despite Long Odds, Carpet Recycling 
Is on the Brink of Viability. ” Floor Daily. Aug. 30, 2020. https://www.
floordaily.net/floorfocus/recycling-update-despite-long-odds-carpet-
recycling-is-on-the-brink-of-viability-augsep- .
189 Loop Industries, Inc. “Securities and Exchange Commission 
Edgar Filing. ” July 8, 2019. http://filings.irdirect.net/
data/1504678/000165495419008030/lp_10q.pdf .
190 Loop Industries, Inc. “Loop Industries Reports Third Quarter 
Consolidated Financial Results of Fiscal 2020 and Provides Updates on 
Business Developments. ” Jan. 9, 2020. https://www.sec.gov/Archives/
edgar/data/1504678/000165495420007693/loop_ex991.htm .
191 Loop Industries, Inc. “Securities and Exchange Commission Edgar Filing. ”
192 Loop Industries, Inc. “Loop Industries Reports Third Quarter 
Consolidated Financial Results of Fiscal 2020 and Provides Updates on 
Business Developments. ”
193 Loop Industries, Inc. “Pepsico and Loop Industries Sign Multi-Year Supply 
Agreement for Boop Branded 100% Sustainable Plastic. ” Oct. 10, 2018. 
https://www.loopindustries.com/en/article/pepsico .
194 Paben, Jared. “Facility to Depolymerize up to 88M Pounds of PET 
Annually. ” Plastics Recycling Update. Oct. 16, 2019. https://resource-
recycling.com/plastics/2019/10/16/facility-to-depolymerize-up-to-88m-
pounds-of-pet-annually/ .
195 Loop Industries. “Loop Industries Announces Capital Infusion to Finance 
Next Phase of Growth Strategy. ” May 29, 2019. https://www.bloomberg.
com/press-releases/2019-05-29/loop-industries-announces-capital-
infusion-to-finance-next-phase-of-growth-strategy .
196 Brandt, Mickey. “Millville Plastics Plan Divides Commission. ” SNJ Today. 
Oct. 23, 2019. https://snjtoday.com/2019/10/23/millville-plastics-plan-
divides-commission/ .
197 Green EnviroTech Holdings. http://greenenvirotech.com/ . Accessed July 
13, 2020. 
198 Green EnviroTech Holdings. Form 10-K. Apr. 18, 2019. 
Retrieved from https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/
data/1428765/000149315219005576/form10-k.htm . 
199 Brandt, “Millville Plastics Plan Divides Commission. ” Also, Smith, Joseph, 
“Millville Offered $100,000 to Sell Former Wheaton Glass Property, ” 
Daily Journal, Mar. 22, 2019, https://www.thedailyjournal.com/story/
news/2019/03/22/new-jersey-millville-synergy-plastics-wheaton-glass-
durst-trumbo-commission-memorandum/3245941002/ .
200 Ibid. 201 Orbia Advanced Corporation. Quarterly Earning Transcript. May 18, 
2020. https://finance.yahoo.com/news/edited-transcript-mexchem-mx-
earnings-042803982.html .
202 CalRecycle. “California Boosts Recycling Infrastructure to Curb Plastic 
and Glass Waste. ” 
203 Netafim USA. “ReGen Recycling Program Available to California 
Agricultural Growers and Dealers Only. ” https://www.netafimusa.com/
recycling/program-guidelines/ .
204 Orbia Advanced Corporation. “Quarterly Earnings Transcript. ” May 18, 
2020. https://finance.yahoo.com/news/edited-transcript-mexchem-mx-
earnings-042803982.html .
205 New Hope Energy. “Trinity Oaks Tyler Plant Operational. ” July 16, 2019. 
https://newhopeenergy.com/news/f/trinity-oaks-tyler-plant-operational .
206 New Hope Energy. “About Us. ” https://newhopeenergy.com/about-us . 
Accessed July 13, 2020. 
207 Sustainable Packaging Coalition. “Johnny Combs. ” https://
sustainablepackaging.org/people/johnny-combs/ . Accessed July 13, 
2020. 
208 New Hope Energy. “Trinity Oaks Tyler Plant Operational. ” 
209 Lerner, Sharon. “Waste Only: How the Plastic Industry Is Fighting to Keep 
Polluting the World. ” The Intercept. July 20, 2019. https://theintercept.
com/2019/07/20/plastics-industry-plastic-recycling/ .
210 Caulfield, Claire. “Are We Doomed? What Can We Do with All Our 
Unrecyclable Plastic?” Civil Beat. Apr. 6, 2020. https://www.civilbeat.
org/2020/04/what-can-we-do-with-all-our-unrecyclable-plastic/ .
211 Roy, Reagan. “Officials Investigating after Fire Breaks Out at Tyler Plastics 
Plant. ” CBS19. May 12, 2020. https://www.cbs19.tv/article/news/local/
officials-investigating-after-fire-breaks-out-at-tyler-plastics-plant/501-
1ef6227f-d020-43cb-a6fe-37c0540de298 .
212 ACC. “Advanced Recycling Alliance for Plastics. ”
213 Nexus Fuels. “About Us. ” https://www.nexusfuels.com/ . Accessed July 13, 
2020. 
214 Moore, Stephen. “Shell Uses Plastic Waste to Produce Resin Feedstocks. ” 
Plastics Today. Jan. 21, 2020. https://www.plasticstoday.com/
sustainability/shell-uses-plastic-waste-produce-resin-feedstocks .
215 Shell. “Shell Uses Plastic Waste to Produce Chemicals. ” Nov. 21, 
2019. https://www.shell.com/business-customers/chemicals/media-
releases/2019-media-releases/shell-uses-plastic-waste-to-produce-
chemicals.html .
216 Nexus Fuels. “Accomplishments. ” https://www.nexusfuels.com/ . 
Accessed August 3, 2020. 
217 House of Representatives, Subcommittee on Environment and Climate 
Change, Committee on Energy and Commerce. “Hearing on ‘Reduce, 
Recycle, Reform: Addressing America’s Plastic Waste Crisis. ’” Mar. 4, 2020. 
https://www.congress.gov/116/meeting/house/110639/documents/
HHRG-116-IF18-Transcript-20200304.pdf .
218 Staub, Colin. “More MRFs Upgrade to Survive Market Shifts. ” 
Resource Recycling. Feb. 26, 2019. https://resource-recycling.com/
recycling/2019/02/26/more-mrfs-upgrade-to-survive-market-shifts/ .
219 Ibid.
220 Rosengren, Cole. “Public Companies Increased Control of $74B US Waste 
Industry in 2018. ” WasteDive. June 4, 2019. https://www.wastedive.com/
news/public-companies-increased-control-of-74b-us-waste-industry-
in-2018/556079/ .
221 MarketWatch. “Annual Financials for Republic Services Inc. ” 
222 CalRecycle. “Local Economies Get Green Boost. ” Jan. 25, 2019. https://
www.calrecycle.ca.gov/NewsRoom/2019/01jan/04 .

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS  | 33
223 Toloken, Steve. “PreZero, ACI Have $90M Vision for Hard-to-Recycle 
Plastics. ” Plastics News. May 20, 2020. https://www.plasticsnews.com/
news/prezero-aci-have-90m-vision-hard-recycle-plastics .
224 Staub, Colin. “PreZero Starts Up California Film Recycling Operation. ” 
Plastics Recycling Update. July 1, 2020. https://resource-recycling.
com/plastics/2020/07/01/prezero-starts-up-california-film-recycling-
operation/ .
225 Staub, Colin. “Mixed Rigids and Film Recycling Sites to Open Next Year. ” 
Plastics Recycling Update. Nov.13, 2019. https://resource-recycling.com/
plastics/2019/11/13/mixed-rigids-and-film-recycling-sites-to-open-next-
year/ .  Sourcing was clarified via correspondence with company.  
226 Toloken. “PreZero, ACI Have $90M Vision for Hard-to-Recycle Plastics. ”
227 Ibid.
228 Staub. “Mixed Rigids and Film Recycling Sites to Open Next Year. ”
229 Paben, Jared. “PureCycle PP Recycling Project Gets $3 Million Boost. ” 
Plastics Recycling Update. June 13, 2018. https://resource-recycling.
com/plastics/2018/06/13/purecycle-pp-recycling-project-gets-3-million-
boost/ .
230 Harrison, Heath. “SOPA to Issue Bonds to Build PureCycle Factories. 
Ironton Tribune. June 28, 2020. https://www.irontontribune.
com/2020/06/28/sopa-to-issue-bonds-to-build-purecycle-factory/ .
231 Based on Google Street view search of PureCycle address. Search 
performed Aug. 2020. 
232 Chevron Phillips Chemical. “Americas Styrenics LLC Began Operations 
May 1, 2008. ” May 2, 2008. https://www.cpchem.com/media-events/
news/news-release/americas-styrenics-llc-began-operations-
may-1-2008 .
233 Lewis, Frank. “Dow Chemical Haverhill Closing. ” Portsmouth Daily Times. 
Aug. 4, 2016. https://www.portsmouth-dailytimes.com/news/9667/dow-
chemical-haverhill-closing .
234 PureCycle Technologies. “PureCycle Cuts Ribbon on New Development. ” 
July 21, 2017. https://purecycletech.com/2017/07/purecycle-cuts-
ribbon-on-new-development/ .
235 AmSty. “List of Manufacturing Sites. ” https://amsty.com/amsty/contact . 
Accessed Aug. 6, 2020. 
236 PureCycle Technologies. “News. ” https://purecycletech.com/news/ .
237 PureCycle Technologies. “PureCycle Technologies Signed an Agreement 
with L’Oréal for the Supply of Ultra-Pure Recycled Polypropylene. ” July 
18, 2019. https://purecycletech.com/2019/07/purecycle-technologies-
signed-agreement-with-loreal-for-the-supply-of-ultra-pure-recycled-
polypropylene/ .
238 Total. “Plastic Recycling: Total and PureCycle Technologies Form a 
Strategic Partnership. ” May 19, 2020. https://www.total.com/media/
news/actualites/plastic-recycling-total-and-purecycle-technologies-
form-strategic-partnership .
239 Closed Loop Partners. Building the Circular Economy. Closed 
Loop Partners 2019 Impact Report. 2020, page 44. https://www.
closedlooppartners.com/impact/ .
240 PureCycle Technologies. “Plastics Recycler to Lease Former Dow Site 
in Lawrence Co. ” July 21, 2017. https://purecycletech.com/2017/07/
plastics-recycler-to-lease-former-dow-site-in-lawrence-co/ .
241 Shaffer, Mark. “Port Authority Approves Bond for PureCycle: Company to 
Use Funds to Build Recycling Unit. ” Ironton Tribune. Aug. 9, 2019. https://
www.irontontribune.com/2019/08/09/port-authority-approves-bond-for-
purecycle-company-to-use-funds-to-build-recycling-unit/ .
242 PureCycle Technologies. “PureCycle Technologies Signed an Agreement 
with L’Oréal for the Supply of Ultra-Pure Recycled Polypropylene. ” 243 Toloken, Steve. “Total, PureCycle Explore European Factory. ” Plastics 
News. May 19, 2020. https://www.plasticsnews.com/news/total-
purecycle-explore-european-factory .
244 QCI. “Our Products. ” https://www.qcillc.com/products . Accessed August 
6, 2020. 
245 Nagl, Kurt. “Plastic Waste Processor Plans $60 Million Plant, 150 Jobs 
in Livonia. ” Crain’s Detroit Business. Sept. 24, 2019. https://www.
crainsdetroit.com/economic-development/plastic-waste-processor-
plans-60-million-plant-150-jobs-livonia .
246 Ibid. A Google Maps location search shows a warehouse facility with 
signage associated with QCI. Retrieved August 6, 2020. 
247 Shannon, Chris. “Proposed Cape Breton Container Terminal Logistics 
Park Has First ‘Green’ Tenant. ” The Chronicle Herald. Oct. 7, 2019. https://
www.thechronicleherald.ca/business/regional-business/proposed-cape-
breton-container-terminal-logistics-park-has-first-green-tenant-360941/ .
248 Scheid, Lisa. “King of Prussia Inventor Envisions New Life for Former 
Berks Coal Generating Plant. ” Reading Eagle. June 27, 2020. https://www.
readingeagle.com/news/local/king-of-prussia-inventor-envisions-new-
life-for-former-berks-coal-generating-plant/article_6b3c7b82-acb7-11ea-
b5d6-8b43900849e3.html .
249 Ibid. 
250 Barrett, Axel. “Movement in US Chemical Recycling. ” Bioplastics News. 
Mar. 31, 2020. https://bioplasticsnews.com/2020/03/31/movement-us-
chemical-recycling/ .
251 DigiMax Global Solutions. “DigiMax Adds Titus Station as Active Client. ” 
Mar. 30, 2020. https://finance.yahoo.com/news/digimax-adds-titus-
station-active-134500991.html .
252 Pennsylvania Government EFacts portal: https://www.ahs.dep.pa.gov/
eFACTSWeb/criteria_facility.aspx . Search performed July 13, 2020. No 
permit information found.
253 Refined Plastics LLC. http://www.refinedplastics.com/ . Accessed July 15, 
2020. 
254 GAIA. All Talk and No Recycling. 
255 AmSty and Agilyx. “AmSty and Agilyx Launch Joint Venture, 
Regenyx LLC. ” Apr. 30, 2019. https://www.businesswire.com/news/
home/20190430005768/en/AmSty-Agilyx-Launch-Joint-Venture-Regenyx-
LLC .
256 Toto, DeAnne. “Phoenix Announces Partnership to Convert Nos. 
3-7 Plastics into Fuel. ” Recycling Today. Apr. 4, 2019. https://www.
recyclingtoday.com/article/renew-phoenix-3-7-plastics-to-fuel/ .
257 Pyzyk, Katie. “Boise, Idaho Temporarily Sending EnergyBag Plastics 
to Cement Manufacturing Facility. ” WasteDive. May 27, 2020. https://
www.wastedive.com/news/boise-plastics-recycling-renewlogy-
energybag/574256/ .
258 Pyzyk, Katie. “Phoenix Awards Contract to Renewlogy for Chemical 
Recycling Project. ” WasteDive. Apr. 5, 2019. https://www.wastedive.com/
news/phoenix-awards-contract-to-renewlogy-for-chemical-recycling-
project/552055/ .
259 Staub, Colin. “Renewlogy Gets Nod for Phoenix Mixed-Plastics Program. ” 
Plastics Recycling Update. Feb. 13, 2019. https://resource-recycling.com/
plastics/2019/02/13/renewlogy-gets-nod-for-phoenix-mixed-plastics-
program/ .
260 ACC. “Advanced Recycling Alliance for Plastics. ” 
261 CLosed Loop Partners. Accelerating Circular Supply Chains for Plastics, 
page 78.
262 ACC. “ACC Members Contributions to Vibrant Oceans. ” https://www.
americanchemistry.com/Sustainability/Vibrant-Oceans-Study.html .

DECEPTION BY THE NUMBERS
SEPTEMBER 9, 2020263 Russell, Steve. “Ocean Plastics: Industry-led Initiatives to End Plastic 
Waste. ” 2019 SPE International Polyolefins Conference. https://
na.eventscloud.com/eselectv2/backendfileapi/download/358894?id=db6
1c96c654174acc32219ff1f9a62af-MjAxOS0wMiM1YzVjNGM1NTY5MDI0 .
264 Staub, Colin. “Recycling Efforts Receive Millions in State Funding. ” 
Plastics Recycling Update. May 15, 2019. https://resource-recycling.com/
plastics/2019/05/15/recycling-efforts-receive-millions-in-state-funding/ .
265 CalRecycle. “California Boosts Recycling Infrastructure to Curb Plastic 
and Glass Waste. ”
266 Based on exports records search in Panjiva.com, performed on July 16, 
2020.
267 Paben, Jared. “Facility Focus: rPlanet Earth. ” Resource Recycling. Aug. 
23, 2019. https://resource-recycling.com/recycling/2019/08/23/facility-
focus-rplanet-earth/ .
268 Ibid.
269 Esposito, Frank. “Sirmax to Build US Recycling Plant in Indiana. ” Plastics 
News. July 30, 2019. https://www.plasticsnews.com/news/sirmax-build-
us-recycling-plant-indiana .
270 Ibid.
271 de la Bastide, Ken. “Bid Date Set for Rail Spurs to New Factory. ” The 
Herald Bulletin. Feb. 25, 2020. https://www.heraldbulletin.com/business/
bid-date-set-for-rail-spurs-to-new-factory/article_54f356be-5804-11ea-
b388-03a24a92ffd2.html .272 Esposito. “Sirmax to Build US Recycling Plant in Indiana. ” 
273 CalRecycle. “California Boosts Recycling Infrastructure to Curb Plastic 
and Glass Waste. ”
274 De La Cruz, Rene Ray. “Shark Solutions Moves Into High Desert. ” Daily 
Press. June 15, 2019. https://www.vvdailypress.com/news/20190615/
shark-solutions-moves-into-high-desert .
275 Sandoval, Dan. “Chinese Plastics Company to Open Recycling Facility in 
Georgia. ” Recycling Today. Oct. 10, 2018. https://www.recyclingtoday.
com/article/upt-group-plastic-recycling-macon-georgia-china/ .
276 DPL Surveillance Equipment. “Chinese Firms Snap Up U.S. Sites to 
Process Scrap (#GotBitcoin?). ” https://dpl-surveillance-equipment.
com/miscellaneous/chinese-firms-snap-up-u-s-sites-to-process-scrap-
gotbitcoin .
277 Wren Dwren. “Trade Concerns, While Unspoken, Still Weigh Heavily on 
SC-China Relationship. ”
278 Search was performed for air permits in the state of Georgia database on 
July 13, 2020. Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental 
Protection Division, https://geos.epd.georgia.gov/GA/GEOS/Public/
GovEnt/Shared/Pages/Main/Login .aspx .
279 NERC. “‘North American Recycled Plastic Processing Capacity Increases. ” 
280 Greenpeace US. “Circular Claims Fall Flat. ” 
© Julie Dermansky / Greenpeace