# Archivo original: denial-and-deception-a-chronicle-of-exxonmobils-efforts-to-corrupt-the-debate-on-global-warming.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:07 -03 2025

DENIAL
DECEPTION:AND
A Chronicle of ExxonMobil’s
Efforts to Corrupt the Debate
on Global Warming
A Report by
May 2002

Acknowledgements
The report was written and researched by Janet
Sawin and Kert Davies, using research and reports byGreenpeace United Kingdom, Ross Gelbspan, KirstyHamilton and Bill Hare. Special thanks to the OzoneAction files. Greenpeace is grateful to the founda-tions, donors and members who support our globalwarming campaign.

Foreward
One way to look at human history is through the peri-
odic struggles between those embodying the cor-rupting influence of power and those who have keptsuch power in check or even successfully under-mined it.  The American Revolution is arguably thebirth of the freedom movement in the Western world,although the British might argue that the birth of the"rights of man" came from the issuing of the MagnaCarta and frankly, all cultures can point to great liber-ators of one era or another.  
Regardless of where it began, every massive center
of unaccountable power, whether it be the RomanCatholic Church of the Middle Ages, the city states ofEurope or the ideology based governments of thelast century have all met their match and ultimatelylost their power when enough people were pushed tothe breaking point and chose to take back theirinalienable rights.
ExxonMobil is now such a power.  Unaccountable to
the U.S. Congress, calling out orders to the WhiteHouse, afoul of countless regulations governing envi-ronmental behavior at all levels of government, pay-ing politicians for favors, and undermining the veryreasons American colonists fought for the right to a"more perfect union."
As has been documented in the pages that follow in
the latest Greenpeace report: Denial and Deception: A
Chronicle of ExxonMobil’s Corruption of the Debate onGlobal Warming , ExxonMobil, the world’s second
largest corporation has successfully used its profitsto stall efforts to stop the greatest ecological threatfacing the world today – global warming.  
Corporations that have sought haven in democracies
and then used these rights to circumvent, ignore orchange laws to their whims have come under theglare of the modern day freedom fighters.  As hasbeen documented in this report, ExxonMobil standsout as perhaps the most significant organization onEarth pushing civilization headlong into a dangerousexperiment on the global climate.  We have already
been provided a glimpse of what happens as globalwarming goes unabated, from the loss of low lyingisland nations and beaches the world over, to thespread of infectious diseases, disrupted agriculture,more severe weather cycles including super storms,more droughts, more floods, and ultimately the mas-sive die-off of the great forests, the disappearance ofmany glaciers, and the further accelerated loss ofbiodiversity.
ExxonMobil’s role in defeating efforts to stop global
warming is impressive.  It has included the paying ofskeptic scientists to confuse the public and the lob-bying and paying of politicians to do nothing – all theway up to the White House.  It has included intimi-dating credible scientists who hold the majority viewthat global warming is happening and is, in part, driv-en by humans.  All of this history has finally beenpulled together into one concise well-documentedreport that reads like it should be turned into ascreenplay like "Erin Brockovich" and "A CivilAction."
But what is most hopeful, despite the frightening
nature of the report, is that activists the world overare now looking at ExxonMobil as the key corpora-tion creating the logjam over global warming. Further,the growing awareness of ExxonMobil’s human rightsviolations around the world, an expanding studentactivist movement in the U.S., boycotts in the U.S.and UK, religious leaders organizing againstExxonMobil for justice, one thing is certain: a widelydistributed, organic campaign is developing againstExxonMobil that is seeking to reform this corporationon many levels.  
It remains to be seen just how much pressure for
positive change will be generated againstExxonMobil.  Its willful acts of arrogance in dealingwith the environmental problems it creates and itshuman rights abuses, have made ExxonMobil themost commonly discussed target for reform since the
i

anti-WTO protests in Seattle.  ExxonMobil is now
standing in the path of history, which has providedspectacular examples of David beating Goliath,across the 20th century including the movement ledby Gandhi to free the Indian people, the U.S. civilrights movement and Solidarity’s defeat of Polishcommunism. The goliath ExxonMobil may providethe perfect catalyst for much needed reform of cor-porate power. As Ken Cohen, ExxonMobil’s head ofgovernment relations and public affairs noted to 
The
Guardian (July 11, 2001), "We know we have a giant
target painted on our chests."
I have no doubt that ExxonMobil will either fall or
reform in due time.  Wrongful behavior, whether outof malice or ignorance cannot long stand.  The ques-tion, however, remains, will ExxonMobil be stoppedbefore global warming is beyond the point of noreturn?  Only time will tell.  In the meantime,Greenpeace will do everything in its power to stopExxonMobil’s rampant disregard for the planet and itspeople.  This report provides a foundational piece ofresearch to aid in the efforts of activists the worldover to kick off the 21st century with either a greatreformation or an even greater dissolution ofExxonMobil, the most powerful entity to have suckedthe life out of the efforts to stop global warming.There is still time to breathe new life into those effortsonce ExxonMobil is cleared from the path.
Rave on,John Passacantando
Executive Director
ii

Executive Summary
Global warming eclipses all other environmental chal-
lenges of the 21st century. There is undeni able proof
that pollution from the burning of oil, coal and otherfossil fuels is the root cause of the observed climate
changes to date. Global warm ing is already occurring,
with evidence piling up weekly of radical climate dis-
ruption. If left unchecked, the catastrophe of global
warming threatens to cause weather disasters andclimate disruption that will destabilize and destroyecosystems, economies and societies worldwide.
Throughout the last decade, ExxonMobil has been
viewed internationally as the number one companydriving the ongoing industry campaign to derail theinternational agreement to solve global warming.While other oil companies are still polluting the envi-ronment and lobbying for pro-oil policies,ExxonMobil epitomizes the worst of corporateAmerica’s onslaught against climate protection. Priorto the 1999 merger, both Exxon and Mobil were lead-ers of American oil industry efforts against globalwarming action.  The merger of these two giants trulycreated what some have called the “Death Star” ofthe global warming debate.
ExxonMobil and their allies have long spearheaded a
corporate war against environmental regulations thatthreaten to control the negative attributes of theircore business – fossil fuel exploitation and use. Theygive millions of dollars to political campaigns andcandidates and spend millions more on lobbyists andadvertisements in order to achieve policies that allowthem to act with impunity. As a result of this effortthey get large financial payback in the form of gov-ernment subsidies, tax breaks, and access to publiclands.
ExxonMobil continues to stall the debate. In early
May, René Dahan, the Director and Executive Vice
President of ExxonMobil, speak ing at the G-8 Energy
Ministers meeting in Detroit, stated that “with regardto potential climate change, some people havedecided not to wait for additional scientific under-standing or for further identification of potential solu-
tions.”
iConversely said Dahan, ExxonMobil has
“become increasingly convinced that the only sensi-ble approach is to take a longer term perspective,”adding that “if warming turns out to be a real prob-lem, will we be willing to shut down the economies ofthe industrialized world…?”
ii
This report, Denial and Deception: A Chronicle of
ExxonMobil’s Efforts to Corrupt the Global WarmingDebate , details more than a decade of deliberate and
persistent efforts by ExxonMobil and its front groupsto derail the evolving global warming treaty and thescientific consensus that ur gently supports the
international agreement. The report also delves into
emerging ties between the ExxonMobil agenda and
the damaging global warming legacy of the Bushadministration.
Since the early 1990s, Exxon and Mobil have taken
leading roles in industry efforts to cast doubt over cli-mate science. With the now defunct Global ClimateCoalition front group and others, ExxonMobil hasclaimed that the scientists are getting it wrong onglobal warming and the role of fossil fuels. This ongo-ing effort was spawned by the revelations of the firstreport of the Intergovernmental Panel on ClimateChange (IPCC) in 1990, which pointed to strong andgrowing evidence of temperature rise, sea level riseand other changes resulting from rising emissions ofcarbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases.That report stressed the need for a 60 to 80 percentcut in CO2 emissions just to stabilize rising atmos-pheric concentrations of this greenhouse gas. Thiscall for emission cuts was received by Exxon, Mobiland others as a direct attack on their core business.
ExxonMobil’s campaign to slow the progress of sci-
entific validation of global warming started with theuse of paid skeptic scientists to publicly rebut scien-tific advances. Exxon has also actively engaged inmanipulation of international scientific assessments.In 1998, Exxon was involved in developing a $6 mil-
iii

lion American Petroleum Institute communications
plan for a two-year campaign intended to reshapethe climate debate – where the ultimate victory wasthe defeat of the Kyoto Protocol, and making thosepromoting it appear ‘out of touch with reality’.
iiiThe
latest attack on climate science was revealed thisyear in a secret ExxonMobil memo to President Bush.The memo asked for the removal of Dr. RobertWatson, the Chair of IPCC. The Bush administrationclimate team and its allies executed ExxonMobil’s willin mid-April of 2002.
In addition to this latest tale of the working relation-
ship between ExxonMobil and Bush, this reportdelves into some of what is known of the company’sclose history with George W. Bush dating back toBush’s days as Governor of Texas. In 1997, thenGovernor Bush consulted Exxon and Marathon oil todraft a proposal to deal with Texas’s debilitating airpollution problem from so called “grandfathered”facilities, those that do not pass modern pollutionregulations, but are allowed to continue to operate.Rather like asking the fox to design the chicken coop,the resulting proposed regulations were not surpris-ingly voluntary and full of loopholes. Eventually thesecret consultations between Exxon and GovernorBush were revealed and the plan was thrown out.
This report also tracks ExxonMobil’s broad array of
political dirty tricks aimed at slowing the progress ofglobal warming policy agreements.  From the fundingand dissemination of “chicken little” economic scarereports on global warming policy to anti-globalwarming treaty advertising on television and in news-papers, ExxonMobil has carried this war on the cli-mate treaty from international negotiations to CapitolHill—around the world and back again.  
ExxonMobil’s use of divisive tactical rhetoric is best
exemplified by its two faced argument on the role ofdeveloping countries in the climate treaty. Whilearguing in the U.S. policy arena that America shouldreject a treaty that does not conscript developingcountries to act, Exxon simultaneously has lobbieddeveloping countries not to support the treaty sayingthat they will be economically harmed by it. In thelead up to 1997 Kyoto climate negotiations, Exxonand Mobil, through the Global Climate Coalition andother front groups, were heavily pushing the messagein the United States that developing countries weregetting ‘off the hook’ by not having to cut their emis-
sions. One television ad against the impending treatyclaimed “it’s not global and it won’t work.”Meanwhile, Exxon CEO Lee Raymond was in Chinaat the World Petroleum Congress warning developingcountries that the Kyoto Protocol would limit eco-nomic growth. He said that the developing worldshould both increase the use of fossil fuels and notlimit oil exploitation within their borders, lest they loseWestern corporate investment.
As recently as this year, Exxon subsidiary Imperial Oil
in Canada is known to have lobbied heavily to get theCanadian Government to back out of promises to rat-ify the Kyoto Protocol. In January, CEO Lee Raymondwas said to have met with British Prime Minister TonyBlair in a preview of the Bush climate plan (alternativeto the Kyoto Protocol) seeking Blair’s tacit approvalof the upcoming plan.
Finally, looking at the actions of the corporation
behind the policy rhetoric, we track Exxon’s irrespon-sible and continuing rejection of clean r enewable
energy development – the clear solu tion to global
warming. In 2001, ExxonMobil earned $15.3 billion inprofits and its return on capital was 17.8 percent. Thecorporation’s total capital expenditures were $12.3billion
iv, and its upstream capital and exploration
expenditures totaled around $8.8 billion.vBut
ExxonMobil did not invest one penny in renewableenergy technologies. ExxonMobil, as the secondlargest global corporation, by all means has aresponsibility to play a leading role in solving theplanet’s largest environmental crisis.
This report shows that ExxonMobil has been a high-
ly destructive influence on both national and interna-tional efforts to limit catastrophic global warming.The influence, the total number of years lost and timewasted, cannot be quantified, and added to the nowpermanent climate legacy of the Bush White House,only our children will truly be able to tally the ultimatedamage. 
iv

Introduction 
The United States, with less than five percent of the
world’s population, emits 25 percent of global warm-
ing pollution. By rights, the nation should be takingresponsibility and leading international efforts toreduce the threats of global warming induced climatechange to the world community. Instead, the UnitedStates has abdicated its leadership role and is nowattempting to erode the commitment of other coun-
tries to reduce greenhouse gas emis sions.
The principal factor behind the U.S. position is that
corporations have played a dominant and damagingrole in shaping the global climate debate. As oilindustry executives admitted in 1998: “Companiesthat produce and use fossil fuels, oil, coal and gas,have a vested interest in the outcome of the climatechange debate.”
1While seemingly obvious, this
statement carries strong hints of the industry’s intentto stifle the emerging international treaty to tackleglobal warming and the science that backstops thoseefforts. While the fossil fuel industry as a whole hasattempted to influence the debate on global warming,one company in particular has gone far beyond therest to undermine both the science of climate changeand the development of responsible U.S. climate pol-icy. That company is ExxonMobil.
ExxonMobil has spent hundreds of millions of dollars
over more than a decade practicing and promotingdenial and deceit to undermine meaningful efforts tosolve global warming. ExxonMobil’s efforts werefinally rewarded when President Bush announcedthat the United States would be withdrawing from theKyoto Protocol in March 2001. The fossil fuel indus-try had overtaken U.S. global warming policy. Thesame is true for the Bush-Cheney energy policy for-mulated in early 2001, and Bush’s alternative strate-gy to address climate change, which he announcedin February 2002. ExxonMobil’s attack on global warming regulation
has followed a multi-pronged strategy: 
• undermine the accepted scientific consensus on cli-
mate change; 
• shape U.S. government policy; • mislead the public and policy makers over the eco-
nomic implications of tackling global warming;
• divide developed and developing countries in climate
negotiations.
Beyond this strategy, the company has refused to
endorse the most viable solution to climate change:investing in renewable energy technology.
ExxonMobil is the corporation formed by the merger
of Exxon and Mobil in 1999. ExxonMobil is knownaround the world alternately as Exxon, Mobil, Essoand Imperial Oil. This report documentsExxonMobil’s legacy of deception and denial onglobal warming. 
1

Undermining Climate Science
“Science is not now able to confirm that fossil
fuel use has led to any significant global warm-
ing.”2– ExxonMobil’s position on climate
change, May 2000. 
“[There is]… new and stronger evidence that
most of the warming observed over the last50 years is attributable to human activities.” –
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change(IPCC), Third Assessment Report 2001
Exxon and Mobil have denied the link between fossil
fuels and climate change for more than a decade,and continue to do so despite the fact that the sci-ence of climate change and its attribution to the useof fossil fuels has become increasingly clear. Asrecently as 11 March 2002, the CEO of ExxonMobil,Lee Raymond, said that the corporation intends to“stay the course” in its skepticism regarding climate
change “until someone comes along with new
information.”
3 ExxonMobil’s efforts to derail the sci-
ence are motivated by the understanding that theweight of scientific evidence influences the urgencyof government action, and thus the speed at whichthe world moves towards a fossil free future.
Over the past ten years, ExxonMobil has been at the
center of industry efforts to sabotage climate changesolutions, including the Kyoto Protocol. One of themost egregious was ExxonMobil’s promotion of awidely publicized and then discredited petition (the“Oregon Petition” of 1998) by “scientists” whichaimed to dismiss the sci entific consensus on global
warming. The peti tion’s organizers attempted to mis-
lead the few valid signatories into believing that thepetition had the backing of the respected NationalAcademy of Sciences (NAS), which it did not. Theydid this by releasing the petition using a sham,unpublished article, formatted in the same design asthat used by the NAS. Subsequently, the NAS issuedan extraordinary statement dismissing this fraudulenteffort, which included “signatures” from cartoon andtelevision sitcom characters. The petition has beendiscredited in the national press.
4
ExxonMobil has also funded and heavily promoted a
number of scientists who are known as “climateskeptics,” in an effort to undermine global scientificconsensus on climate change. These are scientistswho state that either climate change is not occurring,is not due to human causes, will not have a negativeimpact upon our economy and society, or alterna-tively that taking measures to solve it will destroy theU.S. economy. It is important to note that while someof these people are highly respected in their fields,none are climatologists, and their publications on cli-mate issues have not been peer-reviewed. Most ofthem have little, if any, credibility in the mainstreamscientific community, and several have been unableto publish their work in the peer-reviewed scientificliterature and have, instead, published their work inpolitical outlets.
It is also critical to understand that while these scien-
tists are often given equal time in the U.S. media, inan attempt to take a balanced approach to the cli-mate issue, they represent a very small minority ofscientific voices speaking on this issue in the UnitedStates and around the world. The global consensuson climate change is clear: the Earth’s climate isindeed changing, and human activities (primarily theburning of fossil fuels) are largely responsible forglobal warming. Dr. Bert Bolin, former head of theIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),said as long ago as 1996 that the larger trends takingplace with regard to the science of climate changeare not “in debate among scientists working on thisissue.”
5
A Decade of Denying the Science
Exxon’s campaign of misinformation concerning theconsensus on global warming and its manipulationand distortion of climate science can be traced backto May 1990, when it attempted to water down theconclusions of the first assessment report of the
2

IPCC. Since this first IPCC report, Exxon and Mobil
have consistently followed a strategy of exploitingselective and outdated scientific studies to questionthe existence of global warming and the causal roleof fossil fuels in its efforts to undermine the emergingconsensus from the IPCC on both the reality and thecause of climate change.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) was established by the United Nations in 1988 toproduce assessment reports on the science of globalwarming, the probable impacts and potential policyresponses. It is made up of about 2,500 of the world’s topscientists, most of them American. Its first report, releasedin May 1990, concluded that human-induced climatechange is real and that levels of greenhouse gases in theatmosphere are increasing. While the first signs of climatechange might not emerge for at least a decade (from1990), according to the report, the Earth faces probabletemperature increases that are unprecedented in humanhistory.
1990:
During the final drafting of the IPCC’s First ScientificAssessment Report in 1990, Brian Flannery, Exxon’sChief Scientific Advisor and key lobbyist, took issuewith the recommendation for 60 to 80 percent cuts inCO2 emissions, in light of what he suggested were“uncertainties” about the behavior of carbon in the cli-
mate sys tem. Although the consensus of opinion
remained against him, Flannery continued to demand
that the IPCC report’s Executive Summary state thatthe range of model results were “quite scientificallyuncertain”.
6He was unsuccessful; the summary con-
cluded that greenhouse gas emissions at presentrates would certainly lead to warming. 
1992:
Exxon was a prominent member of the GlobalClimate Coalition (GCC), which until early 2002 wasthe most outspoken and confrontational lobby groupbattling global commitments to emissions reduc-tions. (See information about front groups in part III)In 1992 the GCC began using well-known climateskeptics like Patrick Michaels, Robert Balling andFred Singer (all partly funded by Exxon) as “experts”at press conferences in its attempts to undermine thecredibility of accepted climate science and the find-ings of the IPCC.
7In February at a press conference in New York City,the GCC used professional skeptic Fred Singer toattack the IPCC science during the fifth session ofnegotiations (INC 5). The GCC also issued a briefingentitled “Stabilizing carbon dioxide emissions wouldhave little environmental benefit,” in which it cited cli-mate skeptic Professor Richard Lindzen of theMassachusetts Institute of Technology.
8
That same year, Flannery was quoted by the WorldCoal Institute in a briefing for climate negotiators:“because model-based projections are controversial,uncertain, and without confirmation, scientists aredivided in their opinion about the likelihood and con-
sequences of cli mate change.”
9Flannery ignored the
fact that more than 2,000 scientists in the IPCCbelieved that the Earth would warm at rates that wereunprecedented over the period of human history.
1994:
The GCC hired a public relations firm in 1994 to takeclimate skeptic Dr. Sallie Baliunas on a media tour.
10
Through the conservative think tank, The George C.Marshall Institute, Baliunas has published severalreports which attempt to show that human activitiessuch as the burning of fossil fuels play no role inglobal warming, that science does not support theprospect of danger ous climate change
11, and that sci-
entific find ings do not support federal regulation of
emissions.12  Baliunas is an expert in astrophysics, not
climate, and her reports were not subject to the peerreview process. Her articles have included argumentsthat efforts to solve the problem of ozone depletionare misdirected; she also works for the GreeningEarth Society, a front group for the Western FuelsAssociation (the coal industry) which promotes theidea and that the increased CO2 released by theburning of fossil fuels is greening the earth (leading tomore plant growth).
13
1995:In 1995, the GCC sponsored and disseminated areport by a private weather forecasting firm – Accu-Weather – to counter the findings of a landmark studyby the U.S. National Climatic Data Center. TheNational Climatic Data Center study documented thelink between extreme weather events and climatechange in the United States over the previous twodecades.
14The Accu-Weather study disputed the
suggestion that there had been more extreme weath-
3

er events, drawing its data from only three U.S. cities.
Although the study was unsupportable scientifically,it gained considerable media and public attentionwhen it was heavily promoted by the GCC.
The IPCC Second Assessment Report was released in
December of 1995. It concluded that “the balance of evi-dence suggests a discernible human influence on theglobal climate” and that “significant reductions in netgreenhouse gas emissions are technically possible andcan be economically feasible.”
15
The president of the American Petroleum Institute at
the time, Charles DiBona, called the IPCC’s SecondAssessment Report “inflammatory,” because it stat-ed that “the balance of evidence suggests that thereis a discernible human influence on global climate.”
16
It is notable that oil producing countries such asKuwait and Saudi Arabia tried to delay the report’srelease because of this “strong language”, andargued against the use of the words “appreciable,”“notable,” “measurable,” and “detectable” in place of“discernable.”
17
Also in 1995, the GCC attempted to orchestrate acharacter assassination of an IPCC scientist, Dr.Benjamin Santer. It accused Santer of “scientificcleansing” – claiming in the press that he had secret-ly and substantially altered the 1995 IPCC report.Other scientists came to Santer’s defense and con-firmed that the allegations were false.
18
1997:In the lead up to the negotiations in Kyoto, JapanMobil ran a series of advertisements in major U.S.newspapers regarding climate change. One of themost extreme appeared in The Washington Post one
month before Kyoto: “Science: What We Know andDon’t Know.” It featured a large pie chart purportingto show that human activities are responsible for only3 to 4 percent of total CO2 emissions in the Earth’satmosphere. While this is true, it is highly misleadingas it conceals the fact that overall CO2 levels haveincreased about 30 percent due mainly to the burn-ing of fossil fuels and deforestation. 
British Petroleum withdrew from the Global Climate
Coalition in 1997, distancing itself from Exxon, Mobiland other corporations that continued to refute thescience of global warming. 
“All of us, of course, must reject the advice of those who
ask us to believe there really is no problem at all. … Forexample, we remember the tobacco company spokesper-son who insisted for so long that smoking did no harm. Tothose that seek to obfuscate, we say: we will not allow youto put narrow special interests above the interests of allhumankind.” – Vice President Al Gore, remarks to the United NationsCommittee on Climate Change Conference of the Parties,8 December 1997, Kyoto, Japan.
1998:
In April 1998, Exxon took part in the planning of a $6million industry public relations offensive – theAmerican Petroleum Institute’s (API) Global Climate
Science Communications Action Plan. The plan aimed
to re-inject uncertainty into the U.S. public’s percep-tion of climate science in the run up to the climatenegotiations in Buenos Aires that November.
19The
Exxon representative in the group formulating thisplan was Randy Randol, who penned the 2002 memocalling for the ouster of Dr. Robert Watson, Chair ofthe IPCC.
20(See appendix and below for ExxonMobil
memo dated 6 February 2001.)
The American Petroleum Institute plan stated that:“Victory will be achieved when:• Average citizens understand (recognize) uncertainties
in climate science, making them stronger ambassa-dors to those who shape climate policy; 
• Industry senior leadership understands uncertainties
in climate science, making them stronger ambassa dors
to those who shape climate policy;
• Those promoting the Kyoto treaty on the basis of
extant science appear to be out of touch with reality.”
Part of the petroleum industry strategy was to coor-
dinate “a complete scientific critique of the IPCCresearch and its conclusions” and to enable deci-
sion makers to raise “such serious questionsabout the Kyoto treaty’s scientific underpinningsthat American policy makers not only will refuseto endorse it, they will seek to prevent progresstowards implementation at the Buenos Aires
4

meeting in November, or through other ways.”
This would be achieved by recruiting and training five
“independent” scientists – “new faces… without a
long history of visibility in the climate debate” to par-ticipate in media outreach. The American PetroleumInstitute aimed to “maximize the impact of scientificviews consistent with ours, with Congress, the mediaand other key audiences” and admitted shamelesslythat it would target teachers and students, in order to“begin to erect a barrier against further efforts toimpose Kyoto-like measures in the future.”
21(See
appendix for full text of memo.)
On 25 April 1998, The New York Times reported that the
American Petroleum Institute intended to “spend millionsof dollars to convince the public that the [Kyoto Protocol]is based on shaky science…” and to give global warmingskeptics “the logistical and moral support they have beenlacking.”
The Royal Dutch/Shell Group withdrew from the plan
on April 21st because of “irreconcilable differences”over tactics, including the proposed use of “inde-pendent” scientists to stage a public relations cam-paign.
22
In June 1998, prior to the climate negotiations ses-sion in Bonn, Germany, the Global Climate Coalition(GCC) distributed a pamphlet to diplomats, entitled“Climate Change: The Case Against ScientificCertainty.” In this document, the GCC argued that:“While it is certain that the Protocol would imposeenormous burdens on America’s economy, thereis no scientific certainty that human activityaffects global climate.” Perennial skeptic, TV jour-
nalist John Stossel, is named in the strategy docu-ment to get a major national story run “examining thescientific underpinnings of the Kyoto treaty.”Potential funding sources for the strategy were iden-tified as the American Petroleum Institute, U.S.Business Roundtable, Edison Electric Institute, andthe National Mining Association and all of its corpo-rate members. Among the potential “fund allocators”were Competitive Enterprise Institute (CEI), theCommittee for a Constructive Tomorrow (CFACT),Frontiers for Freedom and the George C. MarshallInstitute.
23 It is clear that the disclosure of this plan by
The New York Times did not impede its progress. 1999: 
The Ford Motor Company withdrew from the GlobalClimate Coalition in late 1999, saying its membershipin the GCC was “an impediment to moving aheadcredibly on [Ford’s] environmental agenda.”
24
Furthermore, Ford stated that “credible evidence ofglobal warming exists.” “We do believe that there issomething to climate change. There is enough evi-dence that something is happening that we ought tostart looking at this seriously,” said Ford spokesmanTerry Bresnihan.
25
2000:In the spring of 2000, ExxonMobil ran a four-partseries of advertisements in The New York Times that
attempted to resurrect the debate over climate sci-ence. The claims ExxonMobil made in the advertise-ment have since been subjected to a full scientificrebuttal using the IPCC findings.
26
“ExxonMobil, the biggest [oil company], is also the world’s
most powerful climate-change skeptic…If the world’sbiggest purveyor of fossil fuels ever accepts openly thatglobal warming is real, that may turn out to be more impor-tant to the planet than any Kyoto deal.”
27– The Economist ,
2 December 2000.
One of the studies referred to in the advertisement28,
and used by ExxonMobil CEO Lee Raymond at theMay 2000 ExxonMobil shareholders meeting, was achart of temperature data for the effectively stagnantSargasso Sea. This was used by ExxonMobil torefute the claim that global warming was occurringworldwide. 
The author of the Sargasso Sea study later said: “I
believe ExxonMobil has been misleading in itsuse of the Sargasso Sea data…. There’s reallyno way those results bear on the question ofhuman-induced climate warming. I think thesad thing is that a company with the resourcesof ExxonMobil is exploiting the data for politicalpurposes.”
29
At the 2000 shareholder meeting, Raymond alsoshowed ExxonMobil shareholders a chart of temper-ature data from satellites and stated that “if you justeyeball that, you could make a case statistically that,in fact, the temperature is going down.”
30However,
the 13 August 1998 issue of the journal Nature31
5

reported that the researchers analyzing the satellite
data had failed to account for orbital decay (satellitesdrop in altitude over time, distorting the temperaturemeasurements). With the flawed analysis, it appearedthat satellites were recording a cooling trend, butwhen corrected for orbital decay, the data actuallyshowed a slight warming. Even climate skeptic Dr.John Christy, the author of the original analysis, con-sidered the new study’s conclusions to be legiti-mate.
32
At the same meeting, Raymond questioned the glob-al scientific consensus by citing the “OregonPetition,” which dismisses global warming and hadbeen signed by 17,000 “scientists.” Raymond statedthat “What I am saying is that there is a substantialdifference of view in the scientific community as towhat exactly is going on.”
33The petition had been
discredited in the national press two years earlierafter it was determined that it was not organized byclimate scientists and that it had misled recipientsinto believing it came from America’s respectedNational Academy of Sciences, which it did not. The17,000 signatories included fictional television char-acters, TV weathermen, deceased persons, and rockstars.
34
Their intentional reliance on such dubious scientificsources led ExxonMobil to claim in a 2000 companyreport on climate change that “we do not now havesufficient understanding of climate change to makereasonable predictions and/or justify drastic meas-ures.… Some reports in the media link climatechange to extreme weather and harm to humanhealth. Yet experts see no such pattern.” ExxonMobilstill refuses to acknowledge the link between fossilfuels and climate change: “science is not now able
to confirm that fossil fuel use has led to anysignificant global warming.”
35
2001:In January and February 2001, the IPCC publisheddrafts of its Third Assessment Report. The reportconfirmed the existence of “new and stronger evi-dence that most of the warming observed over thelast 50 years is attributable to human activities.” Theestimated temperature increase expected over thenext 100 years was now believed to be double whatthe panel predicted in its 1995 report.
36In March 2001, scientists at the MassachusettsInstitute of Technology released a study which con-cludes that there is a 95 percent chance that theearth’s temperature will rise by at least 1.6 degreesFahrenheit during this century. The study was pre-pared by a team of about 35 scientists, economistsand technical experts at MIT. Ronald Prinn, anatmospheric scientist who co-directed the modelingeffort, said that “results suggest that policy makersshould make some effort to reduce the world’s risksfrom global warming despite the economic cost ofdoing so,” according to The Wall Street Journal .
37
In September 2001, the world’s leading climate
expert body, the UN Intergovernmental Panel onClimate Change (IPCC), met in London to reachagreement on its Third Assessment Report on cli-mate change. The IPCC’s draft final report containedthe following line: “The Earth’s climate system hasdemonstrably changed on both global and regionalscales since the pre-industrial era, with some ofthese changes attributable to human activities.”
At this meeting, ExxonMobil suggested an amend-
ment deleting the text: “with some of these changes
attributable to human activities.” The IPCC rejected
this amendment.
38Not only has the IPCC consider-
ably strengthened its opinion that the recent warmingis mostly due to human activities, it attributes thisincrease principally to the burning of fossil fuels.
39
“As with any other risk, the uncertainty is no excuse for
inaction…. The ability to think steadily and consistentlyabout a topic as complicated as climate change is a toughtest of management acumen.” “Some executives aremeeting it head-on. Those who are not should wonder whythey aren’t – and so should their shareholders.” – Harvard
Business Review, July-August 2000.
October 2001 - An About-Face on Science?
Interestingly, ExxonMobil’s public statements on the
scientific evidence for global climate change havebecome less uniform of late. It is unknown whetherthis indicates an internal split on the state of the sci-ence or full knowledge while the campaign of publicdeception continues. As with other environmental lia-bility cases and tobacco companies, “when theyknew better” becomes a key piece of evidence.
6

In apparent contrast to Lee Raymond’s statement in
March 2002, that the corporation intends to “stay thecourse” in its skepticism regarding climate change“until someone comes along with new information,”
40
other ExxonMobil executives and printed documentshave been quoted with different stances. 
In a speech given at the Oil and Money Conference in
London, on 30 October 2001, René Dahan, theDirector and Executive Vice President of ExxonMobilsaid that: “Scientific uncertainty is no reason to delaytaking appropriate action.” Furthermore: “We atExxonMobil agree that global climate change is aserious issue and the current lack of scientific, eco-nomic and technical certainty is not a reason for inac-tion.”
41
Mr. Dahan claimed his statements marked “an exten-
sion, a clarification” of ExxonMobil’s position, ratherthan any switch in it, and were unrelated to pressurefrom green lobby groups that have mounted a con-sumer boycott in the United Kingdom and sharehold-er campaign against the company.
42
An Esso document released in the UK, states that“there are still many gaps in the understanding of cli-mate change, but it poses serious long term risks anduncertainty is no reason for inaction.”
43
These statements bear strong similarity to the indus-try-deplored “precautionary principle,” the basis forthe UN Framework Convention on Climate Change,which states that “[w]hen an activity raises threats ofharm to human health or the environment, precau-tionary measures should be taken, even if somecause-and-effect relationships are not fully estab-lished scientifically. In this context the proponent ofan activity, rather than the public, should bear theburden of proof.”
44 The logic of this principle is that
ExxonMobil should bear the burden of proof, andshould take precautionary measures to reduce thethreat of climate change by starting a transition awayfrom fossil fuels. However, ExxonMobil’s actionsclearly do not reflect this responsibility, given theirlack of investment in renewable energy, their push formore research and delay, and their continued explo-ration and production of oil and gas.
By contrast, as early as May of 1997, executives at
Shell verbalized the precautionary principle. Forexample, Heinz Rothermund, the Managing Director
of Shell UK Exploration and Production, asked: “Howfar is it sensible to explore for and develop newhydrocarbon reserves, given that the atmospheremay not be able to cope with the greenhouse gasesthat will emanate from the utilization of the hydro-car-bon reserves discovered already? Undoubtedly thereis a dilemma.”
45
On 11 March 2002, in a speech given at StanfordUniversity, Sir John Browne, Chairman and CEO ofBritish Petroleum, explained why his company brokeranks with other oil corporations in 1997 and decid-ed to face up to climate change:
First, it was clear that reputable science could not
be ignored. The science wasn’t complete – butscience is never complete…. But they knewenough to say that there were long-term risks andthat precautionary action was necessary if wewere to avoid the greater risk - ofthe evidence mounting to the point where dra-conian action was unavoidable.
46
Attacking the Scientists
After years of trying to discredit the science and cor-rupt the scientific debate, ExxonMobil is now goingafter the scientists.
In March 2002, a February 2001 ExxonMobil memo
47
to the White House, regarding U.S. climate policy and
ongoing IPCC proceedings, was released to themedia. The memo, from ExxonMobil’s SeniorEnvironmental Advisor, Dr. Arthur (Randy) G. RandolIII, asks the Bush administration to use its influenceto oust Dr. Robert Watson from his post as Chair ofthe Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Dr.Watson is an internationally respected atmosphericchemist, who is director of the World Bank’sEnvironmental Department. He has also been out-spoken about the urgency for action to solve globalwarming, and has long criticized the United States forits lack of action.
In the memo, dated 6 February 2001, Randol charged
Dr. Watson with using leaked drafts of the IPCC’s cli-mate reports to further his “personal agenda” andasked:
7

“Issue: Can Watson be replaced now at the
request of the U.S.?”
The memo also included a list of “recommendations,”
including the removal of specific people from govern-ment offices and the appointment of a number of “cli-mate skeptic” scientists to positions within theadministration to influence final reports of the IPCC.
One example provided by Randol as evidence was
this Watson quote: “The United States is way offmeeting its targets. A country like China has donemore, in my opinion, than a country like the UnitedStates to move forward in economic developmentwhile remaining environmentally sensitive.” Watson’sstatement was true on both counts. U.S. greenhousegas emissions are now more than 17 percent above1990 levels
48, despite a commitment under the UN
Framework Convention on Climate Change (now U.S.law) by our government to stabilize at 1990 emissionslevels by 2000. China has reduced its emissions overthe past several years, even while its economy hasexpanded faster than that of the United States.
49
Watson responded to ExxonMobil’s charges by not-ing that: “Every one of my talks have been solidlybased on IPCC material…. Obviously, one can beselective, but I try to be very balanced…. So thosewho say I’m an advocate don’t want to hear the mes-sage that indeed the earth is warming; that most ofthe warming of the last five years is attributable tohuman activities; that carbon dioxide is the keyhuman-induced greenhouse gas and that most of itcomes from fossil fuels…. But I’ve never advocatedfor a particular policy position.” He also denied thathe had ever leaked information prior to the peerreview process, during which time IPCC material issent to scientists around the world, in addition toexperts and governments for review.
50
ExxonMobil initially claimed that the letter was notwritten by anyone within the corporation. TomCirigliano, a spokesman for ExxonMobil, told The
Wall Street Journal that “Mr. Randol didn’t write the
memo but was simply passing it on from third parties.He said that the oil company has no official positionon Mr. Watson’s candidacy, and said that he couldn’tidentify the memo’s authors.”
51But he also noted that
“In the U.S., as a citizen, or as a group… you have aperfect right to contact your government and tellthem what you think about various issues…. That’s
what a free society is all about.”
52ExxonMobil has yet
to take full responsibility for this memo, written on itsletterhead and faxed from its offices.
Exxon’s History of Abusing Science
Exxon’s abuse of science to further its own interests is notnew nor limited to climate change. Following the ExxonValdez oil spill of 1989, Exxon stated in report after reportthat Prince William Sound was “essentially clean andrecovered.”
53However, in early 1993, Doug Wolfe of the
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration(NOAA) said that “there was a massive impact with mas-sive mortalities [resulting from the Valdez spill]. It’s veryclear that long term recovery is far from complete.”
54
According to Carol Ann Manen of NOAA, “Exxon [was]picking and choosing the information it is using to assessrecovery,” and Wolfe added that Exxon had “made use ofpartial data sometimes taken out of context and selective-ly ignored other data available to them.”
55According to Riki
Ott, a marine biologist from Alaska, “We’ve been lied to byExxon from day one of the Exxon Valdez oil spill.”
56Lee
Raymond, Chairman and CEO of ExxonMobil, directedExxon’s clean up efforts for the Valdez spill.
57
The Skeptics
ExxonMobil has funded some of the most visible and
notorious “climate skeptics,” whose work it uses toback up its anti-Kyoto lobbying
58, and to distort the
debate in the public arena. Whether or not moneyfrom the fossil fuel industry can be said to have cor-rupted or influenced the findings of scientists in anyway, ExxonMobil’s financial support has providedthese climate skeptics with a voice and a global plat-form from which to deliver their opinions to the pub-lic. The prominence and influence of these scientistshas been completely out of proportion both in termsof their contribution to the science of climate changeand in the extent to which they represent wider sci-entific opinion on the issue of global warming. Inessence, scientists who have credibility in one fieldhave often been hired to do public relations work forthe fossil fuel industry in another field, thereby parad-ing industry wish lists as scientific fact.
8

ExxonMobil - Funding the Skeptics
One of the most high profile skeptics in the climate
change debate, S. Fred Singer , has recently denied
receiving any oil company money, and claimed thathis consulting for oil companies was solely “on thesubject of oil pricing, some 20 years ago….”
59Yet
Exxon’s own documents60show that in 1998, the
company gave a grant of $10,000 to the Science andEnvironmental Policy Project (SEPP), of which Singeris the founding president, and another $65,000 to theAtlas Economic Research Foundation, which pro-motes and supports Singer’s work.
61In addition, in
the past Singer has acknowledged receiving fundingfrom Exxon.
62
According to the Wall Street Journal63, ExxonMobil
also funds the ultra-conservative and anti-environ-mentalist Frontiers of Freedom Institute, of whichSinger is a staff member. Frontiers of Freedom wascited in the American Petroleum Institute (API) 1998Global Science Communications Action Plan as apossible organization to help operationalize their anti-Kyoto strategy, to be funded by API and others in thefossil fuel industry.
64
Singer has a history of public attacks on the integrityof the IPCC process.
65He has fabricated quotes from
the former chair of the IPCC, Dr. Bert Bolin, in anattempt to suggest that Dr. Bolin had changed hismind about climate change.
66Singer was also the
mastermind behind a Committee for a ConstructiveTomorrow (CFACT) project that took fifty Republicanstudents from the United States, trained in the skep-tics’ arguments, to the climate negotiations in Bonnin 2001, to demonstrate in favor of Bush’s abandon-ment of the Kyoto Protocol.
67CFACT was also listed
in the 1998 API plan mentioned above.
Throughout the years, Singer, a seemingly profes-
sional generic skeptic, has argued against an inter-national treaty to ban whaling, and against action onacid rain, ozone depletion and clean air. He has stat-ed that most people would survive a nuclear war andthat resultant climatic changes would be minor andshort-lived. He has also argued that the lung cancerrisk from second-hand smoke was statisticallyinsignificant.
68(See appendix for details.) However,
aside from one technical comment, Singer has beenunable to publish his work in any peer-reviewed sci-entific journals for at least 15 years.
69Sallie Baliunas has published several reports which
attempt to show that human activities such as theburning of fossil fuels play no role in global warming,that science does not support the prospect of dan-gerous climate change
70, and that scientific findings
do not support federal regulation of emissions.71The
Global Climate Coalition (of which Exxon and Mobilwere prominent members) hired her to go on a mediatour in 1994 to refute the science of global climatechange.
72She was also a “co-author” of the paper
which imitated the National Academy of Sciencesformat, and was the basis for the 1998 “OregonPetition” with signatures from “17,000 scientists” dis-missing the scientific consensus on climate change.
73
Other prominent skeptics funded by Exxon includePatrick Michaels , Robert Balling , and Sherwood
Idso .
74All are veterans of the 1991 coal-industry
funded skeptic campaign coordinated by theInformation Council on the Environment (ICE).According to strategy papers developed for the cam-paign, the ICE campaign sought to “re-position glob-al warming as theory (not fact)” and attempted to tar-get “older, less educated males from larger house-holds who are not typically information seekers” and“younger, lower income women.”
75
In 1998, Exxon gave a grant of $15,000 to The CatoInstitute’s Environment and Natural Resources pro-gram, of which Patrick Michaels is a senior fellow.
Michaels argues in four directions: global warming isnot happening, science that detects global warmingis flawed, industry-funded science is viable andobjective, and global warming will be good for theplanet and humankind. Contradicting his claims thatglobal warming is not occurring, in 1998 Michaelswrote that: “The earth’s climate is not necessarilychanging in a deleterious fashion…. These changesmay bear, at least in part, a fingerprint of humanactivity.”
76
Exxon also funds the Pacific Research Institute forPublic Policy, which published Robert Balling’s
1992 book on climate change, The Heated Debate .
77
Balling has argued that climate change, when or if it
occurs, will be beneficial, particularly for the UnitedStates. “Do something to stimulate plant growth inareas prone to degradation of graze lands: burn fos-sil fuels and help to increase atmospheric CO2 levels.
9

The pastures of the world, along with the animals
(and people) depending on those ecosystems, will bein your debt!”
78
Sherwood Idso is the scientific advisor for the
Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and GlobalChange in Arizona, which received a $10,000 grantfrom Exxon in 1998. Idso’s past contribution to theclimate debate was a 1991 coal industry fundedvideo The Greening of Planet Earth – which claims
that global warming is good for humanity. It was thesubject of congressional hearings in the early 1990s.
79
10

Influence on Bush Policies
Exxon has attempted to shape U.S. policy on
global warming over the past decade frommany angles. With the election of George W.Bush, they now have a more sympathetic earin the White House.
Texas – The Beginnings of the Exxon-Bush
Relationship
The relationship between George W. Bush and Exxon
began when Bush was Governor of Texas, duringwhich time Exxon played a key role in weakeningstate environmental regulatory policy on air quality.
Bush was coming under increasing pressure from the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
80, the Texas
public in general, and from environmentalists to closea loophole in the 1971 Texas Clean Air Act, whicheffectively exempted 830 older ‘grandfathered’power plants (responsible for more than 30 percent ofthe state’s industrial air pollution) from pollution con-trol. Texas state regulators were considering impos-ing mandatory restrictions on polluters, but Bushhelped block regulations that would require emis-sions reductions.
81
Seeing an opportunity to paint himself green in therun up to his presidential campaign, but keen to notalienate his old colleagues in the energy industry,Bush asked two oil company presidents – V.G.Beghini of Marathon Oil Company and AnselCondray of Exxon – to draft a program tailored to theneeds of the industries involved. (ExxonMobil’sBeaumont complex is the largest grandfathered refin-ery in Texas.
82) 
Beghini, Condray and Bush’s environmental director,
John Howard, met in secret for the first six months of1997 to develop a working proposal for legislationthat would not disadvantage them. Robin Schneider,executive director of the non-profit Public ResearchWorks, noted that the companies attending thesemeetings were among Bush’s most generous andreliable contributors.
83Their final product – an entire-ly voluntary scheme – became law in 1999, following
a sham public consultation.84According to The New
York Times , “No environmental groups or other pub-
lic interest groups were invited, and they only learnedabout the meetings early this year [in 1999].”
85
In a memo to company owners of grandfatheredfacilities in Texas, dated 11 June 1997, Beghini andCondray wrote that: “In early March, while discussingthe National Ambient Air Quality Standards Issue withGovernor Bush, he asked us to work with his office todevelop the concepts of a voluntary program to per-mit grandfathered facilities in Texas… House Bill3019 and the associated debate from the recent leg-islative session indicate that our lawmakers are readyto end grandfathering. This voluntary program will bean excellent opportunity to influence the manner inwhich grandfathered facilities are permitted. Yourinvolvement and that of your company are impor-tant.”
86
Bush has “given these polluters a corporateloophole they can drive a Cadillac through,”commented Land Commissioner Garry Mauro,Bush’s democratic opponent in the 1998 Texasgubernatorial race.
87
Bush heralded his success in having achieved amajor environmental policy without needing to resortto a “command and control” approach. It was exact-ly the kind of voluntary policy that he would later pro-pose in February 2002 in place of the KyotoProtocol’s binding emissions reduction targets.
Sharing the platform at a press conference in January
1998 with Ansel Condray, Bush claimed that he hadalready signed up 26 industry volunteers for his CleanAir Program.
88By the end of that year however, only
three companies had actually reduced emissions,and by less than 17 percent of the promisedamount.
89
In 2001, the Texas state legislature threw out
11

the Bush/Exxon voluntary plan as a failure, and
instituted mandatory emissions reductionsrequirements.
Today Texas is one of the most polluted states in the
country; Houston has surpassed Los Angeles as thenation’s smog leader. Reductions in toxic emissionsunder Governor Bush have been attributed to poli-cies put in place under Bush’s predecessor, GovernorAnn Richards, a point which Bush’s aides have notdisputed, according to The New York Times .
90
Bush and Fuzzy Science
One of the three men appointed by then-Governor
Bush to the Texas Natural Resource ConservationCommission (TNRCC) was Ralph Marquez, a 30-yearexecutive with Monsanto Company and a lobbyist ofthe Texas Chemical Council. The other two Bushappointees were a cattleman/executive of the FarmBureau and a former employee of the state agricul-tural department who tried to loosen rules requiringfarmers to notify farm workers when applying pesti-cides. According to The Washington Post , the TNRCC
“has endorsed industry opposition to EPA initiativesand belittled federal officials’ science.” In fact, The
Washington Post article notes that “Marquez testified
in Congress that ozone – the key ingredient in smog– is a ‘relatively benign pollutant.’’
91
“I don’t think we know the solution to global warmingyet, and I don’t think we’ve got all the facts.” –George W. Bush, second presidential debate, 2000.
92Bush + ExxonMobil = Bad Policy
1997: Bush asks Exxon and Marathon to draft voluntary
air pollution policy.
1997-1998: Air pollution policy drafted in secret meetings
with polluters and Bush.
1999: Bush pushes policy through Texas state legislature.
2000: Texas Natural Resources Conservation 
Commission (TNRCC) announces that voluntary plan reduced emissions by 3 percent at most (compared to estimated 25 to 50 percent reductionexpected under regulatory requirements).Bush promises to regulate carbon dioxide during presidential campaign.
2001: Texas state legislature throws out Bush/Exxon
voluntary plan as failure and institutes mandatory 
emissions reductions requirements.
Bush becomes President of the United States.IPCC releases Third Assessment Report, stating that “there is new and stronger evidence that most
of the warming observed over the last 50 years is
attributable to human activities.”
93
Not liking the IPCC’s conclusions, Bush asks the U.S. National Academy of Sciences (NAS) for a second opinion; the NAS concludes that the IPCCis right. ExxonMobil sends memo to Bush urging the administration to oust Dr. Robert Watson, chairof the IPCC. Bush throws out Kyoto Protocol, reneges on pledge to regulate CO2 emissions.Bush-Cheney energy plan is released; is strongly influenced by fossil fuel and nuclear power industryinterests. Secretary of State Colin Powell promisesthat a new proposal for dealing with global warming will be ready for an international meetingin November; soon thereafter, National Security Adviser Condoleeza Rice and EPA Administrator Christine Todd Whitman announce that the Bush administration has no such plan.
94
2002: Bush announces plan for voluntary approach to 
climate change, which looks very much like the program that ExxonMobil advocates. ExxonMobil memo becomes public. Bush administration pushes for overthrow of Robert Watson as IPCC chair, and succeeds.
12

National Influence
ExxonMobil has claimed that its contributions to
President Bush’s election campaign were minimaland that the corporation has no influence overPresident Bush. According to René Dahan, ExecutiveVice President of ExxonMobil, the corporation’s polit-ical action committee (PAC) donated $745,670 toindividual presidential and congressional candidatesin the 2000 election cycle, and only $5,285 of thiswent to the Bush campaign. “It is ridiculous to sug-gest that our contributions could buy influence onU.S. government policy.”
95
However, the facts show otherwise. 
ExxonMobil’s Multi-Million Dollar Contributions and
Lobbying Campaign
Exxon gave more money to the Republicans during
the 2000 election cycle than any other oil company –more than $1 million. Of its total political donationsfor that year, 89 percent went to Republicans.
96
ExxonMobil’s lobbying budget in 1999, the mostrecent year for which figures are available, totaled$11.7 million.
97ExxonMobil ranked fifth in the United
States for lobbying expenses that year, exceededonly by the U.S. pharmaceutical and tobacco giants.This came on top of years of funding for a multimil-lion-dollar anti-Kyoto advertising campaign.
The Bush Administration and Oil/Exxon Ties
President Bush’s selections for his Cabinet were
made public in January of 2001. More than half ofthem (including Vice President Cheney) came fromthe oil and gas industry. For example, Bush’s UnderSecretary for Economic Affairs in the CommerceDepartment, Kathleen Cooper, was the former ChiefEconomist for Exxon; Condoleeza Rice, Bush’sNational Security Advisor, was on Board of Directorsof Chevron and had an oil tanker named after her;and Commerce Secretary Don Evans is the formerdirector of an oil and natural gas company based inDenver and helped Bush raise a record amount ofmoney during the 2000 presidential campaign.
98
Lobbying Bush to Kill the Kyoto Protocol
Two days before the Bush inauguration, ExxonMobil
published an op-ed in the U.S. press outlining its rec-ommendations for “An Energy Policy for the NewAdministration.” The op-ed stated that “the unrealis-
tic and economically damaging Kyoto process needsto be rethought .”
99
Meanwhile, ExxonMobil and its oil industry col-
leagues were lobbying Capitol Hill and the WhiteHouse as well. Following Bush’s March 2001 state-ment regarding his formal opposition to the KyotoProtocol, the Chief Executive of the AmericanPetroleum Institute wrote a letter of support and con-gratulations to the Chair of the Energy and Air QualitySubcommittee, Congressman Joe Barton, thankinghim for the “strong leadership” he had demonstratedon the issue. The letter indicated that Barton hadasked the API for its view on the status of the inter-national negotiations to implement the KyotoProtocol on 26 March 2001, days before Bush’srejection of the treaty. The letter re-stated the usualskeptic’s arguments against Kyoto (the economicimplications and lack of developing countries partici-pation), much of the language echoing that of bothBush (“the Kyoto Protocol represents a fundamental-
ly flawed approach…”) and of Exxon’s statements
(“the long term challenge of potential climatechange”) (emphases added). Like ExxonMobil, theAPI still calls for more research to reduce “the scien-
tific gaps and uncertainties surrounding the potentialof human impacts on the climate .”
100
The U.S. Council on International Business (USCIB),
of which ExxonMobil is a member, wrote to Bush on11 April 2001, after his withdrawal from the KyotoProtocol, suggesting that “the U.S. should move
quickly to chart a path forward that will avoid theKyoto protocol’s unrealistic targets, timetables andlack of developing country participation .”
101
On 17 April 2001, ExxonMobil placed an advertise-
ment in several U.S. newspapers claiming that theKyoto Protocol is “fatally flawed” and “fatally politi-cized,” and that the stalemate in The Hague (climatetalks of November 2000) and a new administration inthe White House “provide an opportunity to developa sounder approach.” This approach, whichExxonMobil claims would entail “more effective stepsto manage the long-term risk of climate change,”include technology research and development (R&D),more scientific study to address “fundamental gaps,”“economically based voluntary actions and an inter-national approach that meets that aspirations of all
13

the world’s people.”102
After less than a year of lobbying the Bush adminis-
tration, the GCC declared success and closed itsdoors in January 2002. “The Global ClimateCoalition, which represented U.S. industry groupsopposed to implementing mandatory greenhousegas emissions reductions, has been dissolved,” acoalition official told BNA on 24 January. FrankMaisano, spokesman for the group, said, ‘We haveachieved what we wanted to accomplish with theKyoto Protocol.’ The coalition had been the mostactive U.S. industry voice opposing U.S. involvementin the global treaty to curb greenhouse gases.”
103
From the GCC website, 25 January 2002: 
“The Global Climate Coalition has been deactivated.
The industry voice on climate change has served itspurpose by contributing to a new national approachto global warming.
“The Bush administration will soon announce a
climate policy that is expected to rely on thedevelopment of new technologies to reducegreenhouse emissions, a concept strongly sup-ported by the GCC.” 
“The coalition also opposed Senate ratification of the
Kyoto Protocol that would assign such stringent tar-gets for lowering greenhouse gas emissions that eco-nomic growth in the U. S. would be severely ham-pered and energy prices for consumers would sky-rocket. The GCC also opposed the treaty because itdoes not require the largest developing countries tomake cuts in their emissions.”
“At this point, both Congress and the Administration
agree that the U.S. should not accept the mandatorycuts in emissions required by the protocol. ”
104
Exactly three weeks later, President Bush announced
his climate policy.
In March 2002, a memo from Randy Randol at
ExxonMobil to John Howard in the Center forEnvironmental Quality at the White House (datedFebruary 2001) was released to the press. This is thesame John Howard who was an environmental aidein the state of Texas under then-Governor Bush, whodevised the voluntary clean air plan with Exxon in the
late 1990s.) The memo was regarding U.S. climatechange policy and ongoing proceedings of the IPCC,and asked the Bush administration to use its influ-ence to oust Dr. Robert Watson from his post asChair of the IPCC. ExxonMobil also requested that anumber of specific officials be removed from federaloffices, including the State Department and the WhiteHouse, and recommended the appointment of anumber of climate skeptics to positions within theadministration. One of these, Harlan Watson, former-ly of the House Science Committee, was to be madeavailable to work with the Bush administration’s cli-mate team.
105
The officials at the Department of State and the WhiteHouse are all gone. Harlan Watson is now the U.S.Senior Climate Negotiator.
In April 2002, ExxonMobil’s third request was grant-
ed. The Bush administration supported Dr. RajendraK. Pachauri to replace American scientist Dr. RobertWatson as chair of the UN’s Intergovernmental Panelon Climate Change. As chair of the IPCC, Pachauriwill lead the expert body in preparing the FourthAssessment report on climate change.
106According
to an article in the journal Nature , “… an orchestrated
campaign by the U.S. administration and the fossil-fuel lobby forced the vote on 19 April in whichPachauri defeated the incumbent, atmospheric sci-entist Robert Watson, by 76 votes to 49. Climateresearchers appreciated the way in which Watsondefended their findings from politically motivatedattacks during his tenure. Many will now be wary ofPachauri, who appears to have tarnished his reputa-tion by collaborating with those whose objective wasto ditch Watson.”
107
“Pachauri, an economist as well as an engineer,might not be quite what Bush expects as he has beena vociferous critic of the president for not doing moreto cut emissions from the U.S., seen as the world’slargest source of heat-trapping gases. While industrylobbyists feel he is preferable to Watson because ofhis work with industry in the past, many climateexperts say Pachauri’s lack of grounding in atmos-pheric science make him an unsuitable choice,”according to the New India Times .
108
14

Pachauri is Director of the Tata Energy Research
Institute (TERI) in New Delhi, and on the board ofdirectors of the Indian Oil Corporation.
109The U.S.
support for Pachauri is suspicious considering hiscriticism of Bush’s climate policy and the fact that hehas voiced strong opposition to Kyoto Protocol pro-visions which the U.S. government and fossil fuelindustry have long supported and environmentalgroups have opposed, including emissions tradingand the use of forest credits (“sinks”). Pachauri hasalso supported anti-corporate efforts such as theStopEsso campaign in the United Kingdom. 
It is suspected that the fossil fuel interests who
worked to get Dr. Pachauri in place are aiming toundermine the progress of the IPCC, which dictatesthe urgency of action and thus the future of the KyotoProtocol by electing a divisive chair. 
“ExxonMobil has been allowed to veto the United States
government’s selection of who will head the prestigiousscientific panel that monitors global warming. Dr. RobertWatson, the highly respected leader of theIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, was black-balled in a memo to the White House from the nation’slargest oil company. The memo had its effect last Friday,when Dr. Watson lost his bid for re-election after the [Bush]administration threw its weight behind the ‘let’s drag ourfeet’ candidate, Dr. Rajendra Pachauri of New Delhi, whois known for his virulent anti-American statements.” -Al Gore, op-ed in The New York Times , 21 April 2002.
Influencing U.S. Energy Policy
Documents obtained by the National Resources
Defense Council110thus far, through the Freedom of
Information Act, regarding the Bush-Cheney EnergyTask Force indicate that there were many conversa-tions with industry, including ExxonMobil, regardingthe formulation of U.S. energy policy in early 2001.Because numerous documents have been withheldto date, the extent to which ExxonMobil influencedthe Bush-Cheney energy plan has yet to be deter-mined.
The American Petroleum Institute was the lead
organization in the energy task force brought togeth-er by Vice President Dick Cheney to formulate anenergy plan. Lee Raymond, CEO and Chairman ofExxonMobil, was a member of the API board at thetime. Under pressure from the U.S. media,
ExxonMobil admitted that it was involved in the draft-ing of the Bush-Cheney energy plan, and at least onedirect consultation between Raymond and Cheney’soffice has been disclosed.
111The resultant plan calls
for increasing domestic supplies of oil and gas, andopening federal lands for drilling, thus giving renewedsupport to the coal and nuclear power industries.
Bush Echoes ExxonMobil
The similarities between ExxonMobil’s statements
and the words coming out of Bush’s mouth areuncanny and likely not coincidental. In April 2001,ExxonMobil paid for advertisements that describedthe Kyoto Protocol as “fundamentally flawed” and“fatally politicized.” After Bush rejected the treaty, hedescribed the Kyoto Protocol as “fatally flawed infundamental ways.”
112
Bush’s reasons for withdrawing the United Statesfrom the Kyoto Protocol reflected ExxonMobil’s argu-ments of the past decade. Bush rejected the treatybecause
113:
•The emissions targets set forth in the protocol are
not scientifically justified;
•The Kyoto Protocol is “fatally flawed” and “ineffec-
tive;”
•It would hurt the U.S. economy and mean massive
job losses;
•The largest developing countries are exempt – even
though his father approved their initial exemption inthe 1992 UN Framework Convention on ClimateChange at the Rio Earth Summit. 
Despite Dahan’s claim that “It is ridiculous to suggest
that our contributions could buy influence on U.S.government policy,”
114immediately following his
speech in London (October 2001), Dahan boasted tothe Financial Times that the Bush alternative to the
Kyoto Protocol “will not be very different from
what you are hearing from us.”
115
In fact, he was right. Below are ExxonMobil’s recom-mendations for a “sounder climate policy,” followedby the Bush plan as announced on 14 February 2002.
15

From ExxonMobil paid newspaper advertisements
and policy speeches, their wish list on climate isclear:1. Encourage voluntary actions.
116
2. Link emissions to economic growth.117
3. More research is needed – on the science of cli-
mate change; for renewables.118
4. Research for “long-term mega-technologies” such
as fuel-cells, clean coal.119
5. Research and promote carbon separation and
storage.120
Bush Administration Global Climate Change Policy 
121:
1. Voluntary emissions reductions;2. The need to link emissions to economic growth;
slow down and stop before reversing emissions –18 percent decrease in “greenhouse gas intensi-ty” by 2012 – meaning business as usual, orworse.
122According to the White House, “This
goal is comparable to the average progress thatnations participating in the Kyoto Protocol arerequired to achieve.”
123
3. $1.7 billion to fund basic scientific research on
climate change (actually announced in 2001).
4. In January, Bush announced a major new initia-
tive on fuel cells with General Motors – his“Freedom Car” program; ExxonMobil is part nering
with GM in developing fuel cell powered cars
fueled with hydrogen from gasoline.
5. $1.3 billion for research on energy and carbon
sequestration technologies.
16

Political Dirty Tricks
On the One Hand: Developing Country
Commitments and the Byrd-Hagel Resolution
Although developing countries emit only a fraction of
global greenhouse gases, and the historical burdenfor emissions rests on the industrialized world,ExxonMobil continues to argue that the KyotoProtocol excludes developing countries such asChina and India, and that developing countriesshould make the same binding commitments toimmediate reductions in emissions as the industrial-ized world.
However, the Kyoto Protocol is a crucial and signifi-
cant first step towards tackling global warming,which does include developing countries. Under theKyoto Protocol, developing countries are allowedsome increases in emissions in the short term, andmore time to bring their emissions under control, inkeeping with an international treaty signed in 1992,that included the United States. 
At the Earth Summit in Rio in 1992, all nations agreed
to the United Nations Framework Convention onClimate Change (UNFCCC). The first President Bushsigned this convention, and the U.S. Senate ratifiedit, making it U.S. law. Under the UNFCCC, all partiesagreed that the developed countries – those respon-sible for the vast majority of greenhouse gas (GHG)emissions since the dawn of the industrial age –would take the lead in reducing emissions. Oncedeveloped countries, such as the United States, havemade progress on reducing their own emissions,developing countries will be required to reduce emis-sions as well. However, until the United States takesthe lead and starts to set an example, we cannotexpect developing nations to make commitments toreduce emissions.
The United States, with less than five percent of
today’s global population, is responsible for 25 per-cent of total current emissions worldwide – far morethan any other individual country in total and percapita. In contrast, developing nations have alreadybegun to put policies in place to reduce their emis-
sions of CO2 and other global warming gases. Forexample, China has eliminated subsidies for coal,has ordered the closure of about 25,000 coal mines,closed down inefficient coal-fired power plants, andhas set targets for the use of renewable energy tech-nologies. From 1991 through 2001, China’s emis-sions grew 8.4 percent, while U.S. emissions (whichbegan the decade at a far higher level) rose 14 per-cent. During this same time period, China’s economygrew four times faster than that of the United States– 142 percent versus 31 percent.
124According to the
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, “even if theChinese economy continues to grow five percent tosix percent per year, by 2020 China’s carbon dioxideemissions still will be significantly below U.S. emis-sions levels in 1990.”
125
The argument ExxonMobil uses again and again totry to prove its case both on the legitimacy of its eco-nomics and the long-term position of the U.S. gov-ernment, is the 1997 Senate Resolution 98. The votewas 95-0 in favor of a resolution by Senators Hageland Byrd recommending that the United Statesshould not sign an international agreement on cli-mate change unless it contained specific new com-mitments for developing countries.
A close look at the political context of the time
reveals extensive lobbying by Mobil, and by Exxon’strade and lobby groups in favor of the resolution, andclose links between Senator Chuck Hagel, Chairmanof Senate Foreign Relations, and the oil industry.
For example:• Mobil took out full-page advertisements in the U.S.
press in June 1997, prior to the Senate vote, advo-cating that “Instead of rigid targets and timetables,
governments should consider alternatives…encourage voluntary initiatives.” It highlighted the
upcoming Senate vote, and concluded: “By early…
[in the 21st] century, fast-growing developing
17

nations will be the largest carbon emitters. That is
why it is incumbent on all nations to participate inthe solution even in the short term.”
126
• After the vote, Mobil took out further advertise-
ments expressing support for the concerns raisedby the Senate vote over the equity of a climatetreaty that excluded developing countries andmight result in “serious harm to the economy of the
United States.” It suggested that “when the
Congress speaks this forcefully, the American pub-lic as well as the administration should takenotice.”
127
• In the run up to the Senate vote, the American
Petroleum Institute signed a U.S. newspaper adver-tisement on 23 June 1997, addressed to PresidentClinton and stating API’s support for the anti-Kyotoresolution by Byrd and Hagel.
128Hagel had close
links with the API at this time; he spoke at its con-ference in November that year, just prior to LeeRaymond, who quoted Hagel’s resolution in hisspeech.
129
• The U.S. Business Roundtable (BRT) ran a $1 mil-
lion advertising campaign on climate change inJune 1997, urging the Clinton administration not torush into policy commitments without fully under-standing the consequences. This campaign includ-ed full-page advertisements in The Wall Street
Journal and The Washington Post , signed by both
Exxon and Mobil.
130The BRT also sent a letter to
Senator Hagel on 8 July 1997, supporting hisupcoming senate resolution, on the basis that “thescience is less than compelling.”
131
On the Other Hand, Developing Countries Should
Not Commit
In October 1997, just prior to the international climate
negotiations in Kyoto, Japan, Exxon CEO LeeRaymond urged Asian governments at the WorldPetroleum Congress in Beijing to continue to fightemissions regulations for at least the next twodecades. Having previously argued that the lack ofdeveloping country participation was unfair to theUnited States, he now threatened that developingcountries would lose foreign investment if bindingtargets were agreed upon at Kyoto: “It would be trag-
ic indeed if the people of this region were deprived ofthe opportunity for continued prosperity by misguid-
ed restrictions and regulations.” Claiming that “the
case for global warming is far from airtight,”Raymond also peddled the scare story that emis-sions reductions would entail “energy rationing
administered by a vast international bureaucracyresponsible to no-one.”
132
By simultaneously suggesting that the United Statesmust not act unless developing countries join them,and that developing countries should not reduce theiremissions because it would hinder economic devel-opment, Exxon and the rest of the industry had effec-tively created an impasse from which the only policythat could emerge was inaction. 
The UN Would Rule the World, Says ExxonMobil
During the negotiations over the Kyoto Protocol inKyoto, Japan, December 1997 the Global ClimateCoalition (GCC) produced a press briefing statingthat: “U.S. sovereignty is at risk,” and that
“Negotiating text gives a UN body – dominated bydeveloping countries – permanent license to controlU.S. economic growth, without Senate ratification ordomestic legislation.”
133Exxon continues to use such
divisive rhetoric.
These statements are false for several reasons. First,
as with any treaty, the U.S. Senate would have to rat-ify the Kyoto Protocol for it to become U.S. law.Second, it would be up to United States governmentalone to determine how it would meet its commit-ments under the treaty. No other country, govern-ment or organization can change the laws of theUnited States. Ratification of the Kyoto Protocolwould not require the United States to give up leg-islative, economic or territorial control; thus, thetreaty would not compromise U.S. sovereignty.Assuming the United States became a party to thetreaty, we will be a party to future negotiations toadvance the commitment levels for future emissionsreductions, and will have control over the targetsestablished for our nation. Finally, countries enter intonegotiations and sign treaties because such treatiesare considered to be mutually beneficial – we gainmore by moving forward with the other partiesinvolved than would otherwise be the case.
18

Everyone Opposes The Kyoto Protocol, Says
ExxonMobil
According to ExxonMobil the vast majority of U.S.
politicians and businesses oppose the KyotoProtocol.
134In actuality, while there are clearly strong
feelings about Kyoto in the United States, opinion isdivided. A U.S. public opinion poll, conducted by The
New York Times /CBS in June 2001, shortly after the
Bush administration rejected the Kyoto Protocol inMarch 2001, found that three out of four peoplebelieved immediate action was required to tackleglobal warming. Furthermore, “more than half thepublic said that the United States should abide by theagreement, even if it meant that China and Indiawould not have to follow the same standards.
135
ExxonMobil’s claim that other U.S. businesses andpoliticians also oppose the Kyoto Protocol is self-ful-filling. ExxonMobil has led the campaign for U.S.opposition to Kyoto, and has been successful ininfluencing politicians, industry and the U.S. public.ExxonMobil has undertaken a multimillion-dollar, ten-year campaign of dirty tricks targeted toward theUnited States to prevent international action on glob-al warming.
Furthermore, it appears that many of the U.S. trade
associations that ExxonMobil claims “support/share”its position are in fact being driven by ExxonMobil.
136
One of the most anti-Kyoto of these, the U.S. Councilfor International Business (USCIB) wrote to PresidentG. W. Bush - allegedly on behalf of all its members –in support of his rejection of the Kyoto Protocol.
137
A Greenpeace survey, which sampled some of themajor members of the USCIB, confirmed that manyof these companies were not consulted before theletter was sent to President Bush and/or did notagree with the letter’s content. For example, BritishTelecom North America responded to theGreenpeace survey: “We belong to this organiza-
tion for reasons of trade relations and were notconsulted on the Kyoto statement. It thereforedoes not reflect our views.”
138
Over the past few years, numerous bills with biparti-san support have been introduced in the U.S.Congress to address climate change and reducedomestic carbon dioxide emissions through pollutioncontrols, development of more energy efficient andrenewable energy technologies, and to promote pub-lic awareness of the climate issue. Several moderate
and conservative Republicans, including SenatorsOlympia Snowe and Susan Collins of Maine, andSam Brownback of Kansas, have introduced or co-sponsored measures that aim to reduce the threats ofglobal warming.
139An amendment offered in the U.S.
House of Representatives in 2000 (H.R. 1646140) stat-
ed that: “climate change poses a significant threat tonational security, the American economy, publichealth and welfare, and the global environment…”and “more efficient technologies and renewableenergy sources will mitigate global warming and willmake the U.S. economy more productive and createhundreds of thousands of jobs.” It further stated that,“action by the U.S. to reduce emissions, taken inconcert with other industrialized nations, will promoteaction by developing countries to reduce their ownemissions.” 
On 3 August 2001, Senators John McCain (R – AZ)
and Joseph Lieberman (D – CT) announced plans tointroduce legislation that would impose a nationwide“cap and trade” system on greenhouse gas emis-sions during a colloquy on the Senate floor. Theystated that voluntary approaches to emissions reduc-tions “will not be enough to meet the goal of pre-venting dangerous effects on the climate system,”(McCain) and that “voluntary programs, unfortunate-ly, do not work” (Lieberman) Furthermore, they notedthat “American businesses will suffer as the rest ofthe industrial countries begin trading emission cred-its under the Kyoto climate agreement recentlyrejected by the Bush administration.”
141 Lieberman
went so far as to say that “I believe that this failure [ofthe government to engage in the issue of climatechange] abdicates the United States’ position as aleader in environmental affairs and places U.S. indus-try at risk.”
142Just one day before their announce-
ment, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee unan-imously approved a resolution that urged Bush toreconsider his rejection of the Kyoto Protocol.
143At
the same time, Senator Jim Jeffords (I-Vermont), wholeft the Republican party in early 2001 and gave con-trol of the Senate to the Democrats, announced thathe intended to get a bill passed to regulate CO2 andthree other pollutants.
144
19

ExxonMobil’s Efforts Beyond U.S. Borders
On 22 January 2002, Lee Raymond, Chairman and
Chief Executive of ExxonMobil (Esso) spent an hourat No. 10 Downing Street with UK Prime Minister,Tony Blair. A senior government official later told The
Guardian newspaper that Raymond’s visit was to per-
suade Blair “not to join the chorus of internationaldisapproval” of Bush’s alternative to Kyoto, whichwas about to be announced.
145
Now that ExxonMobil has succeeded in getting theUnited States to withdraw from the Kyoto Protocol,the corporation is lobbying the Canadian governmentto reject the treaty. In March 2002, Bob B. Peterson,the Chairman and CEO of Imperial Oil (theExxonMobil subsidiary in Canada) told the CanadianPress:
“Kyoto is an economic entity. It has nothing to do
with the environment. It has to do with world trade.This is a wealth-transfer scheme between developedand developing nations. And it’s been couched andclothed in some kind of environmental movement.That’s the dumbest-assed thing I’ve heard in a longtime.”
146
Both Bob Peterson and Tim Hearn (Peterson’s soon-to-be successor) are recommending that Canadareject the Kyoto Protocol as the United States hasdone. Hearn said in early March 2002: “I don’t knowwhy we would walk down this path. Why would wecreate more unemployment and shrink our economyfor ostensibly no real impact on the environment?”
147
20

Economic Scare Tactics
The global treaty and scientific consensus have solid-
ified despite ExxonMobil’s efforts. As it becameincreasingly difficult to confuse the public on scientif-ic grounds, the fossil fuel industry – and ExxonMobilin particular – has begun to refocus its propagandaon the alleged costs of taking action to reduce car-bon dioxide emissions, misleading the public andpolicy makers about the harm that such efforts wouldhave on the U.S. economy.
ExxonMobil’s primary arguments have been that the
Kyoto Protocol will impose significant economiccosts on the United States and that reductions madein the North (by the developed nations) will have anegative economic impact on countries of the South(the developing nations of the world).
Chicken Little
ExxonMobil has repeatedly claimed that the KyotoProtocol will impose significant economic costs onthe United States, bringing with it economic disaster,massive unemployment, and loss of competitive-ness.
148
However, numerous studies have determined theUnited States could meet its targets under theUNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol at little to no eco-nomic cost.
In February of 1997, about 2,000 top economists
(including six Nobel Laureates) signed a statementaffirming that many potential climate protection poli-cies “would slow climate change without harming
American living standards, and these measures mayin fact improve U.S. productivity in the long run.”They urged the United States to play a leadership roleat the Kyoto negotiations.
149
In November 2000, the Department of Energyreleased a study by five U.S. national laboratories,Scenarios for a Clean Energy Future . This study exam-
ines possible implementation plans for the KyotoProtocol, and concludes that U.S. emissions could
be cut by 390 million tons of carbon per year by2010, producing energy saving equal to or exceedingthe costs. Furthermore, the development of newtechnology and increased use of existing, cleanertechnologies could allow for continued reductions inemissions for more than a quarter century.
150
According to a study by the Tellus Institute, theUnited States could reduce its carbon emissions to14 percent below 1990 levels (the Kyoto target is 7percent) while reducing pollution, creating new jobsand additional income, and saving the averageAmerican household nearly $400 per year.
151
In 2001, the IPCC Working Group III concluded thatbottom-up studies “…show that the costs of reduc-ing emissions by 20 percent in developed countrieswithin the next three decades are negligible to nega-tive. Other bottom-up studies suggest that thereexists a potential for absolute reductions in excess of50 percent in the longer term, without increasing, andperhaps even reducing, total energy system costs.”Their report noted that “The literature indicates thatsignificant ‘no-regrets’ opportunities are available inmost countries and that the risk of aggregate netdamage due to climate change, consideration of riskaversion, and application of the precautionary princi-ple provide rationales for action beyond no regrets,”and that “earlier mitigation action may increase flexi-bility in moving toward stabilization of atmosphericconcentrations of greenhouse gases.”
152The report
also noted that “significant technological progressrelevant to greenhouse gas emissions reduction [withrenewable energy technologies, for example] hasbeen made since the SAR [Second AssessmentReport] in 1995 and has been faster than anticipat-ed.”
153
Several countries in Europe have already begun toreduce their emissions at home through increasedenergy efficiency and the expansion of markets forrenewable energy. For example, Denmark now gen-
21

erates more than 18 percent of its electricity with the
wind154, and Germany has set a target of meeting
one-fourth of its electricity needs with wind power by2030.
155The European Union aims to produce 12 per-
cent of its energy, and more than 22 percent of itselectricity, with renewable technologies by 2010.
156
The primary impetus behind these targets is Europe’scommitment to reduce global warming gases, suchas carbon dioxide, under the Kyoto Protocol.
Rather than damaging economies in Europe, policies
put in place to advance the development and use ofrenewable energy technologies have provided newmarkets, numerous jobs, investment, and other ben-efits. In fact, at a G-8 meeting in Banff, Canada inApril 2002, Germany’s Environment Minister JürgenTritten said that he did not understand U.S. argu-ments that meeting the targets under the KyotoProtocol would harm the U.S. economy. Germanyhas reduced greenhouse gas emissions without sig-nificant problems. “We are convinced that reductionof carbon dioxide is not a harm to the economy.”
157
The United States has far more renewable energypotential than all of Europe combined. In addition,most economies of western Europe produce signifi-cantly more output (measured in gross domesticproduct) per unit of energy consumed, meaning thatthe United States has more opportunities thanEurope for increasing its energy efficiency and there-by reducing its energy intensity. 
ExxonMobil Behind the Curve
In addition to these voices, other fossil fuel com-
panies have called for the ratification of theKyoto Protocol . On 7 November 2001, Greg
Bourne, the President of British Petroleum for SouthAustralia and Australasia, called on the Australiangovernment to ratify the Kyoto Protocol. He said thatthe Australian economy would suffer if the nation didnot commit to ratification.
158Bourne said that “the
world is going to have to change its energy use pat-tern” and that postponing this change will make thetransition more difficult, and “cause too much socialupheaval.” Further, in contrast to ExxonMobil’scharge that the Kyoto Protocol will bring massiveunemployment, Bourne’s “own belief is that there willbe many more jobs created by changes into a newereconomy than there will be lost.”
159Both BP and Royal Dutch/Shell Group have estab-lished internal targets for reducing their greenhousegas emissions. In 1998, BP committed to reducing itsemissions by 10 percent below 1990 levels over a 12year period; one month later, Shell pledged to do thesame by 2002.
160BP met its target seven years ahead
of schedule, and as Sir John Browne said in March2002, “we’ve met it at no net economic cost –
because the savings from reduced energyinputs and increased efficiency have out-weighed all the expenditure involved.”
161 While
these corporations still have a long way to go, at leastthey are heading in the right direction.
The Kyoto Protocol will obviously affect the polluting
energy industries – the fossil fuel industry in particu-lar – if they do not begin soon to diversify their prod-ucts and invest in more climate friendly fuels andclean, renewable energy technologies. However, theaverage American and society as a whole will savemoney and will benefit from a more stable climate,better health, cleaner environment, and more jobs.The costs of inaction will be far greater.
In early December 2001, Robert A.G. Monks, founder of
the leading U.S. corporate-governance consulting firm,Institutional Shareholder Services, Inc., announced theintroduction of a shareholder resolution calling forExxonMobil’s board to rein in Lee Raymond, charging thatRaymond’s “increasingly extreme position on globalwarming and other environmental and social issueswas harming the company’s reputation and sharevalues.”
162
In March 2002, ExxonMobil shareholders gained an impor-tant victory when the Securities and ExchangeCommission (SEC) ruled in support of two shareholder res-olutions in the corporation’s proxy for 2002. The resolu-tions, which were filed by 56 investor groups which areconcerned about ExxonMobil’s position on climatechange, call for executive compensation to be linked to thecompany’s social and environmental performance, and forthe publication of a report on the company’s efforts todevelop renewable energy technologies. ExxonMobil hadchallenged the resolutions at the SEC.
163
22

“Just as Enron’s board members failed to properly oversee
their company’s financial dealings, ExxonMobil’s board isfailing to oversee their company’s position on vital envi-ronmental issues.” – Sister Patricia A. Daly, Dominican Sisters of CaldwellNew Jersey.
164
North vs. South
While ExxonMobil continues to argue that developing
countries should make the same binding commit-ments as the developed world, and has been lobby-ing Congress to reject the Protocol due to lack ofdeveloping country participation, ExxonMobil alsolobbies developing countries to reject any environ-mental obligations (including those on the developednations) that might “strangle economic growth.”
165In
an effort to silence calls from the developing world forthe developed nations to honor their commitmentsunder the UN climate convention and to act first, thecorporation alleges that developing countries willface heavy costs if industrialized countries implementpolicies to reduce CO2 emissions.
166At the same
time, ExxonMobil executives, including CEO LeeRaymond, have implied that developing countriesmust continue to burn fossil fuels or face losing for-eign investment, a direct threat to the economies ofthese nations.
167
These notions have been used by fossil fuel lobbyiststo foster suspicions among developing countries.They have also been at the center of a deliberate,double-blind strategy to hamstring the entire interna-tional process to deal with climate change. And, ofcourse, ExxonMobil has completely ignored thecosts – economic and otherwise – that climatechange will impose upon the world’s developingcountries.
The Costs of Inaction
Climate change will have greatest impact on those
least responsible for the problem and least able todeal with it. According to the IPCC, “the developingcountries, particularly the least developed coun-tries,… have lesser capacity to adapt and are morevulnerable to climate change damages….” In fact,“[t]he effects of climate change are expected to begreatest in developing countries in terms of loss oflife and relative effects on investment and the econo-my.” Furthermore, “The projected distribution of eco-nomic impacts is such that it would increase the dis-
parity in well-being between developed countries anddeveloping countries….”
168
“The human consequences – and the economic costs – of
failing to act [on climate change] are unthinkable. Morerecord floods and droughts. Diseases and pests spreadingto new areas. Crop failures and famines. Melting glaciers,stronger storms and rising seas.” – Vice President Al Gore, Kyoto, Japan, December 1997.
The insurance industry has become increasingly con-
cerned about climate change. According to a 2001report by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,“The world’s nations have endured nearly one trilliondollars in economic losses (and 560,000 fatalities)due to 8,800 natural disasters over the past fifteenyears. Three-quarters of the loss costs were weather-related, and a fifth were insured. Over the past 50years, the number of weather-related natural disas-ters has been steadily rising, as have the total andinsured losses. Nearly 60 percent of these losses arevisited on U.S.-based companies, and between 1970and 1999 losses (adjusted for inflation) grew nine-times faster than population.”
169
In 2000, the CGNU, the largest insurer in Great Britainand world’s sixth largest insurance company, saidthat if left unchecked, climate change could bankruptthe global economy by 2065. “Property damage [dueto severe weather] is rising very rapidly, at somethinglike 10 percent a year,” according to Dr. AndrewDlugolecki of CGNU. Furthermore, “…once this thingbegins to happen [the effects of climate change areseen in the West], it will accelerate extremely rapid-ly.”
170In 2001, Munich Reinsurance predicted that in a
couple of decades the cost of climate impacts willamount to $300 billion a year.
171
The Kyoto Protocol Will Not Work, Says
ExxonMobil
ExxonMobil has also claimed that the Kyoto Protocol
will do little to achieve its goal of reducing green-house gas emissions.
172But the Kyoto Protocol is a
living document, with a series of ‘commitment peri-ods,’ that will advance, with stronger targets, as timepasses and in future international negotiations. Whatthe global community has today is an important start
23

to reducing the threat of climate change. It is essen-
tial that the Protocol be ratified and enter into forceas soon as possible so that countries can begin usingthe mechanisms (e.g., joint implementation, the cleandevelopment mechanism, etc) and ensure that theywill work on a global scale. Furthermore, one of theprimary reasons why the Protocol is not strongertoday is because ExxonMobil has lobbied tirelesslyfor more than a decade to undermine the veryprocess of negotiating the treaty.
ExxonMobil’s Anti-Climate Front Groups
Much of Exxon’s work to undermine the climatenegotiations has been carried out under the cover ofindustry lobby organizations. Since 1990, this net-work of fossil fuel industry umbrella groups has beenattempting to undermine the scientific evidence andeconomic advice given to governments, and stall theclimate negotiations.
In addition to carrying out its own lobbying at the cli-
mate talks and in the media, ExxonMobil is, or hasbeen, a leading member of the following organiza-tions, and has played a central part in the planningand funding of their misinformation and propagandacampaigns. These lobby groups have worked hardboth to undermine the climate science and overplaythe economic implications of climate protection.Global Climate Coalition (GCC)
“Over the past decade, the Global Climate Coalitionhas spent millions of dollars to defuse the globalwarming issue, lobbying members of Congress tothwart any corrective action, conducting economicstudies that conclude that any such measures wouldirreparably harm the economy, and sponsoring skep-tics on speaking tours to question whether globalwarming is the crisis other scientists say it is.”
173
The GCC was established in 1989 and, for more thana decade, was the most outspoken and confronta-tional lobby group battling emissions reduction com-mitments. It invested enormous resources into full-scale attacks on international climate agreement,waging extensive, multi-million dollar dis-informationcampaigns.
174Both Exxon and Mobil were board
members of the GCC and supported the organiza-tion.
175 It was recently reported that during the 1990s,
Exxon and Mobil spent approximately $1 billionfinancing the GCC, though accurate figures maynever be known.
176
In 1997, British Petroleum (BP) left the GCC afteradmitting that climate change required action. Duringthe period 1999-2000, there was a large-scale defec-tion of companies such as Ford, Texaco and GeneralMotors, but ExxonMobil remained. ExxonMobil wasthe last to leave the GCC, and left only because thecoalition stopped listing corporations as member,accepting only trade associations.
177
The GCC folded in early 2002, declaring thatPresident Bush and the Senate were enacting theiragenda and thus it had achieved its goals.
178
American Petroleum Institute (API)
ExxonMobil is a financial supporter of the API andsits on the board. Lee Raymond, CEO of ExxonMobil,was the chair of the API from 1995-1997.
179U.S. Vice
President Dick Cheney has been a member of itsboard of directors, and the API remained a memberof the Global Climate Coalition until the GCC foldedin early 2002.
24

International Chamber of Commerce (ICC)
The ICC is an industry lobby group that has active atmany sessions of the Kyoto negotiations. At the 6thConference of the Parties (COP 6) in The Hague,Netherlands, in November 2000, ExxonMobil’s ChiefScientific Advisor, Brian Flannery, was registered as arepresentative of the ICC and was one of the group’smain spokespeople. 
International Petroleum Industry Environmental
Conservation Association (IPIECA)
Exxon and Mobil were both members of the IPIECAin 1996 when it attempted to influence the Decemberclimate talks with dire economic forecasts resultingfrom emissions reductions. ExxonMobil remains amember.
U.S. Business Round Table (BRT)
The BRT is made up of CEOs from more than 200large corporations, including ExxonMobil. The cli-mate agenda it pushes calls for global agreementsthat include developing countries, voluntary agree-ments for industry, “flexible policies,” and tradableemissions permits between countries. Tax and regu-latory measures are strongly opposed. Its 1997 posi-tion statement proposed that “a climate policy whichfails to include all nations should be opposed,”despite the fact that in 1992, parties to the UNFramework Convention on Climate Change, includ-ing the United States, agreed that developed coun-tries should act first.
180
Global Climate Information Project (GCIP)
In the run up to the international climate changenegotiations in Kyoto, Japan in 1997, this industrycoalition ran a $13 million advertising campaign in theU.S. press, and U.S. national and local television andradio stations that opposed U.S. commitments to theupcoming global warming agreement, claiming thatdeveloping countries were not included and thetreaty would harm the U.S. economy.
181It was spon-
sored by the GCC and by API while Lee Raymondwas chair.
U.S. Council on International Business (USCIB)
ExxonMobil is a member of this corporate lobbygroup which actively lobbied for President George W.Bush’s rejection of the Kyoto Protocol.Pushing ExxonMobil’s Economic Agenda
1996:In 1996, the American Petroleum Institute commis-sioned and funded an economic model to predict thecosts of reducing carbon emissions. The model –produced by U.S. consulting firm Charles RiverAssociates – predicted that any commitment to legal-ly binding emissions targets within the next decadewould entail large costs.
182This model failed to com-
pare these potential Kyoto Protocol implementationcosts with economic costs of inaction or delay on cli-mate protection, nor the costs of past and future cli-mate change impacts on humans and the environ-ment. Furthermore, it did not incorporate the eco-nomic benefits that would result from new marketsand jobs created through emissions reduction poli-cies and the development and use of renewableenergy and more energy efficient technologies. 
The author of the model, David Montgomery, spoke
at a briefing organized by the U.S. Council forInternational Business and chaired by the head of theInternational Chamber of Commerce (ExxonMobil isa member of both organizations) at the UN climatenegotiations in Geneva, December 1996. He wasquoted widely in the media throughout that year.
183
At the December 1996 climate talks, the IPIECA cir-culated a briefing paper which concluded that: 
“Current proposals for near term (10-20 years)
emissions reductions in developed countries,which imply curbs on fossil fuel based energy use,would result in substantial costs that would inhib-it economic growth and negatively affect trade,investment, competitiveness, employment andlifestyles.”
184
Exxon and Mobil were both members of the IPIECAat the time.
185
1997:In February of 1997, 2000 top economists (includingsix Nobel Laureates) signed a statement affirmingthat many potential climate protection policies“would slow climate change without harmingAmerican living standards, and these measures
may in fact improve U.S. productivity in the long run.”They urged the United States to play a leadership roleat the Kyoto negotiations.
186
25

Following the Senate vote on the Byrd-Hagel resolu-
tion in 1997 (which stated that the United Statesshould not sign an international agreement on cli-mate change unless it contained specific commit-ments for developing countries), the Global ClimateInformation Project (GCIP) began a $13 million adver-tising campaign in the U.S. press, and on U.S.national and local television and radio stations.
187
Before the Kyoto climate negotiations had evenbegun the GCIP advertisements claimed that “the UN
Global Climate Treaty isn’t global…and it won’t work,” and that “Americans will pay the price…50 centsmore for every gallon of gasoline”.
188The campaign
was sponsored by the GCC and by the API, while LeeRaymond was chair of the API.
189
During the Kyoto negotiations in December 1997 theGlobal Climate Coalition produced a press briefingstating that: “Economic damage [of Kyoto] could
empty American pockets… millions of job losses,higher gasoline, food and heating bills.”
190
1998:In 1998, Wharton Econometrics ForecastingAssociates (WEFA) published a study commissionedby API which used every worst case scenario possi-ble (no alternative fuels, no time to make transition,no international cooperation or market-based mech-anisms, no economic benefits from averting climatechange damages or reducing pollution, etc.), andresulted in fear mongering figures regarding the eco-nomic costs of implementing the Kyoto Protocol. Thestudy was not peer-reviewed. WEFA estimated thatthe Protocol would require a carbon tax of $265 permetric ton over the next decade, and that this wouldresult in economic output reduction of 3.2 percent (of$300 billion in 1992$) or a cost of $2,700 perAmerican family. In addition, more than 2.4 millionjobs would be lost, gasoline prices would risesharply, while gas and electricity prices would dou-ble, and advanced developing countries (which arenot yet required to reduce emissions under theProtocol) would gain a competitive advantage overthe United States.
191The Global Climate Coalition
helped WEFA release the study on the national level. 
In late 1998, the U.S. Business Roundtable placed an
advertisement in The Washington Times stating that
“… the Protocol mandates a 41 percent reduction ofgreenhouse gas reductions by 2008-2012,” and othermisleading or false claims.
192
2000:
The 6th Conference of the Parties (COP6) to the UNClimate Change Convention took place in TheHague, Netherlands, in November 2000. Two yearsearlier, in Buenos Aires, the world’s nations had setthis conference as a deadline for agreeing on themechanisms to achieve meaningful reductions ingreenhouse gas emissions. 
One of the most visible lobby groups in The Hague
was the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC),with more than 100 lobbyists. While the ICC put greateffort into positioning itself (and business in general)as environmentally responsible, it lobbied hard toprevent binding government regulation. Instead, itencouraged the use of only voluntary action byindustry, and promoted unlimited use of the KyotoProtocol’s market based mechanisms – includingemissions trading and the Clean DevelopmentMechanism.
193
During the negotiations, the Vice President of ICC,Richard McCormick, warned against “a ‘quick fix,
look good’ deal that would cause a dramatic andcostly shift in the way industrialized countries useenergy.”
194
One of the main ICC spokespeople at COP 6 wasBrian Flannery, the Chief Scientific Advisor forExxonMobil. On one hand he talked the ICC’s rheto-ric of free market environmentalism to the media, buthis real motives – and those of the ICC – becameapparent when he switched hats to speak out as alobbyist for ExxonMobil. He confirmed to the Earth
Times : “ExxonMobil is firmly against the Kyoto
Protocol… it achieves very little and costs too much.”He also claimed that emissions reductions wereunfeasible: “You are going to need to expand the sup-ply to meet the pressing future needs for energy, forthings like the modern internet, the ‘e’ economy.”
195
The Hague talks collapsed without agreement whenthe U.S. delegation refused to compromise over itsdemand for the use of “carbon sinks” (e.g., forestplantations) to meet U.S. reduction targets.
2001:
In 2001, ExxonMobil placed an advertisement in
26

major U.S. newspapers entitled “Moving Past
Kyoto…”, in which it states that leading the list of“fundamental flaws” of the Kyoto Protocol “is thegrowing recognition that most governments cannotmeet the politically chosen targets without resortingto economy-wrecking measures.” It goes on to saythat “Kyoto was too much too soon.”
196
By contrast, if the targets had been chosen based onthe science, they would be far higher. The science isunambiguous on this point: to arrest global warmingrequires worldwide reductions in carbon emissions of70 percent.
197
In its drafts of the Third Assessment Report , pub-
lished in January and February 2001, the IPCC con-firmed that “using known and currently available
technologies, global greenhouse emissions canbe reduced below year 2000 levels in the peri-od 2010-2020 at zero net costs, with at least half of
this achievable at negative costs (i.e. at a profit) .”
198
27

Ignoring the Future – Missing the Boat on Clean Energy
If governments do not act now to stop further explo-
ration to find and exploit more oil and other fossilfuels, and instead accelerate the transfer of invest-ment into renewable energy, the world will be com-mitted to new oil, gas and coal developments whichthe planet’s atmosphere and climate will not be ableto withstand. ExxonMobil, and the Bush administra-tion, continue to ignore this reality.
In an April 2001 advertisement posted in U.S. news-
papers, ExxonMobil recommended a number ofsteps that the Bush administration should take todeal with climate change. One of those “concreteproposals” was to: “Realistically appraise andaddress barriers to renewable energy….”
199
But ExxonMobil has no interest in actually developingand using renewable energy technologies. In fact, inMarch 2002, the corporation’s chairman and CEO,Lee Raymond, said that without “new breakthroughsin green energy” he does not intend to invest inrenewable energy. “We’ve been there, done that,” hesays. In the early 1980s he helped run investments insolar, wind and battery power on which Exxon claimsto have spent $500 million before selling out.
200
According to René Dahan, Director and ExecutiveVice President of ExxonMobil:
“Renewables will have their part. How big or small a
role depends on addressing major issues of cost andimpact. Government mandates… can’t overlookbasic issues of science and economics, and we’llcontinue to make ourselves unpopular by telling any-one who’ll listen about the realities.”
201
However, there have been numerous breakthroughsin renewable energy technologies over the past twodecades. Like the mobile telephone industry, therenewable energy industry today bears no resem-blance to what it was in the 1970s and 1980s. Costshave declined dramatically and will continue to dropwith new advancements in technology and greatereconomies of scale. In fact, wind generated electric-
ity is now cost-competitive with fossil fuel generationin good wind sites, and far cheaper than nuclearpower. Wind power is the world’s fastest growingenergy source, growing as quickly as the telecommu-nications industry, with solar photovoltaics (PVs) notfar behind. This is despite the fact that in many coun-tries, such as the United States, government subsi-dies for conventional energy fuels and technologiescontinue to be many times higher those going torenewable energy.
202
Renewable energy – wind, biomass, geothermal,ocean/wave, and solar power – could supply all ofthe world’s energy needs. Denmark has led the worldin showing that there are no technological or eco-nomic barriers to renewable energy that cannot beovercome. Denmark already gets 18 percent of itselectricity from wind power, and plans to increase thisshare to 50 percent by 2030.
203Germany has set a
goal of producing 25 percent of its electricity from thewind by 2030.
204And the European Union has set a
target of generating 12 percent of its energy and 22percent of its electricity with renewables by 2010.
205
Developing countries such as China, India and Brazilhave also committed to significant increasing incapacity of renewable energy technologies. The mar-ket potential for renewable energy and energy effi-cient technologies is enormous. According to someforecasts, clean energy markets will grow from lessthan $7 billion in 2000 to more than $82 billion by2010.
206
A 1997 U.S. case study concluded that less than fivepercent of U.S. energy sector, heavy industry andenergy-intensive transport sector jobs are likely to beaffected by policies to reduce greenhouse gas emis-sions, and that far more jobs will be created than lostin the United States.
207
In his October 2001 speech, Dahan also stated that:“The renewable industry does not suffer from a lackof investments…. What it will suffer from is the
28

absence of significant breakthrough advances to
close the economic gap with competing energyforms. This will come from research, not from manu-facturing investments.”
208
However, experience in the United States, Europe,Japan and elsewhere has demonstrated that govern-ment policy is the most important factor in determin-ing the success of renewable energy technologies.Furthermore, policies that create a market for thesetechnologies encourage private investment in renew-ables research and development (R&D) and produc-tion capability, and enable the experience in installa-tion, operation and maintenance, and the economiesof scale that can significantly reduce the costs ofrenewable energy.
209
If a corporation of ExxonMobil’s size – one of theworld’s largest – were to shift significant investmentout of fossil fuels and into renewable energy, it couldplay an important role in further reducing the costs ofrenewable energy. Unfortunately, ExxonMobil dis-misses non-fossil fuel sources of energy such asrenewables, despite the growing investments inthese technologies by other major international oilcompanies including British Petroleum (BP) andRoyal Dutch/Shell. 
But, rather than investing in renewable energy,
ExxonMobil is investing more and more money in oiland gas. ExxonMobil is not interested in developingrenewables, but in finding alternative ways to usefossil fuels. Its “solutions” to climate change rangefrom “cleaner fuels,” to advanced drilling techniques,to increased energy efficiency of their operations, totree planting. None of these actions will reduce car-bon dioxide emissions. 
“Cleaner fuels” such as low-sulfur diesel reduce
some airborne pollutants, but do not reduce theemissions that cause global warming. Hydrogen fuel-cell vehicles offer great future potential – but theenergy generated will be carbon-free only if thehydrogen fuel is produced with renewable energy. Itis no surprise then that the fuel cell vehicleExxonMobil is working to develop, in coordinationwith auto manufacturers, will use gasoline to producethe hydrogen fuel. 
In 2001, ExxonMobil earned $15.3 billion in profitsand its return on capital was 17.8 percent. The cor-
poration’s total capital expenditures were $12.3 bil-lion
210, and its upstream capital and exploration
expenditures totaled around $8.8 billion.211But
ExxonMobil did not invest a single cent in renewableenergy technologies.
By contrast, BP and Shell have both agreed to spend
hundreds of millions of dollars each on their renew-able energy divisions. Both companies have stressedthat they want to turn what could be a regulatory bur-den into an eventual profit. “The element of profitstems from our belief that commercial mechanisms,such as those included in the [Kyoto] protocol, arethe way to solve problems like global warming,” saysBP spokesman Roddy Kennedy.
212BP and Shell
spend a fraction on renewables of what they spendexploring and developing fossil fuels, and a merefraction of what they could spend on renewables. Yetthe divide between these companies and ExxonMobilis enormous. 
Dahan concluded his statement by saying that:
“…most importantly [governments must] undertakeresearch on … long-term mega-technologies such asfuel cells, clean coal, CO2 separation and storage,…”“We need to remember that those new technologiesdo not exist today and yet they represent the only, Irepeat, the only effective long term response topotential climate change.”
213
ExxonMobil wants to have it both ways – it claimsthat renewable energy technologies require majorbreakthroughs and are too expensive. At the sametime, it calls on governments to invest significantamounts of money in new “long-term mega-tech-nologies” that will continue our reliance on dirty, pol-luting fossil fuels for decades to come. Not only arethese long-term fossil-reliant technologies behindmost renewable technologies in terms of technologi-cal development and cost, but their costs also gobeyond massive investments in R&D, production andfuel costs, and the opportunity costs that come withcontinuing to invest in dirty, non-renewable fossil fueltechnologies rather than clean, renewable alterna-tives. Carbon dioxide extraction and sequestrationare end-of-pipe solutions. 
Renewable energy technologies are available today
and their use is expanding rapidly worldwide.
29

Leaders in business and government, around the
globe, are calling for a transition to a clean energyeconomy to address global climate change, increasenational security, and meet the rising demand forenergy worldwide.
214 ExxonMobil’s tactics – calling for
more research and development, for example – sim-ply seek to delay this transition and to continue indef-initely the use of fossil fuels. 
Lou Noto, Vice Chairman of ExxonMobil, has also
stated that the corporation is “against mandates andsubsidies, which distort markets, decrease efficiencyand raise costs to consumers.”
215Clearly, he was
referring only to subsidies for non-fossil fuels andtechnologies, and he failed to mention the fact that,at least in the United States, government subsidiescontinue to favor conventional fuels and technologiesover renewables.
216“Renewables like wind, solar, and biomass can be players
only in niche markets today, where they don’t have to com-pete with fossil fuels, which are abundant, affordable andefficient.”- Lou A. Noto, Vice Chairman, ExxonMobil, Tokyo, Japan,15 February 2000.
217
“They [renewable energy technologies] are nowready to be brought, full force, into service….Speedy action by the Administration and theCongress is critical to establish the regulatory andtax conditions for these renewable resources torapidly reach their potential.” - Former Director U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (underBill Clinton) R. James Woolsey, Former Chairman JointChiefs of Staff (under Richard Nixon) Admiral Thomas H.Moorer, and Former National Security Advisor (to RonaldReagan) Robert McFarlane, 19 September 2001.
30

Conclusion
ExxonMobil’s operations over the past decade make
it clear that the company will stop at nothing tothwart action to address the serious issue of globalwarming. ExxonMobil is guilty of: 
• Sabotaging the only international treaty to solve
global warming;
• Deliberately deceiving the public by manipulat ing and
misrepresenting solid scientific research on globalwarming;
• Deliberately misleading government officials in the
U.S. and abroad.
ExxonMobil bears significant responsibility for the
current, weakened state of the only internationalagreement to tackle global warming.  While one hun-dred seventy-eight nations have now agreed to legal-ly binding emissions reductions, the United States,under the Bush administration, with ExxonMobil’sguidance, refuses to take part in the Kyoto Protocolagreements. The U.S. and Exxon are now lobbyingother nations not to ratify the treaty. Knowing that atreaty ratified without the U.S. would be embarrass-ing and create problems for multi-national corpora-tions, Australia recently switched its stance,announcing that it will not ratify the Kyoto Protocoluntil the United States has done so. In Canada,ExxonMobil’s Imperial Oil has been at the lead offorces pushing for their country to stall ratification aswell.
ExxonMobil must also bear significant responsibility
for the lack of a real domestic plan to deal with theUnited States’ 25 percent share of global greenhousegas pollution. The company has been one of themost active players working to deliberately under-mine domestic global warming pollution reductions.This Bush administration is taking us backwards tothe same voluntary global warming plan endorsed bythe first President Bush. That agreement failed toachieve any pollution reductions, resulting in thecharge for mandatory cuts embodied in the Kyoto
Protocol.  We also see echoes of the voluntary airpollution controls that failed Texas five years ago,after being written by Exxon for then Governor Bush.The amount of influence ExxonMobil wields overPresident Bush should not be discounted. WhileBush claims he wants to lead the world on climatechange, it is clear that he is the one being led – byExxonMobil, which has, in effect, both written andpaid for his climate policy.
ExxonMobil’s propaganda and lobby machine must
be stopped if the Kyoto Protocol is to be saved andglobal warming addressed by the international com-munity. For the global community to escape the mostserious impacts of global warming, ExxonMobil mustshift its resources to promote a clean energy future.To adequately demonstrate true commitment to theplanet’s most pressing environmental crisisExxonMobil must immediately:
•Support the Kyoto Protocol, the world’s only inter-
national treaty on global warming;
•Stop denying the solid scientific consensus backing
the Kyoto Protocol;
•Stop deceiving the American public and govern-
ment with misleading advertising campaigns anddeceptive lobbying efforts.
31

Endnotes
iRené Dahan, ExxonMobil Executive Vice President,
“Pins and Policies,” Speech given in Detroit, Michiganto the Meeting of the G-8 Energy Ministers, May 2,2002; see http://www.exxonmobil.com.
iiIbid.
iiiPlan contents provided in memo from Joe Walker to
Global Climate Science Team, subject: “Draft GlobalClimate Science Communications Plan,” that wasleaked to The New York Times , April 1998; reprinted in
The Oil Industry and Climate Change , Greenpeace
International, August 1998, available athttp://www.greenpeace.org/~climate/industry. SeeAppendix for API memo.
ivDavid Buchan and Sheila McNulty, “ExxonMobil Aims
for final $1 billion Synergies,” Financial Times , 6 March
2002.
v     ExxonMobil, 2001 Summary: Annual Report ; see
http://www.exxonmobil.com.
1Frank Sprow, Vice President, ExxonMobil, speech to
Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Dallas, 11June 1998.
2     See http://www.exxonmobil.com/news/publications
/c_global_climate_change/c_intro4.html May 2000.
3  David Buchan and Sheila McNulty, “A Dinosaur Still
Hunting for Growth,” Financial Times , 11 March 2002;
available from http://news.ft.com/ft/gx.cgi/ftc?page-name=View&c=Article&cid=FT3SHVFMOYC&live=true.
4The New York Times , 22 April 1998; “Odd Names
Added to Greenhouse Plea,” The Associated Press , 1
May 1998; and Dr. Lloyd Keigwin, December 2000.Quoted in “How ExxonMobil is MisleadingShareholders, Policy Makers and the Public aboutGlobal Warming,” Campaign ExxonMobil, 2001, avail-able at http://www.campaignexxonmobil.org/share-holder/pdf/Misleading.pdf.
5Dr. Bert Bolin, Report to the Second Session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United FrameworkConvention on Climate Change, Geneva, Switzerland,8 July 1996. The previous year he said that “An
increasing polarization of the public debate that hasbeen developing in some countries does not reflectany similar debate among experts at work on theseissues.” Dr. Bert Bolin, Report to the Eleventh Sessionof the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for aFramework Convention on Climate Change, New York,6 February 1995.
6Jeremy Leggett, The Carbon War: Global Warming and
the End of the Oil Era (Routledge, 2000), 2-3. 
7GCC press release: ‘World’s Energy Policy Should Not
be Based on Feelings,’ 27 February 1992.
8Jeremy Leggett, “A Catalogue of Carbon Club
Manipulation, Distortion, Sabotage or Lying at theClimate Negotiations,” available at http://www.carbon-war.com/ccchrono.html.
9“Ecoal,” World Coal Institute briefing no. 7, INC 5, New
York, April 1992.
10Ties that Blind , Ozone Action, March 1996.
11Are Human Activities Causing Global Warming?
Published by George C. Marshall Institute, 1996; and‘Human Activity is Not the Cause of Global Warming,’Press Release from the Marshall Institute, 10 April1996.
12Sallie Baliunas, “Ozone and Global Warming: Are the
Problems Real?” George C. Marshall Institute,December 1994. 
13Sallie Baliunas, “Ozone and Global Warming: Are the
Problems Real?” George C. Marshall Institute,December 1994; and Greening Earth Society,http://www.greeningearthsociety.org.
14  Ross Gelbspan, GCC targets landmark study , available
at http://www.heatisonline.org.
15Scientific-Technical Analyses of Impacts, Adaptations
and Mitigation of Climate Change: Summary forPolicymakers – IPCC Working Group II, 1995.
16“Petroleum Group Disputes that Burning Fossil Fuels
Warms Planet,” Thomson Energy Report , 18 March
1996.
32

3317Ibid.
18Ross Gelbspan, The Heat is On (Cambridge, MA:
Perseus Books, 1998), 78-81.
19Plan contents provided in memo from Joe Walker to
Global Climate Science Team, subject: “Draft GlobalClimate Science Communications Plan,” that wasleaked to The New York Times , April 1998; reprinted in
The Oil Industry and Climate Change , Greenpeace
International, August 1998, available athttp://www.greenpeace.org/~climate/industry. SeeAppendix for API memo.
20Ibid.
21Ibid.
22“A Half-Baked Scheme,” Sarasota Herald-Tribune , 3
May 1998.
23Plan contents provided in memo from Joe Walker to
Global Climate Science Team, subject: “Draft GlobalClimate Science Communications Plan,” that wasleaked to The New York Times , April 1998; reprinted in
The Oil Industry and Climate Change , Greenpeace
International, August 1998, available athttp://www.greenpeace.org/~climate/industry. SeeAppendix for API memo.
24“Ford Leaves Anti-Kyoto Climate Change Group,”
AirDaily , Volume 6, No. 234, 8 December 1999.
25Catherine Strong, “Ford Quits Lobbying Group,” The
Associated Press , 6 December 1999.
26See www.campaignexxonmobil.org/learn/unsettled-
science.shtml and www.heatisonline.org.
27“Big Business Bows for Global Warming,” The
Economist , 2 December 2000.
28In the advertisement entitled, “Unsettled Science,” The
New York Times , March 2000. 
29Dr. Lloyd D. Keigwin (Senior Scientist, Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute), in letter to Peter Altman(National Coordinator, Campaign ExxonMobil), 11December 2000. Quoted in “How ExxonMobil isMisleading Shareholders, Policy Makers and the Publicabout Global Warming,” Campaign ExxonMobil, 2001;available athttp://www.campaignexxonmobil.org/shareholder/pdf/Misleading.pdf. See also Thaddeus Herrick,“ExxonMobil Uses Scientist’s Data as Evidence ofNatural Warming,” The Wall Street Journal , 22 March
2001.30See “How ExxonMobil is Misleading Shareholders,
Policy Makers and the Public about Global Warming,”Campaign ExxonMobil, 2001; available athttp://www.campaignexxonmobil.org/shareholder/pdf/Misleading.pdf.
31Dian J. Gaffen, “Falling Satellites, Rising
Temperatures?” Nature (13 August 1998): 615.
32William K. Stevens, “As Debate Persists, New Study
Confirms Atmospheric Warming,” The New York Times ,
13 August 1998, 14.
33Lee Raymond, speaking at the ExxonMobil sharehold-
ers meeting in May 2000.
34   The organizer of the petition, Dr. Arthur Robinson, is
not a climatologist and has no significant climate cre-dential; he is a physical chemist. Robinson concededin May 1998 “that he made little attempt to verify thecredentials of those who responded to the petition.”The Associated Press , 2 May 1998. The petition was
discredited in the general media two years earlier – forexample, The New York Times , 22 April 1998.
35ExxonMobil, “Global Climate Change – A Better Path
Forward,” April 2000.
36Report of Working Group I of the IPCC – The Scientific
Basis , 2001.
37Antonio Regalado, “Study Offers Odds on Global
Warming, Suggesting Range of Possible Reactions,”The Wall Street Journal , 22 March 2001.
38  Bill Hare, Greenpeace briefing on IPCC, July 2001,
available at http://www.greenpeace.org climate web-site. 
39IPCC, Working Group I, Climate Change 1995: the
Science of Climate Change , Second Assessment
Report (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,1996). See also “Climate Change Outstrips Forecasts,”BBC News , 22 January 2001; available from
http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/sci/tech/newsid_1126000/1126669.stm.
40David Buchan and Sheila McNulty, “A Dinosaur Still
Hunting for Growth,” Financial Times , 11 March 2002;
available from http://news.ft.com/ft/gx.cgi/ftc?page-name=View&c=Article&cid=FT3SHVFMOYC&live=true.
41René Dahan, Director and Executive Vice President,
ExxonMobil, speech at the Oil-Money Conference,London, England, 30 October 2001.
42David Buchan and Vanessa Houlder, “Oil Group Calls

34for Drive on Saving Energy,” Financial Times , October
30 2001.
43See http://www.esso.co.uk.
44“Wingspread Statement on the Precautionary
Principle,” developed in a January 1998 meeting of sci-entists, lawyers, policy makers and environmentalistsat Wingspread, headquarters of the Johnson Foundation in Racine, WI. Available athttp://www.seen.org/precaution.html.
45Heinz Rothermund, Managing Director, Shell UK
Exploration and Production, 19 May 1997.
46Sir John Browne, Chairman and CEO of British
Petroleum, in a speech at Stanford University regardingBritish Petroleum’s policy on global climate change, 11March 2002.
47Memo from A.G. Randol III, Ph.D., Senior
Environmental Advisor, ExxonMobil to John Howard,White House Council on Environmental Quality, 6February 2001. See appendix for memo.
48U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Inventory of
U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks 1990-2000 ,
EPA-430-R-02-003 (Washington, DC: U.S. EPA, 15April 2002), E-2 and E-3. Total greenhouse gas emis-sions increased by 14 percent, 1990-2000; net CO2emissions (emissions and sinks) rose 16.8 percent,1990-2000; net greenhouse gas emissions rose 21.2percent, 1990-2000. Emissions increased in 2001 and2002 as well.
49Cat Lazaroff, “China Beats U.S. in Greenhouse Gas
Cuts,” Environment News Service , 15 June 2001
(accessed 1 May 2002); available at http://www.ens-news.com/ens/jun2001/2001L-06-15-06.html.
50Cited by Damien Cave, “Watson, Come Here, I Want to
Fire You,” Salon.com , 5 April 2002 (accessed 30 April
2002); available from http://www.salon.com/tech/fea-ture/2002/04/05/global_warming/?x; another articleregarding this issue and Watson’s denial of informationleaks is: John J. Fialka, “White House Backs IndianChallenger to Head Panel Probing Climate Change,”The Wall Street Journal , 4 April 2002.
51John Fialka, “White House Backs Indian Challenger to
Head Panel Probing Climate Change,” The Wall Street
Journal , 4 April 2002.
52“ExxonMobil Hits Back in Memo Row,” BBC News, 5
April 2002, available fromhttp://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/world/americas/newsid_1913000/1913640.stm.53For example, Exxon’s 1992 Annual Report, which con-
cluded that “recent surveys have confirmed dramaticimprovements in conditions in Prince William Sound….Exxon’s massive cleanup effort, together with the natu-ral recovery process, has left shorelines essentiallyclean and recovered.” Exxon Corporation, Annual
Report , 1992, Texas, p. 8.
54“Two Faces of the Exxon Disaster,” New Scientist , 22
May 1993.
55Both cited in “Valdez Spill wasn’t so Bad, Claims
Exxon,” New Scientist , 8 May 1993.
56 “Alaskan Truth Squad Calls Exxon’s Attempt to Negate
Long-Term Damage from Oil Spill ‘Desperate’,” R. Ott,R. Steiner, D. Lankard, K. Weaverling, and R. Fineberg,press release, 26 April 1993.
57Steve Liesman and Allanna Sullivan, “Playing Everyman
at Valdez,” The Wall Street Journal , 1 December 1999,
page A1.
58   Ross Gelbspan, ExxonMobil emerges as major funder
of greenhouse skeptics , March 2001, www.heatison-
line.org.
59In a letter to the editor, S. Fred Singer wrote: “My con-
nection to oil during the past decade is as a WessonFellow at the Hoover Institute; the Wesson moneyderives from salad oil. S. Fred Singer, “My SaladDays,” letter to the editor, The Washington Post , 12
February 200, p. A20.
60See www.exxonmobil.com/contributions/
public_info.html.
61See www.atlasusa.org/highlights/archives/1995/H1995-
02-Environment.html; andhttp://www.heatisonline.org/contentserver/objec-thandlers/index.cfm?id=3645&method=full.
62During a 1994 television appearance on Nightline,
Singer acknowledged receiving funding from Exxon,Shell, Unocal and ARCO, and that his institute, theScience and Environment Policy Project (SEPP) is par-tially funded by Exxon. For more information, seehttp://www.heatisonline.org/contentserver/objec-thandlers/index.cfm?ID=3207&method=full.
63“Conservatives Seek IRS Inquiry on Environmental
Group’s Status,” The Wall Street Journal , 21 June
2001.
64API memo, 1998 – see appendix.
65  See interview with Fred Singer, “Hot Topics, Cold
Truth,” The New American , 31 January 2000.

3566See www.heatisonline.org; and IPCC press release,
“IPCC Chair denies attack on VP Gore andEnvironmentalists,” Geneva, 26 June 1997.
67“Pro-Bush Students Chant for Capitalism,” The
Independent , 19 July 2001. Exxon gave $5,000 to
CFACT in 1998 alone, according to its own records.For more information, seehttp://www.heatisonline.org/contentserver/objec-thandlers/index.cfm?id=3789&method=full.
68Various letters to the editor in The Wall Street Journal ,
The Washington Times , and The Chicago Tribune .
69Ross Gelbspan, http://www.heatisonline.org/con-
tentserver/objecthandlers/index.cfm?id-3645&method=full.
70Are Human Activities Causing Global Warming?
Published by George C. Marshall Institute, 1996; and‘Human Activity is Not the Cause of Global Warming,’Press Release from the Marshall Institute, 10 April1996.
71Sallie Baliunas, “Ozone and Global Warming: Are the
Problems Real?” George C. Marshall Institute,December 1994. 
72“Ties that Blind: Industry Influence on Public Policy and
Our Environment: Case Studies,” Ozone Action, March1996. 
73Arthur B. Robinson, Sallie L. Baliunas, Willie Soon, and
Zachary W. Robinson, “Environmental Effects ofIncreased Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide,” UNPUB-LISHED, January 1998. Also “Oregon Petition,” avail-able at http://www.oism.org/pproject/.
74Documentation for funding of these “climate skeptics”
was found on the ExxonMobil website; the page wasremoved from their site in the fall of 2001. For moredetailed information, including funding listed below,see http://www.heatisonline.org/contentserver/objec-thandlers/index.cfm?id=3645&method=full.
75Campaign strategy papers quoted in “Ties that Blind:
Industry Influence on Public Policy and ourEnvironment,” Ozone Action, March 1996. 
76Patrick Michaels, Climate Research , vol. 9, no. 329 (31
December 1998).
77Documentation was found on the ExxonMobil website;
the page was removed from their site in the fall of2001. For more detailed information, seehttp://www.heatisonline.org/contentserver/objec-thandlers/index.cfm?id=3645&method=full.78The Arizona Republic , 18 July 1999; and Greening
Earth Society, World Climate Report , 17 May 1999.
79See www.heatisonline.org.
80The U.S. EPA threatened to cut off federal highway
funds after Bush’s state environmental agency failed todraft a pollution plan for Dallas. That prospect led theTexas highway-building lobby and the Dallas financialand political establishment to push for quick action todeal with pollution. John Mintz, “George W. Bush: TheTexas Record; Evidence Contradicts Claims of CleanerAir,” The Washington Post , 15 October 1999.
81John Mintz, “George W. Bush: The Texas Record;
Evidence Contradicts Claims of Cleaner Air,” The
Washington Post , 15 October 1999.
82Texas Public Employees for Environmental Regulations,
available at http://www.txpeer.org/.
83JimYardley, “On the Record: Governor Bush and the
Environment; Bush Approach to Pollution: Preferencefor Self-Policing,” The New York Times , 9 November
1999.
84Records of meetings and memos obtained from the
Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission(TNRCC) by the Sustainable Energy and EconomicDevelopment Coalition (SEED), Austin, Texas,http://www.seedcoalition.org.
85Jim Yardley, “On the Record: Governor Bush and the
Environment; Bush Approach to Pollution: Preferencefor Self-Policing,” The New York Times , 9 November
1999.
86Memo from the Offices of V.G. Beghini and A.L.
Condray, to “Attached Distribution List,” regarding“Grandfathered Facilities in Texas,” dated 11 June1997. Available at http://www.txpeer.org/Bush/meet-ingletter.html.
87“28 Companies Volunteering Emissions Cuts,” Houston
Chronicle , 4 January 1998.
88  Ibid.
89“How a Bill Becomes Law,” Nate Blakeslee, Texas
Observer , June 11 1999. The one-sixth (17%) figure
was published in a study by the Environmental DefenseFund, released in November 1998.
90Yardley, “On the Record: Governor Bush and the
Environment; Bush Approach to Pollution: Preferencefor Self-Policing.”
91John Mintz, “George W. Bush: The Texas Record;

36Evidence Contradicts Claims of Cleaner Air,” The
Washington Post , 15 October 1999, page 1.
92Cited by Damien Cave, “Watson, Come Here, I Want to
Fire You,” Salon.com , 5 April 2002 (accessed 30 April
2002); available from http://www.salon.com/tech/fea-ture/2002/04/05/global_warming/?x.
93IPCC, “Summary for Policy Makers,” 2001 report
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
94Eric Pianin, “McCain, Lieberman Urge Greenhouse Gas
Curbs,” The Washington Post , 4 August 2001, p. A01.
95René Dahan, Director and Executive Vice President,
ExxonMobil Corporation, Speech given at Oil-MoneyConference, London, England, 30 October 2001.
96See the Center for Responsive Politics web site for a
breakdown of the donations: Open secrets, “Oil andGas Top Contributors,” available at http://www.opense-crets.org/industries/contrib.asp?Ind=E01&Cycle=2000.
97According to the most annual figures available for the
Center for Responsive Politics (based in Washington,D.C.), ExxonMobil outspent Enron by more than 6 to 1to promote its cause on Capitol Hill. While Enron spent$1.9 million lobbying Congress and the President,ExxonMobil spent $11.7 million, in 1999. Center forResponsive Politics, Washington, D.C. Available fromhttp://www.opensecrets.org/lobbyists/indusclient.asp?code-E01&year-1999.
98Christopher Newton, “Memo Shows Influence of
Lobbyist,” Associated Press Online , 26 April 2002.
99ExxonMobil, “An Energy Policy for the New
Administration,” op-ed, 18 January 2001; availablefromhttp://www2.exxonmobil.com/Files/Corporate/010118.pdf.
100 Letter from Red Cavaney, President and CEO of API, to
Congressman Joe Barton, 11 April 2001.
101Letter from Thomas Niles, USCIB president, to George
W. Bush, 11 April 2001.
102ExxonMobil, “Moving past Kyoto…,” op-ed, The New
York Times , 17 April 2001. See http://www.exxonmo-
bil.com.
103Pamela Najor, “Global Climate Coalition Ends Its Work;
Voice for Industry Opposed Global Treaty,” Bureaus ofNational Affairs, 25 January 2002. 
104Global Climate Coalition website (accessed 25 January
2002); available at http://www.globalclimate.org/.105Memo from A.G. Randol III, Ph.D., Senior
Environmental Advisor, ExxonMobil to John Howard,White House Council on Environmental Quality, 6February 2001. See appendix for memo.
106IPCC, World Meteorological Organization (WMO), UN
Environment Programme (UNEP), “Session elects newBureau and Bureau of Task Force on Inventories:Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Elects Dr.Rajendra K. Pachauri as its Chairman,” press release,20 April 2002 (accessed 3 May 2002); available fromhttp://www.ipcc.ch/press/pr20042002.htm.
107“Maintaining the Climate Consensus,” Nature , Vol. 416,
no. 6883 (25 April 2002): 771. 
108Sharmila Gopinath and Lola Nayar, “U.S. Wants
Pachauri to Head Global Panel,” New India Times , 12
April 2002 (accessed 3 May 2002); available fromhttp://www.newsindia-times.com/2002/04/12/sci-ence26-top.html.
109Sharmila Gopinath and Lola Nayar, “U.S. Wants
Pachauri to Head Global Panel,” New India Times , 12
April 2002 (accessed 3 May 2002); available fromhttp://www.newsindia-times.com/2002/04/12/sci-ence26-top.html.
110See http://www.nrdc.org.
111For example, see Don Van Natta Jr., “Energy Firms
Were Heard on Air Rules, a Critic Says,” The New York
Times , 2 March 2002. 
112For example, this was said by Bush in a Rose Garden
statement in June 2001. “President Bush DiscussesGlobal Climate Change,” Office of the Press Secretary,The White House, 11 June 2001 (accessed 5 May2002); available fromhttp://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releas-es/2001/06/20010611-2.html.
113For examples, see “President Bush Discusses Global
Climate Change,” Office of the Press Secretary, TheWhite House, 11 June 2001 (accessed 5 May 2002),available from http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releas-es/2001/06/20010611-2.html; Aziz Haniffa, “Bush SaysKyoto Pact is Flawed,” rediff.com, 12 June 2001(accessed 5 May 2002), available from http://www.red-iff.com/news/2001/jun/12us1.htm; “Text of a letter fromthe President to Senators Hagel, Helms, Craig, andRoberts,” 13 March 2001, The White House website(accessed 5 May 2002), available fromhttp://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releas-es/2001/03/20010314.html; “Japan Not Satisfied withBush Climate Proposal,” Reuters, 14 February 2002;

37and Andrew C. Revkin, “Climate Plan Is Criticized as
Optimistic,” The New York Times , 26 February 2002.
114René Dahan, Director and Executive Vice President,
ExxonMobil Corporation, Speech given at Oil-MoneyConference, London, England, 30 October 2001.
115David Buchan and Vanessa Houlder, “Oil group calls
for drive on saving energy,” Financial Times , October
30 2001.
116ExxonMobil, “Moving past Kyoto…” and “…to a
sounder climate policy,” op-eds, The New York Times ,
17 April 2001.
117Lou A. Noto, Vice Chairman, ExxonMobil, February
2000.
118Dahan, Executive Vice President, ExxonMobil, London,
October 2001; Esso UK, October 2001; ExxonMobil,“Moving past Kyoto…” and “…to a sounder climatepolicy,” op-eds, The New York Times , 17 April 2001.
119Dahan, October 2001.
120Dahan, October 2001; ExxonMobil, “…to a sounder
climate policy,” op-ed, The New York Times , 17 April
2001.
121President Bush’s entire proposal, “Bush Administration
Global Climate Change Policy,” can be found athttp://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2002/02/cli-matechange.html.
122For example, see Kelly Sims-Gallagher (Belfer Center
for Science & International Affairs, Harvard University),“Bush’s Hot Air Plan,” Foreign Policy in Focus , 19
February 2002 (accessed 29 April 2002), available fromhttp://www.fpif.org/commentary/2002/0202green-house.html; Greenpeace International, “Analysis of theBush Climate Change Strategy,” 15 February 2002,available at http://www.greenpeace.org.
123See “Fact Sheet: President Bush Announces Clear
Skies and Global Climate Change Initiatives,” 14February 2002; available fromhttp://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releas-es/2002/02/20020214.html.
124Cat Lazaroff, “China Beats U.S. in Greenhouse Gas
Cuts,” Environment News Service , 15 June 2001
(accessed 1 may 2001); available from http://www.ens-news.com/ens/jun2001/2001L-06-15-06.html.
125Cat Lazaroff, “China Beats U.S. in Greenhouse Gas
Cuts,” Environment News Service , 15 June 2001
(accessed 1 may 2001); available from http://www.ens-news.com/ens/jun2001/2001L-06-15-06.html.
126Mobil Corporation, “Climate Change: Let’s Get it
Right,” op-ed, The Denver Post , 20 June 1997. 
127Mobil Corporation, “The Senate Speaks,” op-ed, The
New York Times , 31 July 1997.
128Greenpeace International, Industry and the Climate
Debate – updated appendix, 1997. 
129Lee Raymond’s speech to API annual meeting,
November 1997.
130Greenpeace International, Industry and the Climate
Debate , 1997.
131Letter to Senator Hagel from Robert Burt, Chairman,
Environment Task Force, Business Round Table, 8 July1997. See www.brtable.org.
132Lee Raymond, Chairman and CEO, Exxon Corporation,
Remarks during World Petroleum Congress, Beijing,China, 13 October 1997.
133GCC press briefing: December 10 Talking Points ,
Kyoto, Japan, 1997.
134For example, ExxonMobil repeatedly mentions the
“bipartisan consensus within the U.S. Senate” in oppo-sition to the Kyoto, citing the Byrd-Hagel amendment;the “significant economic costs” that it will impose onthe developed world. See the rest of this report forexamples and sources, and see http://www.exxonmo-bil.com.
135Richard L. Berke and Janet Elder, “Bush Loses Favor,
Poll Says, Despite Tax Cut and Trip,” The New York
Times , 21 June 2001.
136Note that in response to a letter from Greenpeace
International regarding Bush’s rejection of the KyotoProtocol, ExxonMobil sent a copy of the USCIB letteras a “good example” of their views on climate change,and the fact that their views “are widely shared by oth-ers.” Letter from ExxonMobil to Gerd Leipold,Executive Director, Greenpeace International, 18 April2001.
137Letter dated 11 April 2001, from USCIB President
Thomas M.T. Niles to President Bush. The USCIB hasan active membership base of more than 300 multina-tional corporations. See http://www.uscib.org.
138Letter to Matthew Spencer of Greenpeace UK, from
Chris Tuppen, Head of Sustainable Development andCorporate Accountability, British Telecom NorthAmerica, 18 July 2001.

38139Eric Pianin, “McCain, Lieberman Urge Greenhouse Gas
Curbs,” The Washington Post , 4 August 2001, p. A01.
140H.R. 1646, introduced by Menendez (D – NJ), Lee (D –
CA), Hastings (D – FL), and Faleomaevaga (AmericanSamoa delegate).
141H. Josef Hebert, “McCain, Lieberman Join Forces on
Global Warming,” The Associated Press (The
California, North County Times), 4 August 2001(accessed 5 May 2002); available fromhttp://www.nctimes.com/news/2001/20010804/72100.html.
142Eric Pianin, “McCain, Lieberman Urge Greenhouse Gas
Curbs,” The Washington Post , 4 August 2001, p. A01.
143H. Josef Hebert, “McCain, Lieberman Join Forces on
Global Warming,” The Associated Press (The
California, North County Times), 4 August 2001(accessed 5 May 2002); available fromhttp://www.nctimes.com/news/2001/20010804/72100.html.
144Ibid.
145John Vidal and Paul Brown “In Bed with Bush,”
Guardian , 30 January 2002.
146Brent Jang, “Imperial Oil Executives Mince No Words
on Kyoto or Anything Else,” Globe and Mail , 13 March
2002, page B9.
147Ibid.
148See below for examples, and see http://www.exxon-
mobil.com.
149Redefining Progress, Economists Statement on Climate
Change , 13 February 1997. Available at
http://www.globalchange.org/econall/97may6g.htm.
150Interlaboratory Working Group, Scenarios for a Clean
Energy Future (Oak Ridge, TN: Oak Ridge National
Laboratory and Berkeley, CA: Lawrence Berkeleynational Laboratory, November 2000). ORNL/COM-476and LBNL-44029. Available athttp://www.ornl.gov/ORNL/Energy_Eff/CEF .htm. Notethat the United States currently emits about 7 billiontons of carbon per year.
151Tellus Institute and Stockholm Environment Institute
(prepared for the World Wildlife Federation), America’s
Global Warming Solutions (Boston, MA: Tellus Institute,
August 1999), 27.
152IPCC, Working Group III, “Summary for Policymakers:
The Economic and Social Dimensions of ClimateChange,” available from http://www.ipc.ch/pub/sar-
sum3.htm.
153IPCC, Working Group III, Climate Change 2001:
Mitigation , “Summary for Policymakers” (Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 5.
154Lester Brown, “World Wind Generating Capacity
Jumps 31 Percent in 2001,” Earth Policy Institute, 8January 2002.
155Speech by German Environment Minister Jürgen
Tritten, “Germany Aims for One-Quarter Windpower by2030,” Environment Daily 1146 (9 January 2002).
Percentage share is based on 1998 demand figures.
156European Wind Energy Association, “European
Renewable Electricity Directive: The Final Version,”Wind Directions (January 2002): 10-11.
157“Kyoto Protocol in Focus of G-8 Talks,” Russian
Journal , 15 April 2002.
158“BP Calls for Ratification of Kyoto Protocol,” ABC
Radio, interview by Mark Colvin with Greg Bourne, 7November 2001.
159Ibid.
160Christopher Cooper, “Kyoto Pact Offers Opportunities
to Crow as Firms Promote Environmental Policies,” The
Wall Street Journal , 2 November 2001.
161Sir John Browne, Chairman and CEO of British
Petroleum, in a speech at Stanford University regardingBritish Petroleum’s policy on global climate change, 11March 2002.
162Jim Lobe, “Shareholder Attack on ExxonMobil’s
Climate Policy Gets Big Boost,” OneWorld.net , 19
December 2001.
163“Campaign ExxonMobil States Shareholders Wind SEC
Support for Resolutions Filed with ExxonMobilCorporation,” PR Newswire, 28 March 2002. For moreinformation, seehttp://www.campaignexxonmobil.org/sharehold-er/2002_resolutions.shtml.
164“ExxonMobil’s ‘Arrogance, Not Action’ Stance on
Global Warming Challenged, Says CampaignExxonMobil ,” PR Newswire , 28 March 2002.
165Ian Johnson, “Exxon Urges developing Nations to
Avoid Environmental Controls”, The Wall Street
Journal , and Lee Raymond, speech to the World
Petroleum Congress, Beijing, China, October 1997.www.exxonmobil.com

39166  Ibid
167Ibid.
168IPCC, Working Group II, Climate Change 2001:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability , “Summary for
Policymakers,” Section 2.8 (“Those with the LeastResources have the Least Capacity to Adapt and rethe Most Vulnerable.”); available fromhttp://www.ipcc.ch/pub/wg2SPMfinal.pdf.
169Even Mills, Eugene Lecomte and Andrew Peara
(Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory), “U.S.Insurance Industry Perspectives on Global ClimateChange,” LBNL-45185 (Berkeley, CA: University ofCalifornia, February 2001), 7 (accessed 30 April 2002);available athttp://eetd.lbl.gov/CBS/PUBS/Climate_report.pdf.
170“Insurer: Warming Will Bankrupt Global Economy;
Climate Change Could Bankrupt Us by 2065,”Environmental News Service , 24 November 2000.
171The Munich Report assumes that carbon dioxide con-
centrations in the atmosphere will rise to twice pre-industrial levels in 2050. It includes information frominsurers around the world, members of the UNEnvironment Programme’s financial services initiative,which includes 86 companies from 27 countries.“Climate Change Costs Could Top $300 BillionAnnually,” Environmental News Service , 5 February
2001; “Climate Change May Cost World $300 BillionPer Year: Insurer,” Dow Jones Newswires , 2 February
2001; “Global Warming to Cost $300 Billion a Year –UN Report,” Reuters News Service , 4 February 2001.
172For example, see ExxonMobil, “May 2001: Sstatement
in Response to Calls for a Boycott of Esso ServiceStations,” available fromhttp://www.esso.com/eaff/essouk/news_sevice/green-peace.html.
173The New Jersey Star-Ledger , 1 August 1999.
174According to Ross Gelbspan, the GCC spent a total of
more than $63 billion to combat progress towardaddressing climate change. See http://www.heatison-line.org/disinformation.cfm.
175Oil Daily , 11 January 2000.
176Paul Brown, “Bush Administration Denies Pressure
from ExxonMobil to Oust British Scientist from GlobalWarming Panel,” The Guardian , 5 April 2002.
177Global Climate Coalition press release, available at
http://www.globalclimate.org/newsroom/nr-00-0314-restructure.htm; Oil Daily , 11 January 2000; and
Campaign ExxonMobil, “How ExxonMobil isMisleading Shareholders, Policy Makers and the Publicabout Global Warming,” 2001. Note, however, thatbecause industry groups continued to belong to theGCC, it is possible that many auto, coal and oil com-panies that had withdrawn continued to support itsefforts indirectly.
178Global Climate Coalition website (accessed 25 January
2002); available at http://www.globalclimate.org/.
179See Lee Raymond’s speech to the Annual Meeting of
the API, Chicago, 10 November 1997.
180U.S. Business Round Table, Position statement on
global climate change, February 1997; available fromhttp://www.brtable.org/document.cfm/26.
181Ross Gelbspan, see http://www.heatisonline.org/disin-
formation.cfm.
182The model is called the International Impact
Assessment Model (IIAM). It was developed byMontgomery in collaboration with Paul M. Bernstein,also of CRA, and Professor Tom Rutherford, of theUniversity of Colorado. Charles River Associates is aWashington, D.C. based consulting firm.
183Ozone Action, “Ties that Blind: Industry influence on
Public Policy and our Environment,” 1997.
184IPIECA, ‘Critical Issues in the Economics of Climate
Change’ – Key conclusions, November-December1996.
185See Greenpeace International, Industry and the
Climate Debate , March 1997, available from
http://www.greenpeace.org/~climate/archive/kpress-pack/debate.html.
186Redefining Progress, Economists Statement on Climate
Change , 13 February 1997.
187Ross Gelbspan, see http://www.heatisonline.org/disin-
formation.cfm.
188“It’s Not Global and It Won’t Work,” The Washington
Post, 10 September 1997. Advertisement reprinted in
Greenpeace International, The Oil Industry and Climate
Change , 1998, page 32, available at http://www.green-
peace.org/~climate/industry.
189Exxon was one of three corporations at the lead of
API’s campaign plans. “Industrial Group Plans to BattleClimate Treaty,” The New York Times , 26 April 1998.
190GCC press briefing: December 10 Talking Points ,

40Kyoto, Japan, 1997.
191Wharton Econometrics Forecasting Associates (WEFA),
Inc., “Global Warming: The High Cost of the KyotoProtocol; National and State Impacts – Highlights,”April 1998; available at http://www.api.org/globalcli-mate/wefastateimpacts.htm Despite the company’sname, WEFA is not connected to the well-respectedWharton Business School. For other, similar studies,see Global Climate Coalition website athttp://www.globalclimate.org/newsroom/gccstudies.htm.
192For example, it claims that “The Protocol contains no
mechanism to enforce commitments and tells us littleabout a range of cost-reducing market mechanismscalled for by the Protocol.” In 1998 the Kyoto Protocolwas still being negotiated. The Business Roundtable,“A Flawed Global Warming Treaty Could Have aChilling Effect on Our Economy,” The Washington
Times , 7 October 1998, p. A7.
193Corporate Europe Observatory, Climate Update, 2001.
See http://www.xs4all.nl/~ceo.
194“Charting a New Course for the Environment and the
Economy,” International Herald Tribune , 18-19
November 2000.
195 “Kyoto Treaty Flawed Says Top Exec of ExxonMobil,”
Earth Times , 15 November 2000.
196ExxonMobil, “Moving past Kyoto…,” op-ed, The New
York Times , 17 April 2001. See
http://www.exxonmbil.com.
197IPCC, Second Assessment Synthesis of Scientific-
Technical Information Relevant to Interpreting Article 2of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change:1995 , Section 4.6.
198Report of Working Group III of the IPCC – Mitigation ,
2001.
199ExxonMobil, “…to a sounder climate policy,” 17 April
2001.
200David Buchan and Sheila McNulty, “A Dinosaur Still
Hunting for Growth,” Financial Times , 11 March 2002,
available at http://news.ft.com/ft/gx.cgi/ftc?page-name=View&c=Article&cid=FT3SHVFMOYC&live=true.
201René Dahan, Director and Executive Vice President,
ExxonMobil Corporation, Speech given at Oil andMoney Conference, London, England, 30 October2001.
202For example, see Marshall Goldberg, “Federal EnergySubsidies: Not All Technologies are Created Equal,”
Research Report No. 11 (Washington, DC: RenewableEnergy Policy Project, July 2000), 3-6. According toGoldberg, only four percent of all subsidies for nuclear,wind and solar energy technologies during the period1947-1999 went to solar and wind power. When subsi-dies for fossil fuels are included, the share of total sub-sidies that has gone to renewables is even lower.
203Lester Brown, “World Wind Generating Capacity
Jumps 31 Percent in 2001,” Earth Policy Institute, 8January 2002.
204Speech by German Environment Minister Jürgen
Tritten, “Germany Aims for One-Quarter Windpower by2030,” Environment Daily 1146 (9 January 2002).
Percentage share is based on 1998 demand figures.
205The European Community’s overall target is for 12 per-
cent gross energy and 22.1 percent of electricity fromrenewables by 2010. (For more information seewww.ewea.org.) European Wind Energy Association,“European Renewable Electricity Directive: The FinalVersion,” Wind Directions (January 2002): 10-11.
206Al Massey, “Staying Clean and Green in a Developing
World,” Ethical Corporation Magazine , 7 February
2002.
207Florentine Krause (International Project for Sustainable
Energy Paths, El Cerrito, CA), “Costs and Benefits forCutting U.S. Carbon Emissions: A Critical Review ofthe Economic Arguments of the Fossil Fuel Lobby,”May 1997.
208René Dahan, Director and Executive Vice President,
ExxonMobil Corporation, Speech given at Oil andMoney Conference, London, England, 30 October2001.
209Janet L. Sawin, “The Role of Government in the
Development and Diffusion of Renewable EnergyTechnologies: Wind Power in the United States,California, Denmark and Germany, 1970-2000,” Ph.D.diss., The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, TuftsUniversity, September 2001, 366-389.
210David Buchan and Sheila McNulty, “ExxonMobil Aims
for final $1 billion Synergies,” Financial Times , 6 March
2002.
211ExxonMobil, 2001 Summary: Annual Report ; see
http://www.exxonmobil.com.
212Christopher Cooper, “Kyoto Pact Offers Opportunities
to Crow as Firms Promote Environmental Policies,” The
Wall Street Journal , 2 November 2001.

213 René Dahan, Director and Executive Vice President,
ExxonMobil Corporation, Speech given at Oil andMoney Conference, London, England, 30 October2001.
214For example, Former Director U.S. Central Intelligence
Agency (under Bill Clinton) R. James Woolsey, FormerChairman Joint Chiefs of Staff (under Richard Nixon)Admiral Thomas H. Moorer, and Former NationalSecurity Advisor (to Ronald Reagan) Robert McFarlane,19 September 2001 letter to 16 U.S. Senators.
215Speech given by Lou A. Noto, Symposium on Pacific
Energy Cooperation, The Institute of EnergyEconomics, Tokyo, Japan, 15 February 2000.
216For example, see For example, see Marshall Goldberg,
“Federal Energy Subsidies: Not All Technologies areCreated Equal,” Research Report No. 11 (Washington,DC: Renewable Energy Policy Project, July 2000), 3-6.
217Speech given by Lou A. Noto, Symposium on Pacific
Energy Cooperation, The Institute of EnergyEconomics, Tokyo, Japan, 15 February 2000.
41