# Archivo original: dollars-vs-democracy.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:56 -03 2025

Dollars vs. Democracy:  
Companies and the Attack on  
Voting Rights and Peaceful Protest
PUBLISHED: 05-2021
https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/research/dollars-vs-democracy/

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | ii
This report was  
researched and written  
by Greenpeace, Inc
AUTHOR
Charlie Cray  
Maggie Ellinger-Locke  
Folabi Olagbaju  
Valentina Stackl
DESIGNED BY
Kyle McKibbin
WITH SUPPORT OF
Jonathan Butler  
Connor Gibson  
Jeff Goddin  
Seth Laxman  
Jim McNeill  
James Mumm  
Lauren Wiggins
PUBLISHED BY
Greenpeace USA  
May 2021
Cover image © Ian Foulk
Greenpeace Inc.  
702 H Street, NW, STE 300, 
Washington, D.C. 20001Introduction and Key Findings   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Dollars to Attack Our Vote   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
	+What These Bills Do   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Dollars to Silence Protest   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
	+What These Bills Do   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
	+Underwriting Racism: Corporate Contributions to Anti-Protest Bill Sponsors and 
Supporters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
	+Fossil Fuel Companies and Anti-Protest Bills   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
	+The Fossil Fuel Industry Lobbying Offensive   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
	+Corporate Responsibility and Actions   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Conclusion and Recommendations   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
	+Recommendations   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Appendices   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Endnotes   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28Contents

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 1
Introduction and Key Findings
A healthy democracy is a precondition for a healthy environment  . When everyone’s vote counts 
and when everyone’s constitutionally-guaranteed right to peacefully protest is protected, our 
government becomes more accountable and capable of meeting the demand for racial justice 
and enacting solutions to the rapidly accelerating climate crisis . 
Congress is currently presented with the opportunity to pass 
two bills that would restore, strengthen, and protect our 
freedom to vote, make sure average people have a better 
chance of being heard by preventing billionaires from buying 
our elections, and ensure we can elect leaders who govern in 
our interests: The For The People Act (H.R. 1/S. 1) and The 
John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act (H.R. 4).
Yet today, conservative state lawmakers across the country 
are attempting to block the path to progress by forcing 
through legislation designed to criminalize and squash  
public protests and disenfranchise voters — especially  
voters of color  . 
Unhappy with the outcome of the 2020 election and following 
the record-breaking turnout among Black voters in the Senate 
runoff election in Georgia, extremist state lawmakers first 
began to introduce a barrage of anti-voter laws in Georgia 
and a few other states . But soon these bills spread across the 
country  . As of late March, according to the Brennan Center for 
Justice, at least 361 anti-voter bills had been introduced in 
47 states .1 
At the same time, extremist lawmakers are also busy drafting 
anti-protest bills with new draconian provisions designed to 
criminalize and stifle protests. Over 80 anti-protest bills have 
been introduced in 34 states so far this year — more than 
twice the number in any previous year  .2 
The introduction of these anti-protest bills started to 
accelerate noticeably in 2017 . The legislation came in 
response to protests led by the Black Lives Matter movement 
and the resistance to the Dakota Access pipeline led by 
Indigenous land and water protectors from the Standing Rock 
Reservation .3 
It’s no surprise that these anti-protest bills are designed 
primarily against these two movements since the struggles for 
climate justice and racial justice go hand-in-hand; both are led 
by communities of color that have borne a disproportionate 
share of corporate harm and police brutality  . Black, Brown, and Indigenous communities began organizing 
the movement for environmental justice decades ago, having 
been most heavily impacted by pollution and illnesses 
associated with fossil fuel extraction and use, petrochemical 
production, and waste disposal operations .4 Many Black, 
Brown, and Indigenous communities are now also on the 
front lines of the climate crisis, trying to survive extreme 
weather events and other impacts that will soon affect 
everyone .5 
Given these realities, it’s no surprise that opinion polls have 
repeatedly found that Latinx and Black communities are more 
likely to be alarmed and concerned about global warming 
than white people, who are more likely to be doubtful or 
dismissive .6
This year, demands for racial justice and climate justice have 
also begun to expose the relationship between polluters 
opposed to government action on climate change and the 
recent racist attacks on democracy  . 
Supporting American Democracy in Washington DC © Tim Aubry / Greenpeace

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 2
After white supremacists stormed the Capitol during the 
failed insurrection of January 6th, it was revealed that fossil 
fuel companies and other corporations and conservative 
groups contributed to groups that helped organize and 
promote the “Stop the Steal” rallies that led to the siege of 
the Capitol .7 Later on January 6, when Congress reconvened, 
the “insurrection caucus” that refused to certify the 2020 
election results was led by many members who have taken 
exorbitant amounts of money from the fossil fuel industry  .8 
According to a recent analysis by the Center for American 
Progress, 82 members of the U  .S . House of Representatives 
and six U  .S . Senators are both climate deniers and members 
of the “insurrection caucus” — those who denied the certified 
results of the 2020 general election, supporting President 
Trump’s attempt to overturn the election .9 Many of these 
same politicians have also spent years undermining voting 
rights and campaign finance reform, opening the doors to 
the plutocrats who have polluted our politics as much as they 
have contaminated our air, water, and land .10 
Republican politicians in Georgia, Texas, Arizona and other 
states began introducing legislation directly designed 
to quash the election rules and policies that led to an 
unprecedented voter turnout  . 
Soon national attention was drawn towards Georgia, where 
state legislators passed a new law signed by Governor Kemp, 
which includes provisions that will have the effect of making 
it more difficult for many voters to participate in upcoming 
elections, particularly Black voters and others that turned  
out in unprecedented numbers during the January Senate 
runoff races. Voting rights groups including the New Georgia Project, Fair 
Fight, Black Voters Matter, and the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People immediately began 
to respond, organizing legal challenges and calling out 
the companies that supported the sponsors of these bills, 
including Coca-Cola, Delta, Home Depot and Aflac.11 
As other state 2021 legislative sessions began, Greenpeace 
investigated corporate contributions to other state anti-voter 
bills along with new and expanded anti-protest legislation . 
The results of that research are discussed below, and 
presented in the appendices to this brief report  .12 
Here are the key findings:
Dozens of state legislators are driving a two-
pronged attack on democracy, sponsoring both 
anti-voter and anti-protest bills. 
44 state legislators sponsored at least one anti-protest bill 
and one anti-voter bill in the past year  .13 
Many companies back state legislators who 
sponsored both anti-voter and anti-protest bills. 
Of the top 100 corporate donors to state lawmakers who 
sponsored anti-voter bills, 53 were also among the 100 
top corporate donors to anti-protest bill sponsors . 
Five of 10 companies that donated the most to sponsors 
of state anti-voter legislation — AT&T , Comcast, RAI 
Services, Phillip Morris/Altria and UnitedHealth Group 
— also rank among the top 10 corporate donors to the 
sponsors of state anti-protest bills .
Early Voting Lines in Virginia. © Tim Aubry / Greenpeace

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 3
Global Climate Strike in San Francisco © George Nikitin / GreenpeaceThe ten companies that contributed the most to state 
lawmakers sponsoring both anti-voter and anti-protest 
bills are14: 
AT&T
Dominion Energy
Zurich North America + subsidiaries
Berkshire Hathaway + subsidiaries
UnitedHealth Group
Mednax Services
Charter Communications
State Farm Insurance + subsidiaries
Philip Morris USA
Vistra Energy (FKA Energy Future Holdings) + 
subsidiaries
Fossil Fuel companies stand out among companies 
backing anti-protest legislation. 
The 10 companies that invested the most in lobbying for 
anti-protest bills since 2017 are all fossil fuel companies .
A growing number of companies have spoken out in 
defense of democracy and voting rights. Yet many 
of these same companies contributed to legislators 
sponsoring state anti-voter or anti-protest bills 
during their most recent election campaigns.
On April 14, well over 100 companies endorsed “We Stand 
for Democracy, ” a statement of clear opposition to “any 
discriminatory legislation or measures that restrict or 
prevent any eligible voter from having an equal and fair 
opportunity to cast a ballot  .”15 We commend them for 
doing so  .
Unfortunately, this was after at least 12 of these 
companies contributed to the sponsors of 43 state anti-
voter bills analyzed: Amazon, American Express, Bank 
of America, Facebook, Ford, General Motors, HP , J&J, Merck, Microsoft, United Airlines, and Wells Fargo.16 We 
urge these and other companies to adopt the policy 
of immediately ceasing any support to politicians that 
sponsor or vote for state anti-voter legislation . 
Companies that ceased PAC contributions to 
members of Congress who refused to certify the 
2020 election contributed to groups that promoted 
the “Stop the Steal” rally. Many are also sponsors 
of state anti-voter legislation introduced after 
January 6. 
In the wake of the insurrection, at least 130 companies 
“paused” PAC contributions to members of the 
“insurrection caucus . ” Some halted such contributions 
altogether  .17 During the last election cycle at least 47 of 
these companies contributed to sponsors of state anti-
voter legislation introduced after January 6.18
Of the top 100 corporate donors to sponsors of anti-
protest bills 36 donated to the Republican Attorneys 
General Association (RAGA). RAGA’s affiliate — the Rule 
of Law Defense Fund — sent robocalls to promote the 
January 6 march to the Capitol .19 
Eight companies (including five oil & gas companies) 
that support RAGA have lobbied for anti-protest bills in at 
least 2 states .20
Many companies are also caught in a “chamber of  
contradictions” because of actions taken by trade  
associations such as the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
The U  .S . Chamber of Commerce opposes the For The 
People Act (H .R . 1/ S . 1), despite the fact that many 
individual member companies oppose state anti-voter 
legislation .21 Executives from six companies that have 
spoken out against state anti-voter legislation — IBM, 
Boston Consulting Group, United Airlines, Microsoft, 
Deloitte and Ford — currently serve on the Chamber’s 
board of directors, its principal policy-making body  .22
At least six state and regional affiliates of the U.S. 
Chamber have also lobbied in favor of anti-protest laws .23
The whole world is watching the unfolding test of America’s 
continuing experiment with democracy  . Corporate support for 
legislators and organizations who sponsor and vote for anti-
voter and anti-protest bills poses a serious threat to America’s 
standing in the world, including our ability to negotiate to 
defend the climate and environmental boundaries that 
science and justice demand of us all .

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 4
Speak Your Mind and Cast Your Vote
Voter registration shot up in June amid nationwide protests 
over the killing of George Floyd, according to a new analysis . 
“Despite a full or partial lockdown in large swaths of the country 
for much of the month, voter registration began to rebound 
as people took to the streets to protest, ” analysis conducted 
by TargetSmart, a Democratic political data firm found.24 
Some of the surge in voter registration during June was most 
likely attributable to efforts by protest organizers to motivate 
large numbers of protesters to register and vote in the 
coming election, using creative means such as posting QR 
codes on protest signs that allowed protesters to scan the 
code and begin the registration process on their phones .25
Voting also gives people a key means of peacefully preserving 
and strengthening other rights, including the right to healthy 
air and clean water  . 
As Michael Latner of the Union of Concerned Scientists’ Center  
for Science and Democracy has said: “Healthy communities 
require healthy democracy  . When communities are disenfran -
chised or underrepresented, it becomes harder for them to 
use democratic institutions effectively to solve their problems 
and advocate for their interests .… This is the predicament 
faced by many environmental justice (EJ) communities—com -
munities of color and low-income communities exposed to 
disproportionately high levels of toxic pollution and other  
environmental burdens .… [R]estrictive election laws, gerryman -
dering, and other factors combine to further reduce already 
low voter turnout in these communities, weakening their  
ability to protect themselves against environmental hazards . ”26
The new wave of state anti-voting bills that followed the 
conservative claims of 2020 election fraud gained national 
media attention when Georgia Gov  . Brian Kemp signed S .B . 
202, a new law infamous for making it a crime to hand out 
water or food to voters standing in line, among other anti-
voter provisions .27 Attention to this anti-voter bill can be 
attributed to the response organized by civil and voting rights 
groups, including the New Georgia Project, Fair Fight, Black 
Voters Matter, and the NAACP  . These groups demanded Georgia-based companies like Coca-
Cola, Delta, Home Depot and others that “helped fund the 
very authors of this regressive voting rights legislation” use 
their lobbying clout to oppose it  .28 Yet the companies were 
slow to respond, publicly criticizing the legislation only after 
the bill was signed into law  .29
Georgia is just one of many states where lawmakers are 
pushing to limit voting . By late March, at least 361 bills making 
voting more difficult for millions of people — especially Black 
and Brown voters — had been introduced in 47 states .30 
What These Bills Do
	|Prohibit automatic voter registration or severely limiting or 
prohibiting same-day voter registration .31
	|Repeal universal voting by mail and other safety provisions 
(e .g . drop boxes) enacted in 2020 to make participation 
safer during the Covid-19 pandemic .32 
	|Bar people from voting by mail unless they provide an 
excuse .33
	|Restrict types of IDs you can use to vote and when you can 
apply for vote-by-mail ballots .34
	|Threaten voters who request an absentee ballot with prose -
cution if they cannot prove an excuse such as illness, active  
military status, or will be out-of-state at the time of election .
	|Prohibit city or township clerks from providing prepaid 
return postage for absentee voter ballots .35
	|Reduce the number of ballot drop box locations and times; 
limit early in-person voting and allow election officials 
to reduce the number of voting locations by raising the 
number of voters within a specific precinct.36
	|Delete people from voter rolls if they miss voting in recent 
elections, or require voters to re-register every three years 
or be removed from the registration list;37
	|Shift election authority for partisan gain from local and 
county officials to the Secretary of State or vice versa.38 
	|Change the rules relating to voter registration drives in 
ways that may make compliance more difficult.39 Dollars to Attack Our Vote
No matter our race, background or zip code most of us believe that for democracy to work for 
all of us, it must include us all . Throughout our history, Americans have fought to expand voting 
rights so that all voters are able to cast their ballot and have it counted .

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 5
In many instances these restrictions disproportionately 
impact Black and Brown communities, younger and elderly 
voters, and poor communities — a growing portion of the 
voting population, and one that tends to be more progressive 
than average .40 
Georgia’s hastily enacted law has racist and partisan 
impacts that are features, not bugs, of the many similar bills 
moving through other statehouses . The original Georgia bill 
would have prevented voting on Sundays, a provision that 
was clearly targeted at Black communities, where church 
congregations have mobilized large numbers of people to 
join in “souls to the polls” caravans organized after church 
services .41 Although that provision was removed before the 
bill was signed into law, another infamous provision remains 
that makes it a crime to provide food or water to voters 
standing in line. This provision disproportionately affects 
communities of color, where voters waiting to cast their votes 
commonly experience long lines . As conservative lawmakers in other states followed  
Georgia’s lead, some in the business community began 
responding to the outcry against Georgia-based companies  
by speaking out against what they saw as a racist and  
partisan attack on democracy  . 
On March 31, business leaders from the Black Economic 
Alliance proclaimed that “[t]he disproportionate racial impact 
of these allegedly ‘neutral laws’ should neither be overlooked 
nor excused .…The stakes for our democracy are too high to 
remain on the sidelines . Corporate America must support our 
nation’s fundamental democratic principles and marshal its 
collective influence to ensure fairness and equity for all….
Corporate America should publicly oppose any discriminatory 
legislation and all measures designed to limit Americans’ 
ability to vote . When it comes to protecting the rights of all 
Americans to vote, there can be no middle ground . We call 
upon our colleagues in Corporate America to join us in  
taking a non-partisan stand for equality and democracy  .  
Each of us stands ready to work with you on what can and 


DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 6
must be done . ”42 Following their lead, more corporate leaders 
and companies began speaking out against the bills .43  
On April 2, 2021, well over 200 top American business 
executives released a statement in support of protecting 
voting rights .44 Two weeks later, on April 14, over 500 
companies and CEOs signed a statement published in the 
New York Times and Washington Post, expressing their 
opposition to “the 360+ state bills pending in 47 states that 
contain discriminatory voting measures . ”45 
These statements by the corporate community are a welcome 
development, but they are not enough . 
For one, companies committed to voting rights should stop 
contributing to any politician who authors, sponsors, or 
votes for anti-voter legislation  . At least a dozen companies 
that endorsed the April 14 statement made campaign contri -
butions to the sponsors of 2021 state anti-voter bills during 
the 2019-2020 election cycle: Amazon, American Express, 
Bank of America, Facebook, Ford, General Motors, HP , Johnson & 
Johnson, Merck, Microsoft, United Airlines, and Wells Fargo.46 
When the outcry against anti-voter bills began to be directed 
at companies that helped legislators who sponsored the bills 
get elected, Greenpeace started digging into the companies 
that contributed to anti-voter bills sponsors during the most 
recent election cycle .47
The 10 companies that made the largest combined campaign 
contributions to sponsors of the state anti-voter bills 
examined are as follows48: 
Company Industry Total
Altria 
Group/Phillip MorrisTobacco $110,650
Dominion Energy Electric utility $70,500
Blue Cross/Blue Shield/Anthem 
and subsidiaries (Highmark in 
PA, Blue in FL,Wellmark in IA, 
Caremark in MD)Health insurance $60,150
Comcast/NBC Universal Telecommunications 
and mass media 
entertainment$56,400
Verizon Telecommunications $38,100
AT&T Telecommunications 
and mass media 
entertainment$35,400
UnitedHealth Group Health care $34,250
General Motors Automotive $34,250
AEP Electric utility $33,500
RAI Services aka  
Reynolds TobaccoTobacco $28,164As corporate leaders increasingly understand, their 
employees, shareholders and other stakeholders expect 
companies to step up when political leaders fail to do so  . 
A 2020 poll of over 2,000 US adults conducted by JUST 
Capital found that 3 in 4 Americans believe that large 
companies “have a role to play in preserving and protecting 
democracy  .”49 
And many companies have, to some degree, begun to do so, 
however haltingly: After January 6, well over 140 companies 
recognized the importance of aligning their campaign 
contributions with their commitment to democratic norms 
and rights, by suspending (at least temporarily) any campaign 
contributions to members of Congress who refused to certify 
the results of the 2020 election .50 
Of the 100 companies that contributed the most to state 
lawmakers who sponsored anti-voter legislation this year, at 
least 32 suspended contributions to members of Congress 
after the January 6 insurrection.51 Of the more than 130 
companies identified that suspended contributions to 
members of Congress who refused to certify the 2020 
election results, 47 contributed to state lawmakers who have 
introduced anti-voter legislation in 2021 .52
No Coup Vote Count Post Election in Washington DC © Tim Aubry / Greenpeace

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 7
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce: The Corporate Club Beating Down Our Freedom to Vote 
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, along with its state and local affiliates, allows companies to align around a common 
agenda, including on taxation, energy policy, and regulations on corporate participation in elections . As the most powerful 
and unifying voice of the business community, the Chamber also allows its member companies to avoid being directly 
associated with positions that might otherwise create significant reputational risks or undermine the interests of companies’ 
own employees, shareholders, or customers . 
The Chamber is currently not required by campaign finance law to disclose who their members are or how much funding 
each company gives them for specific political purposes such as making contributions to specific candidates. The Chamber 
is allowed to withhold this information even though its political expenditures can be significant.53 In the 2020 election cycle, 
the Chamber reported making $903,063 in political contributions .54 
More than anything else, however, the Chamber’s strength is in its investment in federal lobbying, which built its reputation 
as the country’s most powerful “influence machine. ”55 In 2020 alone, the Chamber spent nearly $82 million on lobbying the 
federal government, more than any other group  .56 
Blocking the For the People Act has been one of the Chamber’s top priorities since it was first introduced in 2019.57 The 
Chamber recently warned members of Congress that supporting the most comprehensive democracy reform bill in a 
generation could adversely affect their standing on its annual ratings scorecard.58 
The Chamber professes to be “deeply troubled by efforts at the state and federal level to enact election law changes on a 
partisan basis, ” which it acknowledges are “more likely to erode access and security and undermine public confidence and 
the willingness of the American people to trust and accept future election outcomes . ” But instead of supporting national 
voter protection standards contained in H .R . 1 and H .R . 4, the Chamber has proposed a bipartisan commission on election 
reform, an obvious attempt to kill the bill and delay reforms until beyond the 2022 election . 
The Chamber also misrepresents specific provisions in the For The People Act that it claims are grounds for its rejection. It 
characterizes disclosure requirements for contributions of $10,000 or more by single donors to independent organizations 
as “severe … penalties . ”59 But eliminating “dark money” contributions doesn’t stop anyone from making those 
contributions — it just forces them to be disclosed . This is the exact kind of increased transparency that Koch operatives 
have privately conceded are highly popular with people across the political spectrum, including a “large, very large, chunk 
of conservatives . ”60
Another of the Chamber’s arguments against the bill is that it uses “taxpayer” funds to match small-donor contributions .61 
In truth, the matching funds would come from fees taken from civil and criminal financial penalties paid by companies that 
commit tax crimes and other violations .62 
Despite a growing chorus of corporate opposition to state legislative attacks on voting rights, so far there is no evidence 
that members of the Chamber have petitioned it to change the group’s position on H .R . 1 .63 Nor is there any evidence that 
they have threatened to quit if it doesn’t, as some companies did before the Chamber began to shift its position on climate 
change .64 
The Chamber’s Board of Directors, its “principal governing and policymaking body, ” bears a particular responsibility to 
support voting rights and change the Chamber’s position on the For the People Act  .65 Members of the board that endorsed 
the “We Stand for Democracy” statement released on April 14 include Boston Consulting Group, Deloitte & Touche, Ford, 
IBM, Microsoft and United Airlines. Other high-profile Chamber members that have endorsed the statement include 
Accenture, American Airlines, American Express, Bank of America, BlackRock, Estee Lauder, Facebook, Goldman Sachs, 
Salesforce, Synchrony, Target and ViacomCBS .66

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 8
Dollars to Silence Protest
“Somewhere I read that the greatness of America is the right to protest for rights. ”  
— Martin Luther King, Jr  ., April 3, 1968
The great movements of the past century — the Civil Rights 
movement, the labor movement, the women’s suffrage 
movement, the environmental movement — have all relied on 
peaceful protest to confront injustices and win wider public 
support  . Greenpeace was itself founded 50 years ago by a small 
group of activists committed to using nonviolent direct action 
to stop nuclear weapons testing . Almost every day in America 
people come together peacefully to demonstrate and raise 
their voices about clean air and water, local land use, and other 
issues they believe in because peaceful protest works . Without 
the right to speak up, we wouldn’t have made significant gains 
towards equal rights for women and people of color, fair wages 
and working hours, or clean air and water  . 
In 2020, an unprecedented number of Americans joined the 
Movement for Black Lives to protest racist policing and force the country to begin to reckon with its long legacy of injustice 
and structural racism . At the same time, Indigenous defenders 
of sovereign land and water rights, climate activists, poor 
communities, and property-owners continue to resist the fossil 
fuel industry’s push to expand .
Today’s movements are facing responses similar to those 
encountered by historic movements, including the introduction 
of laws and policies designed to silence leaders and undermine 
public support for their cause .67 
Between May 2020 and January 2021, when massive protests 
against racialized police violence swept the country, three 
federal bills and 21 state bills “aimed at suppressing Black 
Lives Matter protesters” were introduced, according to the 
International Center for Not-For-Profit Law.68 
Many prominent civil rights activists cross the Edmund Pettus Bridge in a reenactment of the Selma to Montgomery march on the 20th anniversary in 1985. Civil rights leaders Jesse Jackson, 
Joseph Lowery, and John Lewis lead the march. © Bettmann / Contributor

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 9
This was not the first time such legislation appeared.  
A similar wave of anti-protest bills occurred in 2017,  
largely in response to recent Black Lives Matter protests  
and Indigenous-led protests against construction of 
the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL) at the Standing Rock 
Reservation in North Dakota . In response to the DAPL  
protests, lawmakers introduced so-called “critical 
infrastructure” legislation designed to criminalize common 
movement tactics. Soon after, similar bills were introduced  
in other states, with support from fossil fuel lobbyists, 
industry trade associations, and the American Legislative 
Exchange Council (ALEC) .69 
The 2020 surge in anti-protest legislation began after the 
death of George Floyd in the custody of Minneapolis police 
and the Black Lives Matter protests that followed .70 In just 
the first four months of 2021, dozens of bills have been 
introduced to restrict lawful assembly and speech, bringing 
the total number of state anti-protest bills to at least 94 since 
May 2020 .71 Assertions that last year’s Black Lives Matter protests justify 
the new anti-protest legislation fall apart when the facts 
are taken into consideration: A Washington Post  analysis of 
thousands of BLM protests that took place across the nation 
last May and June found that 96 .3 involved no property 
damage or police injuries, and in 97 .7 percent of events no 
injuries were reported among participants, bystanders or 
police. “These figures should correct the narrative that the 
protests were overtaken by rioting and vandalism or violence, ” 
the Post’s analysts concluded .72
After January 6th, when white supremacists attacked the U.S. 
Capitol with the intention of stopping the peaceful transition 
of power, some state and federal lawmakers began pressing 
for new legal powers to prosecute domestic violent extremist 
groups .73 Yet critics warn that laws already exist for the crimes 
committed on January 6th, and that historical precedents 
suggest caution is required since those new legal powers 
could be used not just against white supremacist groups 
but also against Black and Brown communities already 
disproportionately targeted by law enforcement  . 


DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 10
What These Bills Do
The provisions in many anti-protest bills are intended to 
penalize, marginalize and weaken protest movements in 
multiple ways . They would: 
ESTABLISH HARSH AND REDUNDANT PENAL TIES  
FOR PROTEST AND GIVE POLICE AND PROSECUTORS  
ARBITRARY ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY . 
Some bills expand the definition of what constitutes a “riot” or  
“unlawful assembly, ” thereby giving law enforcement expanded  
authority to arrest and prosecute peaceful protesters .74 
In Indiana, H.B.1205 would expand the definition of “unlawful 
assembly, ” requiring that only three people be engaged in 
“tumultuous conduct, ” defined as conduct that results in 
the “obstruction of law enforcement or other government 
function. ” But “obstruction” is not defined in the bill, leaving it 
open to interpretation .75 According to the International Center 
for Not-For-Profit Law, “As a result of these changes, someone 
in a 3-person, peaceful protest whose conduct is deemed 
“likely” to interfere with a government hearing, for instance, 
could be covered by the resulting “riot” statute” and charged 
with a misdemeanor carrying a mandatory 30-day sentence .76 
Most anti-protest bills include new or expanded sentencing 
and/or fines for peaceful, nonviolent activity that is already 
illegal, such as trespass, property damage or obstructing 
traffic.77 Some reclassify misdemeanors, such as trespass,  
as felonies .78 One aspect of this legislative trend has been to treat 
alleged criminal law violations as akin to “terrorism, ” a 
linguistic smear used to justify cross-agency and federal 
law enforcement involvement in what would otherwise 
be state or local level prosecutions . Reports that federal, 
state, and local law enforcement have collaborated across 
jurisdictions against pipeline opponents, often describing 
activists as “domestic terrorists, ” and coordinating and 
sharing information (sometimes with private security 
companies working for the industry) through “fusion 
centers” that were created after the 9/11 attacks to help law 
enforcement collaborate against terrorist threats across 
jurisdictions should concern anyone familiar with the history 
of government activities intended to discredit and disrupt 
previous movements .79 
One egregious example of this new wave of anti-protest laws 
was signed into law by Florida Governor Ron DeSantis on April 
19, 2021 . DeSantis initially proposed the bill in September 
2020, in response to statewide protests for racial justice, to 
immediate criticism by civil liberties groups and even a few 
law enforcement officials.80 The law carries a sentence of up 
to five years for peaceful protests, and could strip activists of 
their voting rights even if they didn’t engage in any violent or 
disorderly conduct  . It also carries a threat of up to 15 years in 
prison for even temporarily blocking traffic in a group of 25 or 
more persons .81 
Juneteenth Protests in Washington DC © Tim Aubry / Greenpeace

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 11
Biden-Harris Election Win Announced - Celebrations in Washington DC  
© Tim Aubry / GreenpeaceNancy Metayer, a prominent figure in South Florida’s 
2020 summer protests and the first Haitian American City 
Commissioner in Coral Springs history, denounced the law  
as an “unequivocally unAmerican . . .assault on Florida’s  
Black and Brown families . ” Metayer said it should be clearly 
seen and contextualized as a response to the millions of 
people in the state’s most marginalized communities who 
answered the moral call to combat systemic discrimination .82 
Opponents are challenging the law as unconstitutional .83 
Soon after DeSantis enacted the new law, the Broward County 
Sheriff’s Office directed its precinct captains to not enforce 
it without running the decision up the chain of command, 
explaining that it threatened to diminish its ability to connect 
with the community  .84
A few weeks later, the Montana legislature passed a bill Gov  . 
Greg Gianforte is expected to sign, that some describe as one 
of the most extreme anti-protest bills yet  . The bill seeks to 
penalize trespassing with intent to impede operations with 
a sentence of up to eighteen months in prison . The bill also 
includes financial penalties for organizations convicted of 
“conspiracy” for supporting protesters .85 
Many bills not only expand law enforcement’s ability to stifle 
speech and stop dissent, they often include incentives to do 
so . Indiana H .B . 1205, for example, allows businesses to sue 
governments for failing to enforce the law against unlawful 
assembly if the failure constitutes “gross negligence, ” a 
measure would encourage local governments to adopt  
overly aggressive responses to protests in order to avoid 
being sued .86 Another Indiana bill, S .B . 198, gives the state’s Attorney 
General concurrent jurisdiction to prosecute any “criminal 
offense” committed by members of an “unlawful assembly, ” 
allowing them to step in and charge protesters if local 
prosecutors decline to do so  .87 Other bills create new 
penalties for government officials who try to “stand down” 
police (North Carolina H.B. 321), undermining local officials’ 
ability to participate in decisions over policing of protests and 
potentially incentivizing aggressive police responses .88 
TARGET COMMUNITIES OF COLOR
Anti-protest bills are a direct response to Black Lives Matter 
and other BIPOC-led movements, laying bare their racist 
intent  . In addition, many include provisions that would 
disproportionately impact poor communities, especially 
communities of color, by imposing massive fines and/or 
making anyone convicted of specified protest-related charges, 
ineligible for public assistance . 
One example is Kentucky’s S .B 211, which would have barred 
anyone convicted under an overbroad and vague definition of 
rioting from receiving certain public benefits for up to a year, 
and expose them to other penalties including mandatory 
minimum prison sentences .89 If passed, this bill would have 
effectively forced many Kentuckians to weigh their First 
Amendment right to join a rally against their access to health 
care, housing and nutrition assistance . 
MARGINALIZE PROTEST MOVEMENTS AND 
DISCOURAGE PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
Bills that penalize bystanders who attend events where 
criminal laws are allegedly broken have the intended effect of 
frightening and discouraging people from attending protests . 
Indiana’s S .B . 198, for example, seeks to creates a new Class B 
misdemeanor offense, “enabling riot. ” It applies to anyone 
who knowingly witnesses the commission of a felony during 
Black Lives Matter Protest in Washington DC © Tim Aubry / Greenpeace

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 12
an “unlawful assembly” and fails to “immediately” either 
leave the location or report the offense to law enforcement.90 
When lawful protesters face massive fines and 
disproportionately punitive criminal penalties, they may 
choose to stay home instead of exercising their constitutional 
right to free speech . As one scholar recently put it, “although 
the state has an interest in ensuring respect for the rule of law, 
the disproportionately harsh penalties…go far and above that 
interest and are detrimental to democracy  .”91 
SANCTION AND BANKRUPT ORGANIZATIONS  
THAT SUPPORT PEACEFUL PROTESTS AND 
MOVEMENT BUILDING
Many anti-protest bills include “aiding and abetting” clauses 
that allow any individual or organization to be charged with a 
crime for providing support to peaceful protesters who break 
the law  . 
Indiana’s S.B. 198 creates a new “financing an unlawful 
assembly” Class A misdemeanor punishable by up to one 
year in jail . It targets individuals who give “anything of value” 
to another person knowing that they intend to commit civil 
disobedience as part of an “unlawful assembly  .” In addition, 
felony charges with penalties of up to six years in prison are established for donors to any group that intends to commit 
civil disobedience .92 
TURN ATTENTION AWAY FROM THE REAL PROBLEM
These anti-protest laws use the cover of “public safety” to 
expand law enforcement’s powers to criminalize peaceful 
protest  . By doing so, these bills divert attention away from 
policies that would reduce police misconduct by removing 
“qualified immunity” and other legal shields that protect 
officers from accountability for violent and unjust actions. 
Similarly, peaceful protests against oil and gas pipelines have 
been deemed threats to “critical infrastructure” by a slew of 
bills designed to quash those protests . These laws distort the 
definition of a term originally used to safeguard communi -
ties from the risks associated with sabotage and attacks on 
petrochemical plants and other industrial infrastructure . For 
corporate polluters, these laws targeting peaceful protesters 
help divert attention away from their own responsibility for 
threats to community safety, including chemical accidents 
and spills, along with the toxic pollution they spew across 
nearby communities on a nearly daily basis . It also diverts 
attention from operational and technological changes compa -
nies could implement to make the nation’s infrastructure and 
surrounding communities inherently safer and more resilient  . 
Global Climate Strike in San Francisco © George Nikitin / Greenpeace

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 13
SOW DIVISION AND ENCOURAGE VIOLENCE
Some anti-protest bills encourage vigilante violence by 
shielding drivers from criminal and/or civil liability for 
intentionally injuring or even killing protesters if they  
can demonstrate that protesters were obstructing traffic 
without a permit or engaged in a “riot, ” a term often  
loosely defined. 
The protection of vigilantism — often in the name of public 
safety — goes back to the days of slavery and post-Civil War 
terrorist acts committed by the Ku Klux Klan and other white 
supremacist groups . The deliberate vehicular homicide 
committed by a neo-Nazi during the 2017 “Unite the Right” 
rally in Charlottesville, Virginia is a more recent and infamous 
example . But drivers have plowed into peaceful protesters 
an alarming number of times since Charlottesville, and an 
increasing number of anti-protest laws would shield them 
from any legal consequences for doing so  . From May 27 
through September 5, 2020 drivers ran into demonstrators 
at Black Lives Matter protests 104 times according to a 
researcher at the University of Chicago’s Project on Security 
and Threats . In 96 of these incidents, the drivers were 
civilians; the other 8 involved police .93 
Driver immunity provisions have been included in over a 
dozen bills introduced in the past year  . As of this writing,  
two such bills - one in Florida and the other in Oklahoma - 
have been enacted into law  .94 These laws endanger public 
safety by immunizing violence, just as the infamous  
“stand your ground” laws have resulted in an increase  
in firearm homicides.95 
Susan Bro, whose daughter Heather Heyer was run over and 
killed in Charlottesville, describes the new driver immunity 
laws as the equivalent to “declaring open season . It’s a 
hunting license, is what it basically is . ”96
DIMINISH AMERICAN DEMOCRACY IN THE  
EYES OF THE REST OF THE WORLD
International human rights observers have concluded that 
the new wave of U  .S . anti-protest laws also violate global 
standards of democracy and civil liberties . In December, for 
example, CIVICUS Monitor downgraded the United States’ 
standing on fundamental freedoms of association, peaceful 
assembly and expression based on “concerns about restrictive 
laws and excessive force used against protesters . ”97 
Under international law, the right of peaceful assembly is 
protected by Article 21 of the International Covenant on  
Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which was ratified by the United States in 1992 . In 2010, the UN Human Rights Council 
created the position of Special Rapporteur on the rights 
to freedom of peaceful assembly, to monitor and report 
on threats to freedom of assembly throughout the world . 
UN Special Rapporteur Maina Kiai conducted an official 
mission to the United States in July, 2016 and reported 
that America was “struggling to live up to its ideals . ”98 Kiai 
described rampant racism and exclusion, especially of 
African-Americans, and unequal economic wealth distribution 
following the 2007-08 financial crisis. These events, he 
found, gave way to increased demonstrations . “There is 
justifiable and palpable anger in the black community over 
these injustices . It needs to be expressed, ” he stressed . “This 
is the context that gave birth to the non-violent Black Lives 
Matter protest movement and the context in which it must be 
understood . ” 
Underwriting Racism: Corporate 
Contributions to Anti-Protest Bill 
Sponsors and Supporters 
Greenpeace identified the 100 companies that made the 
largest contributions to sponsors of state anti-protest bills, 
introduced between June 1, 2020 and March 25, 2021 .99 
The ten companies with the greatest total contributions  
to politicians sponsoring anti-protest bills are listed in  
this table: 
AT&T $ 228,300
Koch Industries  
+ subsidiariesGeorgia-Pacific $ 151,050
Comcast Corporation  
+ subsidiariesNBC Universal, NBC 
Universal LLC$ 148,200
Berkshire Hathaway  
+ subsidiariesBNSF Railway, 
MidAmerican, 
Pacificorp, NV Energy, 
Nevada Power, GEICO, 
Netjets, Mclane$ 136,730
Lester Properties $ 132,000
Duke Energy $ 130,050
Amazon.com Services $ 121,250
RAI Services $ 118,550
Philip Morris USA $ 112,157
UnitedHealth Group $ 111,650
Dominion Energy $ 111,550

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 14
Fossil Fuel Companies and  
Anti-Protest Bills
It’s no surprise that fossil fuel companies are among the 
largest corporate contributors to sponsors of anti-protest 
bills, since many of these bills directly target frontline 
resistance to the industry’s expansion . Twenty-two of the top 
100 companies — responsible for $1,257,974 in contributions 
— are either directly or indirectly involved in producing, 
transporting or distributing fossil fuels: 
Five oil and gas companies:
Koch Industries (#2) 
Marathon Petroleum (#21)
Chevron (#67) 
Phillips 66 (#71) 
ExxonMobil (#78) 
Eleven electric utilities heavily reliant on fossil fuels:
Berkshire Hathaway100 (#4)
Duke Energy (#6) 
Dominion Energy (#11) 
AEP (#23) 
Southern Company (#24)
Pinnacle West/Arizona Public Service (#33)
NextEra101 (#38)
FirstEnergy (#52)
Salt River Project (#64)
TECO Energy/EMERA (#91)
Ameren (#96)
Four natural gas utilities/distributors:
NISOURCE (#40) 
Atmos (#48) 
Southwest Gas (#55) 
IGS Ventures/IGS Energy (#74)
Two railroad companies: 
CSX (#53)
Union Pacific (#46) 
The Fossil Fuel Industry  
Lobbying Offensive 
Greenpeace also investigated corporate lobbying for  
anti-protest bills aimed specifically at restraining activists 
that stand in the way of the fossil fuel industry’s aggressive 
attempt to strangle the continent with a network of pipelines 
and other fossil fuel “infrastructure . ” These bills are a subset 
of the larger list of anti-protest bills we analyzed above .102 The argument is often made that companies contribute to 
political candidates for many reasons, and that campaign 
contributions do not buy votes on specific legislation, even if 
they might buy access to legislators in some cases .103 That’s 
why companies spend even more money on in-house and 
external lobbyists, “government affairs” consultants, think 
tanks, PR firms, charitable groups, academic shills, trade 
associations, and other players that comprise the powerful 
networks of influence they operate in Washington and state 
capitals across the country  .104 
An analysis of lobbying disclosure reports found that oil and  
gas companies have directed by far the most resources to  
lobbying for anti-protest “critical infrastructure” bills introduced  
between 2017 and 2021, holding eight of the top 10 spots . The 
other two are closely tied to the industry — companies that 
transport and use fossil fuels for electricity generation .105 
Marathon Petroleum Corp
ExxonMobil
Koch Industries / Flint Hills
Enbridge / Spectra / Alliance Pipeline
TC Energy (TransCanada)
Valero
CenterPoint Energy / Vectren
Energy Transfer
Magellan Midstream
Dominion Resources
Many of these companies are directly involved or invested in 
projects fiercely opposed by the climate justice movement. 
Enbridge: Indigenous rights activists in Minnesota and 
Wisconsin have led resistance to the permitting and 
construction of Enbridge’s Line 3 pipeline in those states since 
2013 .106 Private security companies working for Enbridge have 
shared information about activists with local police, while 
Minnesota’s federal “fusion center” — one of many created 
to share counterintelligence information about terrorist 
threats — has tracked Line 3 opponents by communicating 
with police in at least three states .107 On February 25, Rep  . 
Shane Mekeland (R) and Rep  . Eric Lucero (R) introduced 
Minnesota HF 1558, which would hold anyone liable for aiding 
or advising individuals who trespass on critical infrastructure 
property. The legislation is similar to a bill that was first 
introduced in 2018 .108 

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 15
Energy Transfer : The company’s Dakota Access Pipeline has 
become a national and international litmus test of Indigenous 
sovereignty and rights and of the nation’s commitment to 
curbing climate change. Soon after a new anti-protest law was 
passed in Louisiana, off-duty law enforcement employed by 
a private security company retained by Energy Transfer used 
the law to crack down on local protesters against the Bayou 
Bridge pipeline, even arresting activists canoeing in public 
waters outside the borders of the pipeline easement  .109
Marathon Petroleum : Marathon bought a partial interest in  
the Dakota Access Pipeline in 2016, amidst growing opposition  
to the project led by the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe .110 
Environmental Justice activists say that Marathon’s Detroit 
refinery is primarily responsible for making the neighboring 
predominantly Black zip code the most polluted in Michigan .111 
Dominion Resources: The company canceled its Atlantic 
Coast Pipeline in 2020 after six years of persistent opposition 
by landowners and climate justice activists .112
TC Energy (TransCanada): TransCanada is the owner and 
developer of the Keystone XL Pipeline . For nearly a decade the company has sought ways to criminalize opposition to 
the project  . In 2013, Bold Nebraska obtained documents 
revealing that the Canadian company was providing security 
briefings to Nebraska authorities advising them to explore 
the viability of using “anti-terrorism laws” against pipeline 
opponents .113 In 2019, South Dakota Governor Kristi Noem 
signed a bill with severe penalties for “riot boosting” that was 
designed to weaken opposition to the pipeline’s construction . 
The governor and the state’s attorney general later agreed not 
to enforce the law after a settlement stemming from an ACLU 
challenge to the law’s constitutionality  .114
Valero Energy : Valero, the second largest oil refiner in the 
country, was planning to be an “anchor customer” of the 
Keystone XL Pipeline before President Biden canceled the 
project on his first day in office.115 The pipeline was designed 
to move Alberta tar sands oil down to the Gulf Coast, where 
it was to supply Valero’s refineries in Texas and Louisiana.116 
Emails obtained by Documented  and published by The 
Intercept  indicate that Julie Klumpyan, Valero’s Director of 
Government Affairs, called Oklahoma Governor Mary Fallin 
to encourage her to sign H .B . 1123, an anti-protest bill, which 
Fallin eventually did .117 
Global Climate Strike in Washington DC © Livia Ferguson / Greenpeace

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 16
Koch Industries : Koch Industries is a leader among the 
dozen fossil fuel companies that have persistently lobbied 
for “critical infrastructure” legislation since 2017 . It’s also the 
second largest contributor to anti-protest bill sponsors in the 
most recent election cycle .118 
Koch Industries has pushed aggressively for legislation that 
creates new criminal offenses for acts of civil disobedience 
and nonviolent protest  . It backed a Texas law enacted in 
2019 that criminalizes peaceful protests taking place near a 
pipeline or other infrastructure, regardless of whether the 
protests actually impair or interrupt the facility’s operations .119 
The Texas-based Society of Native Nations opposed the bill in 
the state legislature, emphasizing that the increased penalties 
would inhibit free speech and unfairly criminalize Indigenous 
people trying to protect their land .120
Interestingly, similar anti-protest bills have also been opposed 
by a senior analyst with Americans for Prosperity (AfP), a 
leading group in the network of politically active nonprofit 
organizations funded by Charles Koch and his late brother 
David . David Voorman, AfP’s senior policy analyst for free 
speech and peace, denounced Georgia’s “Safe Communities Act” and similar anti-protest bills as unconstitutional 
infringements on free speech for requiring permits for 
assembling on public property  .121 Voorman’s opposition to 
these bills is arguably in line with the libertarian principles 
espoused by the Koch Brothers . And yet, when the Koch 
Brothers’ principles conflict with Koch Industries’ profits, it’s 
the bottom line that seems to win out  .
The Insurance Journal  asked Koch Industries spokesman 
David Dziok about the anti-protest provisions in critical 
infrastructure bills supported by the company  . Dziok said 
the bills “are necessary — not only for the safety of the 
communities in which we operate, but also for the safety of 
those exercising their rights to demonstrate . ”122 
However, the company’s professed concern for the safety 
of its neighboring communities is belied by the major 
role it played in the aggressive and successful effort to kill 
chemical safety legislation introduced in Congress in the 
years following the 9/11 terrorist attacks .123 The legislation 
would have required companies to substitute safer materials 
and inherently safer technologies for existing ones .124 Koch 
officials argued that the safer standards weren’t needed  
Global Climate Strike in New York © Stephanie Keith / Greenpeace

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 17
since there hadn’t been another attack since 9/11 .125 But the 
bills were designed to protect against both deliberate attacks 
and catastrophic accidents, which have happened in the  
years before and after 9/11. Because Koch Industries helped 
kill the legislation, millions of Americans continue to be 
threatened by the potential for chemical releases caused by 
accidents or sabotage .126 
Industry Trade Associations : Fossil fuel companies also 
lobby for anti-protest bills through business associations 
such as the American Fuel & Petrochemical Manufacturers 
(AFPM)127, the American Petroleum Institute and state affiliates 
of the US Chamber of Commerce .128 These groups often play 
a critical role in coordinating legislative strategy  . In 2019, for 
example, The Intercept  obtained a recording of AFPM lobbyist 
Derrick Morgan explaining that model legislation distributed 
to an audience of industry representatives had been drafted 
in response to protests against the Dakota Access Pipeline: 
“We’ve seen a lot of success at the state level .…We’re up to 
nine states that have passed laws that are substantially close 
to the model policy that you have in your packet  .”129
The fossil fuel industry’s ties to law enforcement agencies  
and state and local police raises additional concerns, 
particularly since police associations have also lobbied  
for anti-protest legislation . Fossil fuel companies have donated to police foundations 
and, in some cases, served on their boards .130 It is also fairly 
common for companies to employ off-duty law enforcement 
officers as plant security. With respect to anti-protest 
legislation, this creates the potential for conflicts of interest 
and situations in which officers could abuse their authority  
on behalf of private-sector employers . In Louisiana, “extra-
duty” state corrections officers used air generated by their 
boat’s propeller to blow the anti-pipeline activists from a 
nearby bayou onto an easement owned by Energy Transfer 
Partners (ETP); the “extra-duty” officers were employed at  
the time by an ETP security contractor  .131 In Pennsylvania,  
off-duty police were hired by Kinder-Morgan, a pipeline 
company, to “deter” protestors .132
Potential conflicts of interest involving lawmakers who  
might personally benefit from anti-protest legislation they 
sponsor or vote for is another valid concern . In Ohio, Sen . 
Frank Hoagland (R) was the primary sponsor of S .B . 33,  
a new “critical infrastructure” law that was passed and 
signed into law by Governor Mike DeWine in January 2021 .133 
Hoagland runs a private security firm that consults for  
oil and gas companies .134 Hoagland met with a lobbyist 
retained by Koch Industries to discuss “critical infrastructure” 
in 2018 .135
Sixth Fire Drill Friday in Washington DC © Ken Cedeno / Greenpeace

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 18
Corporate Responsibility and Actions
In the summer of 2020, many companies responded to the 
Movement for Black Lives protests by formally pledging to 
address racial justice .136 Most of these pledges are internal 
commitments to diversity and inclusion that involve hiring 
and advancement practices, pay equity and other policies . 
Some involve underwriting low-income housing and small 
and medium-sized enterprises .137 A growing number of 
companies are donating to policy initiatives involving 
civil rights and criminal justice reforms, part of the larger 
challenge of addressing structural racism .138 
But addressing structural racism also means aligning corporate  
political activities with the democratic values that many of 
these same companies are committing to  . Companies that don’t  
continuously strive to align their political activities with the  
values they espouse and commitments they make risk damaging  
their own reputations, potentially hurting their bottom line . 
Hundreds of companies themselves made that immediately 
clear after the January 6 attack on the Capitol, suspending  
contributions to members of Congress who flouted the  will of the electorate by refusing to certify the results of the  
2020 election .139 
But companies that profess a commitment to racial justice 
and democracy must go further  . They need to choose which 
side they are on and end their support for politicians seeking 
to restrict the constitutionally guaranteed freedoms of 
speech and assembly, particularly when those restrictions 
are targeted at or disproportionately enforced against 
communities of color  . 
Companies cannot have it both ways: You cannot pretend 
to be a climate champion by pointing to reduced carbon 
emissions while contributing to politicians who block 
climate policies or attack the rights of Indigenous land and 
water protectors and climate activists . You cannot claim to 
be committed to racial justice while supporting politicians 
who sponsor bills designed to criminalize and strip away the 
constitutional rights of Black and Brown protesters . What 
follows are specific recommendations for companies to 
take under consideration in determining how their actions 
measure up to their commitments . 
Global Climate Strike in Washington DC © Tim Aubry / Greenpeace

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 19
The same communities that bear the worst impacts of 
pollution and poverty are also the targets of voter suppression 
and the criminalization of protest  . And that’s on top of the 
many existing and ongoing related injustices they face, 
including surveillance, deportation, mass criminalization, 
incarceration, and police violence . Ultimately, the injustices 
inflicted upon such communities affect the entire society. 
Injustices so large cannot be ignored, even by those in the 
most powerful perches of privilege . 
Fortunately, some corporate leaders have begun to 
acknowledge their responsibility to step up and join  
the defenders of democracy and inclusion, inside and  
outside of government  . 
After the violent insurrection on January 6, at least 130 
companies suspended PAC contributions to members of 
Congress who refused to certify the results of the 2020 
Election .141 Days later, the 
U .S . Chamber of Commerce, 
the Business Roundtable and 
the National Association of 
Manufacturers called for a 
peaceful transfer of power  .142 
Yet the attacks on democracy have 
persisted after Trump’s exit from 
office. The false flag of election 
fraud has been carried to Georgia 
and other states, where anti-voter 
legislation has been introduced in 
the name of election integrity  . 
Two weeks after a group of 
prominent Black business leaders 
called upon Corporate America to 
“marshal its collective influence 
to ensure fairness and equity 
for all, ” hundreds of companies 
and individual executives joined together to publish “We Stand for Democracy, ” the statement 
denouncing state legislative attacks on voters’ rights, in the 
Washington Post and New York Times .143
These actions are welcome . But more action is needed at 
both the state and federal levels . With 361 anti-voter bills 
introduced in 47 states (as of late March 2021), and some 
already passed and signed into law, the time has come for 
companies to support the enactment of national standards 
to overturn these laws and ensure that every American can 
safely and freely cast their ballot  . 
Given its historical support for many of the most anti-
democratic politicians in the country, the corporate 
community has a lot to answer for  . Its commitment to 
democracy will be measured in the weeks and months  
ahead by the actions they take . Conclusion and Recommendations
America is confronting an historic and overlapping set of challenges, including a climate crisis 
that threatens to spiral out of control. We cannot effectively and equitably address these crises 
in a democracy that excludes communities that are most impacted . When such is the case, 
Americans lose the right to legitimately describe their government as a democracy  .140 
Jane Fonda at Global Climate Strike in Los Angeles © Madeline Carretero / Greenpeace

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 20
Recommendations
Support strong national standards for voting rights and 
election reform. 
	|Publicly support the John Lewis Voting Rights 
Advancement Act (H .R . 4) .144 
	|Join the overwhelming majority of Americans across the 
political spectrum who support the For The People Act 
(H .R . 1/ S . by publicly supporting the bill .145 
QUIT SUPPORTING POLITICIANS WHO  
SPONSOR OR VOTE FOR ANTI-VOTER AND  
ANTI-PROTEST LEGISLATION. 
Americans expect companies to align their actions with  
their values: A recent poll by Morning Consult found that  
57 percent of Americans think companies “should cut  
back on donations to elected officials who are working  
to limit voting rights . ”146
Companies must withhold and ultimately end all forms 
of direct or indirect political spending for lawmakers who 
introduce, sponsor or vote for legislation designed to  
restrict people’s basic right to vote .147 
BEYOND PAC CONTRIBUTIONS:  
STOP ALL POLITICAL SPENDING
PACs account for only a fraction of the money that flows 
from companies into politics .148 Companies contribute far 
more to party committees, Super PACs and politically-active 
non-profit “dark money” groups.149 In the 2020 cycle, for 
example, companies and wealthy individuals were primarily 
responsible for the over $2 billion spent by Super PACs .150 
Ultimately, companies need to suspend all forms of direct  
and indirect campaign spending .151 
Big money in politics creates a structural form of discrimina -
tion that makes it much harder for Black and Brown people 
to build and exert political power and effectively advocate for 
their interests and community needs, including their ability 
to run for and win elected office. Large donors skew sharply 
white due to racial wealth disparities driven by historic and 
current discrimination .152 It is time to build on the successes 
of state and local models of publicly financed campaigns by 
passing the For The People Act (H .R . 1/ S . 1) . 
It is also time to ensure more transparency in political 
spending to reduce corruption and increase accountability, 
another important principle behind some of the disclosure 
requirements contained in the For the People Act  .153 Companies should also adopt a code of conduct for political 
spending and disclosure, as recommended by many 
shareholder groups and experts in corporate accountability 
and governance .154 
“CHANGE THE CHAMBER”
Companies that “stand for democracy” should withdraw their 
support from the U  .S . Chamber of Commerce so long as it 
opposes the For The People Act (H .R . 1/ S . 1) or work within to 
stop it from lobbying against “the greatest civil rights bill since 
the civil rights movement itself  .”155 
Executives from six companies that endorsed the “We Stand 
for Democracy” statement released on April 14 — IBM, 
Boston Consulting Group, United Airlines, Microsoft, Deloitte 
and Ford — serve on the Chamber’s board of directors, its 
“principal governing and policymaking body  .”156 
These and other Chamber member companies that signed the 
statement, bear a particular responsibility to either change 
the Chamber’s position or demonstrate their conviction and 
disagreement with the Chamber’s position by resigning .157 
DEFEND THE RIGHT TO DISSENT
Companies must recognize the important role that peaceful 
protesting has played in advancing the cause of democracy  . 
Companies that respect and support the constitutionally 
protected right to peacefully protest should take the  
following actions: 
	|Stop supporting state lawmakers who sponsor or vote for 
anti-protest legislation . 
	|Stop supporting the American Legislative Exchange 
Council (ALEC) along with state and regional affiliates of 
the Chamber of Commerce, so long as they support anti-
protest legislation .158
	|Stop doing business with other companies that lobby in 
support of anti-protest legislation . 
	|Withdraw support for any police association or other 
groups that lobby for anti-protest legislation . 
	|Don’t hire individuals or contract with private security 
companies with a record of surveillance and infiltration of 
activist groups, or who are connected to violent extremist 
and white supremacist groups . 

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 21
Company Industry Total ($)
Altria Group/Phillip Morris tobacco 110650
Dominion Energy electric utility 70500
Blue Cross/Blue Shield/
Anthem and subsidiaries 
(Highmark in PA, Blue in 
FL,Wellmark in IA, Caremark 
in MD)health insurance 60150
Comcast/NBC Universal telecommunications and 
mass media entertainment56400
Verizon telecommunications 38100
AT&T telecommunications and 
mass media entertainment35400
UnitedHealth Group health care 34250
General Motors automotive 34250
AEP (American Electric 
Power)electric utility 33500
RAI Services (Reynolds 
Tobacco)tobacco 28164
Anheuser Busch beverages 26250
Community Loans of 
Americamortgage loans 26000
Farmers Insurance insurance 25700
Charter Communications/
Spectrumtelecommunications 21000
Centene/Wellcare health insurance 20000
Capital One banking 18725
Pinnacle West electric utility 18500
Pfizer pharmaceuticals 18200
Delta airline and refinery 17400
Walmart retail/grocer 17000
Raytheon weaponry 16000
Enterprise Holdings car rental 15550
Koch Industries oil and gas 15500
American Property Casualty 
Insuranceinsurance 15350
Amazon retail 15000
Titlemax financial services 13250
Southwest Gas oil and gas 12900
Marathon Petroleum oil and gas 12250
Southern Companies Gas 
aka Gas South PAC12250
USAA banking and insurance 11500
Smithfield Foods pork and food processing 11500
Micron Technology technology 11500
Coca Cola beverages 11424
Duke Energy electric utility 11400
BNSF Railway railway transportation 10800
Switch data centers 10800Appendices
Company Industry Total ($)
Wells Fargo banking 10800
Kaiser Permanente (mainly 
Southeast Permanente)health insurance 10400
UPS delivery 10200
Eli Lilly pharmaceuticals 10050
Service Corporation 
Internationalfuneral services 10000
Home Depot retail 10000
Oncor electric utility 10000
Check into Cash payday loans 10000
CenturyLink telecommunications 9800
GEO Group corrections/private prison 9500
Advance America payday loans 9500
Facebook social media 9500
Norfolk Southern railway transportation 9100
Union Pacific railway transportation 9050
CheckSmart financial services 9000
Freeport McMoran mining 8650
Boyd Gaming and 
subsidiariesGaming 8250
Cigna health insurance 8250
Cox Communications telecommunications 8091
Comerica bank 8000
Sprint telecommunications 8000
International Paper forest products 8000
ITC Holdings energy transmission 7650
CorrectHealth prison health provider 7600
Publix retail/grocer 7250
Centerpoint Energy gas utility 7000
Nationwide Mutual 
Insuranceinsurance 7000
Ford automotive 6750
Abbott Labs pharmaceuticals 6750
Republic Services waste management 6500
CVS/Caremark retail 6500
CMS Energy electric utility 6500
7-Eleven convenience stores 6500
Walgreen retail 6400
Allstate PAC insurance 6250
Hy-Vee supermarket chain 6250
Microsoft software 6250
CSX railway transportation 6200
Caterpillar farm equipment 6000
Waste Management waste management 6000
Liberty Mutual insurance 6000
Tenaska power gas and solar 6000
United Airlines airline 5689A Corporate contributions to sponsors of state anti-voter bills . 
» Methodology used  for state anti-voter research . 
Top 100 Corporate Contributors to State Anti-Voter Bill Sponsors

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 22
Company Industry Total ($)
Chevron Phillips oil and gas 5250 .66
Humana health insurance 5250
NiSource natural gas utility 5250
Disney entertainment 5000
Bristol-Meyers Squibb/
Celgenepharmaceuticals 5000
Motorola phones 5000
Merck pharmaceuticals 4800
DTE Energy electric utility 4750
Intuit software 4500
GEICO insurance 4500
Maxim Healthcare managed health 4250Company Industry Total ($)
Cleveland Cliffs steel 4000
Sysco restaurant supplies 4000
Johnson & Johnson pharmaceuticals and 
medical supplies4000
Suntrust Bank banking 4000
State Farm insurance 4000
TransCanada oil and gas 4000
Carmax used cars 4000
Owens-Illinois food packaging 4000
Aetna Life & Casualty insurance 4000
Dow Chemical petrochemicals 3750
B Corporate contributions to sponsors of state anti-protest bills .
» Methodology used  for that anti-protest research .
Top 100 Corporate Funders of State Anti-Protest Bill Sponsors
Company NameTotal 
Contributions 
to Anti-Protest 
Bill Sponsors 
AT&T  $228,300 
Koch Industries + subsidiaries  $153,050 
Comcast Corporation + subsidiaries  $148,200 
Berkshire Hathaway + subsidiaries  $136,730 
Duke Energy  $130,050 
Amazon . com Services  $121,250 
RAI Services (Reynolds American)  $118,550 
Philip Morris USA  $112,157 
UnitedHealth Group  $111,900 
Dominion Energy  $111,550 
State Farm Insurance + subsidiaries  $110,400 
Zurich North America + subsidiaries  $109,705 
Centene Corp + subsidiaries  $105,900 
Charter Communications  $104,228 
“Advance Financial  
(Harpeth Financial Services LLC)” $91,000 
Pfizer  $82,125 
HCA Management Services  $79,850 
American Electric Power / AEP  $79,375 
Enterprise Holdings  $79,225 
General Motors  $75,800 
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Tennessee  $74,500 
Marathon Petroleum  $72,565 
Federal Express / FedEx  $72,350 
Southern Company + subsidiaries  $66,955 
Anheuser-Busch Co  $65,800 
Merck & Co  $64,250 
Mcguirewoods Consulting  $63,900 
Jack Daniel Distillery  $61,750 
Walmart  $62,218 
Corecivic (FKA Corrections Corp of America, CCA)  $60,500 Company NameTotal 
Contributions 
to Anti-Protest 
Bill Sponsors 
Cigna + subsidiaries  $60,200 
Anthem Inc + subsidiaries  $60,050 
Pinnacle West (Arizona Public Service)  $57,600 
Truist Financial Corporation + subsidiaries  $56,950 
Tri Star Health System  $53,500 
CVS Caremark (CVS)  $53,300 
The Clay Firm  $53,150 
Nextera Energy + subsidiaries  $51,900 
Flexpac (Packaging Company)  $51,000 
Nisource Inc  $47,400 
Walt Disney Company  $45,600 
Titlemax  $43,250 
Geo Group  $42,850 
Barrick Gold Corp + subsidiaries  $42,500 
Nationwide Mutual Insurance Co  $42,250 
Union Pacific Corporation  $41,500 
Allstate Insurance + subsidiaries  $41,300 
Atmos Energy  $39,700 
Centurylink  $39,000 
Mednax Services  $38,050 
Publix Super Markets  $38,000 
Firstenergy Corp  $37,650 
CSX Corp  $37,150 
Eli Lilly & Co  $36,750 
Southwest Gas  $35,750 
Butler Snow Omara Stevens & Cannada  $35,600 
Cox Communications & Affiliated Entities  $35,500 
Frost Brown & Todd  $34,400 
Raytheon  $34,250 
Dentaquest  $33,200 
Bass Berry & Sims  $32,000 

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 23
Company NameTotal 
Contributions 
to Anti-Protest 
Bill Sponsors 
USAA  $31,950 
Verizon Communications  $31,900 
Salt River Project  $31,375 
D B H Management Consultants  $30,650 
Mag Mutual Insurance  $29,500 
Chevron Corp  $27,250 
East Carolina Anesthesia Associates  $27,000 
Troutman Sanders LLP  $26,640 
Queen Of Virginia Skill & Entertainment  $26,000 
Phillips 66  $25,610 
Wells Fargo  $24,500 
Caterpillar  $24,500 
Freeport Mcmoran Copper & Gold  $24,300 
IGS Ventures (IGS Energy)  $24,200 
Catalyst Public Affairs Group LLC  $23,838 
Adams & Reese  $23,150 
Exxon Mobil  $22,850 
National Healthcare Corp  $22,800 
Vistra Energy (FKA Energy Future Holdings)  $22,500 
Walgreen Co (Walgreens)  $22,186 Company NameTotal 
Contributions 
to Anti-Protest 
Bill Sponsors 
United Parcel Services / UPS  $22,000 
Humana  $21,500 
Molina Healthcare  $21,750 
Waller Lansden Dortch & Davis  $20,867 
Boeing Co  $20,500 
JM Family Enterprises  $20,250 
International Paper  $20,200 
Farris Mathews Branan Bobango & Hellen  $20,100 
Eastern Radiological  $20,000 
JES Contruction, Inc  $20,000 
Teco Energy (Emera)  $20,000 
Johnson & Johnson Services  $19,950 
Blue Cross Blue Shield Of North Carolina  $19,500 
Keystone Corp  $19,000 
Waste Management  $18,850 
Ameren Corp  $18,440 
Hunton Andrews Kurth LLC  $18,168 
Allen Allen Allen & Allen  $18,000 
Bradley Arant Boult & Cummings LLC  $17,750
Company NameTotal 
Contributions 
to Sponsors 
of both Anti-
Voting and 
Anti-Protest 
Bills
AT&T $47,250
Dominion Energy $36,000
Zurich North America + subsidiaries $22,750
Berkshire Hathaway  + subsidiaries $22,100
UnitedHealth Group $21,550
Mednax Services $21,500
Charter Communications $21,000
State Farm Insurance  + subsidiaries $19,200
Philip Morris USA $18,350
Vistra Energy (FKA Energy Future Holdings) + 
subsidiaries$17,500
Centene Corp  + subsidiaries $16,250Company NameTotal 
Contributions 
to Sponsors 
of both Anti-
Voting and 
Anti-Protest 
Bills
Pinnacle West (Arizona Public Service) $16,000
Amazon . com Services $15,750
Pfizer $15,250
Blackridge $15,000
Troutman Sanders LLP $14,840
Koch Industries $14,000
HILLCO Partners $13,250
Southern Company  + subsidiaries $12,930
USAA $12,600
RAI Services (Reynolds American) $12,500
COMCAST Corporation  + subsidiaries $12,300
Atmos Energy $11,500C Companies lobbying for critical infrastructure bills . 
» Methodology used to rank corporate lobbying  .
D Companies that gave the most to state sponsors of both types of bills . 
»	Methodology used  for state anti-voter research . 
Top Corporate Funders of State Legislators Who Sponsored Both Anti-Voter and Anti-Protest Bills

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 24
Company NameTotal 
Contributions 
to Sponsors 
of both Anti-
Voting and 
Anti-Protest 
Bills
The Friedkin Group $11,500
Marathon Petroleum $11,500
Federal Express / FedEx $11,100
Verizon Communications $11,000
Mcguirewoods Consulting $10,900
United Parcel Services / UPS $10,000
Keystone Corp $10,000
Walmart $9,750
Jack Daniel Distillery $9,500
Centerpoint Energy $9,000
Allen Boone Humphries Robinson $9,000
Williams Mullen $8,958
Switch Ltd $8,800
American Electric Power / AEP  + subsidiaries $8,750
Caterpillar $8,500
Mag Mutual Insurance $8,500
Kaiser Permanente $8,400
Enterprise Holdings $8,350
Raytheon $8,250
Tri Star Health System $8,000
Southwest Gas $7,950
Travelers Companies $7,750
Salt River Project $7,575
CIGNA $7,500
Hunton Andrews Kurth Llc $7,493
Duke Energy $7,400
CVS Caremark $7,250
Merck & Co $7,250
Anheuser-Busch Co $7,000Company NameTotal 
Contributions 
to Sponsors 
of both Anti-
Voting and 
Anti-Protest 
Bills
General Motors $7,000
Dentaquest $7,000
Geo Group $6,750
Titlemax $6,750
Linbarger Goggan Blair & Sampson $6,750
Wells Fargo $6,500
Energy Transfer LP $6,500
Zachry Corp $6,500
Facebook $6,000
Niagara Falls Redevelopment $6,000
Pro-Oil, Inc $6,000
Flexpac $6,000
National Fuel Gas $5,900
Delta Airlines $5,600
Correcthealth $5,600
3m Company $5,500
Home Depot $5,500
Landrys Restaurants $5,500
Publix Super Markets $5,500
Williams Companies $5,500
Vulcan Materials $5,500
American Pharmacy Inc $5,500
Genentech $5,400
Cox Communications & Affiliated Entities $5,250
Freeport Mcmoran Copper & Gold $5,250
International Paper $5,250
Election Graphics $5,200
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Georgia $5,100

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 25
Company Response to Capitol Riot# rank 
among 
companies 
giving to 
state anti-
voter bill 
sponsors
3M pause all state/fed $ for Q1 #207
Abbott Labs suspended all PAC donations  #65
Abbvie suspend all PAC donations  #154
Accenture paused all PAC contributions
ADM suspended contributions
AES suspended $ to members who voted 
to certify the results
Aflac paused contributions #109
Airbnb “withold support” for those voted 
against certification
Alaska Air Halt all federal candidate 
donations indefinitely
Allstate suspended $ to members who voted 
to certify the results#71
Altria suspended all contributions  #1
Amazon Suspended PAC $ to vote no cert 
caucus#25
American Airlines 3 month “pause” on campaign 
contributions#197
American Express No more PAC $ to those who vote 
against certificantion
American 
Investment 
Councilhalting all donations  
Amgen suspended contributions to all 
federal candidates indefinitely#165
AT&T Suspend contributions to members 
who voted to reject the vote#6
BASF “cutting off” $ to members who 
voted against certifying the results
Best Buy No more PAC $ to those who vote 
against certificantion
Blackrock Stopped politcal contributions
Bloomin’ Brands paused contributions  
Blue Cross Blue 
ShieldSuspended $ to those who 
challenged results#4
Boston Scientific Paused PAC contributions
Boeing paused political contributions #143
BP Halt PAC contributions for 6 months
Capital One suspend contributions #16
Cargill immediate and indefinite 
suspension
CBOE temporary pause
Charles Schwab Stopped contributions for rest of 
2021  (Shut down their PAC )
Cheniere pausing PAC contributions to 
individual candidates
Chubb Suspended allCompany Response to Capitol Riot# rank 
among 
companies 
giving to 
state anti-
voter bill 
sponsors
Cigna Suspended #54
Cisco no $ to 147 who voted not to certify 
the results
Citibank/
Citigroup3 Month Pause  
Clorox paused contributions
CME Group 
(Mercantile 
Exchange)Pause “for the forseeable future” 
Coca-Cola Suspended contributions (except 
inaugural comm) and condemned 
the violence#33
Comcast Suspended contributions to those 
voted against certifying election 
results#4
Commerce 
BanksharesSuspended contributions to “those 
who impeded a peaceful transfer of 
power”
ConocoPhillips Halting and reviewing its giving 
practices
Dell suspend contributions not in line 
with Dell’s principles  (Will not revisit 
their decision )
Deloitte Suspended political contributions
Disney Paused contributions in 2021 #83
Dow Chemical No PAC contributions for entire 21-
22 cycle#100
Duke Energy 30 day pause #34
Ebay suspended $ to members who voted 
to certify the results#193
Edward Jones paused contributions
Edison 
Internationalpause all congressional donations 
and indefinite freeze to those who 
voted to overn resutls
Eli Lilly suspend giving to those who voted 
against certification#40
Ernst & Young Suspended PAC contributions
Exelon No $ to members who objected to 
results#189
Expedia suspended donations #114
Facebook “pausing” for Q1 #48
First Energy pausing contriutions  (no timeline 
given )
Ford suspending its PAC #64
Freeport-
McMoRansuspended contributions and will 
review#52
Genentech “cutting off” $ to members who 
voted against certifying the results#138E Companies that suspended P AC contributions to members of Congress after Jan. 6 .
Corporations That Suspended PAC Contributions After Jan. 6 But Supported State Anti-Voter Bill Sponsors  
(full file here )

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 26
Company Response to Capitol Riot# rank 
among 
companies 
giving to 
state anti-
voter bill 
sponsors
General Electric No $ to members who objected to 
results
General Mills suspended $ to members who voted 
not to certify the results
Gilead Sciences Paused contributions
Goldman Sachs freezing all political donations
Google no contributions in this cycle to 
members who voted not to certify 
the results
H&R Block Halting PAC contributions
Hilton Suspended political contributions 
indefinitely
Honeywell suspended $ to members who 
objected  
Horizon paused contributions
Intel suspend donations to those voted 
against certifying the elections
Intercontinental 
Exchangesuspended PAC contributions 
indefinitely
Intuit suspended contributions #88
Investment 
Company 
InstituteTemporarily suspended all political 
contributions
Jacobs 
Engineering Suspended to all federal candidates 
indefinitely
JBS paused contributions
Jet Blue paused contributions
Johnson & 
Johnsonpaused contributions #93
JPMChase suspend donations for 6 months #141
KPMG KPMG said that they are “imposing 
a moratorium on contributions” to 
members of Congress who did not 
support election certification, and 
will re-evaluate their PAC giving
KraftHeinz suspended $ to members who voted 
to certify the results
Kroger paused contributions
Leidos paused contributions
Liberty Mutual paused contributions #77
Loan 
Syndications 
and Trading 
Association (bank 
and investment 
firm trade assn)Temporarily suspended all political 
contributions
Lockheed Martin suspended all contributions
Managed Funds 
Association 
(Hedge Fund 
trade assn)reassess PAC spending
Marathon 
Petroleumpaused contributions  (condemned 
the violence at the capitol )#28
Major League 
Baseball1st league to halt donations pending 
a reviewCompany Response to Capitol Riot# rank 
among 
companies 
giving to 
state anti-
voter bill 
sponsors
Marriott no $ to members who voted against 
election certification
Mass Mutual suspended contributions to any 
candidate who voted against 
certification
Mastercard Suspended PAC contributions to 
members who voted not to certify
McDonald’s condemned insurrection (PAC 
policy?)
Microsoft Stopped PAC contributions to 
members voted against election 
results  . (will “promote and join a 
conversation with other businesses” 
about “strengthening democracy. ” )#73
Morgan Stanley Stopped PAC contributions to 
members voted against election 
results
NASDAQ PAC will pause donations for 
next several months and halt 
contributions to any officials who 
voted to object
Newmont suspended $ to members who voted 
to certify the results
New York Life suspended $ to members who voted 
to certify the results
Nike Suspend PAC contributions to 
members who voted against 
certifying the results
Northrup 
GrummanPaused PAC contributions
Novo Nordisk Paused contributions
Occidental 
Petroleumpaused contributions
Oracle Suspended $ to anyone who voted 
against certifying the results
Pepsico suspending contributions pending 
review#104
PG&E suspended $ to members who voted 
to certify the results
PNC Financial 
Svcssuspended contributions
PPG no $ to members who voted against 
election certification
Pfizer 6 months stop on $ to members who 
voted against election certification#18
Price Waterhouse 
CoopersSuspend PAC contributions to 
members who voted against 
certifying the results
Public Service 
Enterprise Groupsuspended $ to members who voted 
to certify the results
Qurate Retail 
Groupsuspended $ to members who voted 
to certify the results
Raytheon pausing contributions #21
Safeway paused contributions
Sanofi “cutting off” $ to members who 
voted against certifying the results#115

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 27
Company Response to Capitol Riot# rank 
among 
companies 
giving to 
state anti-
voter bill 
sponsors
Smithfield paused federal camp contributions #31
Sony Music Indefinitely suspended 
contributions to those who voted 
against certifying the results
S & P Global Indefinitely suspended 
contributions to those who voted 
against certifying the results
Southern 
Companyno specifc commitment; no $ to 
members who don’t meet their 
“values”  
Spirit 
Aerosystemspaused contributions
State Street not support lawmakers who 
undermined democracy
Target paused contributions
Tyson Foods paused contributions
UBS suspended PAC contributions to 
members who voted not to certify
Union Pacific paused contributions #50
UnitedHealth 
GroupPause contributions to federal 
candidates#7
Universal Music 
GroupIndefinitely suspended 
contributions to those who voted 
against certifying the results
United Parcel 
Servicepausing contributions #39Company Response to Capitol Riot# rank 
among 
companies 
giving to 
state anti-
voter bill 
sponsors
Valero Energy pausing all contributions and 
evaluating#131
Verizon Suspend contributions to members 
who voted against certifying the 
results#5
ViacomCBS no $ to members who voted against 
election certification
Visa Temporarily suspended all political 
contributions#142
Walgreens Suspend contributions to members 
who voted against certifying the 
results#70
Walmart Indefinitely suspended 
contributions to those who voted 
against certifying the results#20
Warner Music 
GroupIndefinitely suspended 
contributions to those who voted 
against certifying the results
Wells Fargo suspended PAC contributions to 
members who voted not to certify#37
Zillow No $ to members who voted against 
election certification

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 28
1 Brennan Center for Justice, State Voting Laws Tracker, April 1, 2021 
(updated) . Link  . 
2 Reid J  . Epstein and Patricia Mazzei, “G .O .P  . Bills Target Protesters (and 
Absolve Motorists Who Hit Them), ” New York Times, April 22, 2021 . Link  . 
To find specific bills, see the International Center for Not-For-Profit Law’s 
US Protest Law Tracker  . 
3 See “Timeline: Oil and Gas Critical Infrastructure Anti-Protest Bills, ” 
Polluter Watch (Greenpeace) . Link , and International Center For 
Not-For-Profit Law US Protest Law Tracker.  Link ; Nora Benavidez and 
James Trager, “Arresting Dissent: Legislative Restrictions on the Right to 
Protest, ” PEN America, May 2020 .  Link  . 
4 “Fossil Fuel Racism, ” Greenpeace, April 14, 2021 . Link  . 
5 See Greenpeace, “Fossil Fuel Racism, ” section on climate impacts, 
especially the subsection titled “disproportionate impact  .” Link  . 
6 Ballew, M ., Maibach, E ., Kotcher, J  ., Bergquist, P  ., Rosenthal, S ., Marlon, 
J ., and Leiserowitz, A . (2020) . Which racial/ethnic groups care most about 
climate change? . Yale University and George Mason University  . New 
Haven, CT: Yale Program on Climate Change Communication . Link  . 
7 One such group was the Republican Attorneys General Association’s 
(RAGA) dark money fundraising division, the Rule of Law Defense Fund . 
Although RLDF does not disclose its funders, RAGA itself received funding 
in 2020 from companies mentioned in this report, including Koch 
Industries, Comcast, Pfizer and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, via its 
Institute for Legal Reform . Some companies including Walmart, Coca-
Cola and Comcast were reportedly reconsidering their relationship with 
RAGA after the Capitol Riot. See “Cash for the Coup: The Groups Behind 
Capital Riots Are Funded By Mainstream Conservative and Corporate 
Donors, ” Accountable . US Link  Months before the insurrection, reports 
emerged that individuals working for the oil/gas industry  in the Bakken 
region identified themselves as members of the Three Percenters , one of 
the anti-government militias that promoted  the “Stop the Steal” caravan 
to Washington, DC . 
8 Ryan Schleter, “How Oil and Gas Companies Funded an Attempted 
Coup, ” Greenpeace, January 11, 2021 .  Link ; Public Citizen, “Fossil Fuel 
Insurrectionists: Since 2016, 65 Fossil Fuel Corporate PACS Contributed 
$8 .8M to Members of Congress Who Denied Democracy and Supported 
Trump’s Push to Overturn the Election” January 27, 2021 . Link  . 
9 Ari Drennan and Sally Hardin, “Climate Deniers in the 117th Congress, ” 
Center for American Progress, May 30, 2021 . Link  . 
10 See, for example, Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, “ Captured: The 
Corporate Infiltration of American Democracy , ” New Press, 2019; 
“Kingpins of Carbon, ” Greenpeace, 2014 . Link ; Jane Mayer, Dark Money , 
Random House, 2016 . 
11 Mark Niesse, “Georgia voting restrictions challenged again in third 
federal lawsuit, ” Atlanta Journal-Constitution, March 30, 2021 . Link ; 
Alexander Ulmer, “Civil rights groups urge companies to join fight against 
Georgia voting restrictions, ” Reuters, March 5, 2021 . Link  . 
12 For more details, see our descriptions of the methodologies used for 
state  anti-voter legislation  and anti-protest legislation  . 
13 The 44, as well as the 80 companies that contributed $5,000 or more to 
these 44 bill sponsors in the most recent cycle can be found here  . See 
tabs 2 .1 and 2 .2 . 
14 See “2021 Anti-Protest Bills: Funding to Legislative Sponsors” 
(spreadsheet), Tab 2 .2: “Top Corp Funders of Anti-Voting & Anti-Protest  .” 
Link  . For a description of the methodology used for this list, go here  
(scroll down) . 15 See “We Stand For Democracy, ” Black Economic Alliance, April 14, 2021 
Link  . 
16 See “We Stand For Democracy  .” We suspect there are more since we 
looked exclusively at contributions to the primary sponsors of just 43 of 
the 361 state anti-voter bills introduced by the end of March, within the 
most recent election cycle (2019-2020) . See notes on methodology  . 
17 While we count at least 130 companies , a survey of senior corporate 
representatives by the Conference Board concluded that hundreds more 
temporarily stopped making PAC contributions without announcing it 
publicly  . See “Corporate PACs Took Unprecedented Action by Broadly 
Suspending Political Contributions Following Capitol Riot” (Press 
Release), February 12, 2021 . Link  . 
18 See column E in  this spreadsheet  . We analyzed campaign contributions 
to sponsors of 43 state anti-voter bills  . Since there were 361 state anti-
voter bills identified by the Voting Rights Lab  and Brennan Center  by the 
end of March (and more since), the number of companies is likely much 
greater  . 
19 Laura Strickler and Lisa Cavazuti, “Republican AG group sent robocalls 
urging march on the Capitol, ” NBC News, January 7, 2021 . Link  . The 36 
companies were identified by cross-checking the list of contributors to 
the sponsors of state anti-protest legislation ( link ) with a list of RAGA 
2020 donors posted by Documented . Link  Also see Robert O’Harrow Jr  ., 
“Rallies ahead of Capital riot were planned by established Washington 
insiders, ” Washington Post, January 17, 2021 . Link  America First Action, 
another group involved in the January 6 riot, receives funding from 
companies including Fanjul Corp (makers of Florida Crystals sugar) and 
Vital Pharmaceuticals (makers of Bang energy drinks) . See Ciara Torres-
Spelliscy, “Follow the Money Behind the Capitol Riot, ” Brennan Center 
for Justice, January 25, 2021 . Link  . 
20 Companies identified by cross-checking companies lobbying for state 
anti-protest bills (link ) with RAGA donor list posted on Documented . 
Link  The 8 are Koch Industries, Marathon Petroleum, Exxon Mobil, BNSF, 
Valero, CenterPoint Energy, CenturyLink, and TC Energy/TransCanada . 
Another 8 RAGA donor companies - Chevron, Duke Energy, AEP , NextEra, 
Charter Communications, Entergy, Nucor Steel and Verizon - have 
lobbied for anti-protest bills in at least 1 state . 
21 See U  .S . Chamber, “Key Vote Alert” to members of the U  .S . Senate, April 
13, 2021 .  Link  . 
22 U .S . Chamber of Commerce, “Executive Leadership: Board of Directors” 
(Link ) . The list of board members can be found here: Link  . 
23 See “Trade Association Lobbying” tab in the Greenpeace spreadsheet 
ranking corporate lobbying for state anti-protest laws . Link  . 
24 TargetSmart, “August 7, 2020 - The Impact of Covid & the Civil Rights 
Movement on Voter Registration, ” August 7, 2020 . Link  . 
25 Jane C . Timm, “Voter registration surged during BLM protests, study 
finds, ” NBC News, August 11, 2020.  Link  . 
26 Michael Latner, “Building a Healthier Democracy: The Link between 
Voting Rights and Environmental Justice” (report), Union of Concerned 
Scientists Center for Science and Democracy, August  . Link
27 Zack Beauchamp, “Yes, the Georgia election law is that bad, ” Vox, April 6, 
2021 . Link  . For the bill’s text see GA 202 . For summaries of specific state 
anti-voter bills, with links to the bill text, see the Voting Rights Lab’s State 
Voting Rights Tracker  . 
28 Dahlia Lithwick, “Corporations Bet on Both Parties, and Our Democracy, ” 
April 13, 2021 . Link  . Endnotes

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 29
29 Hannah Denham and Jena McGregor, “Georgia sports teams and major 
companies such as Coca-Cola and Delta Air Lines condemn new state 
voting law, ” Washington Post, March 31, 2021 . Link  . 
30 The Brennan Center for Justice, Voting Laws Roundup: March 2021 . Link  . 
31 Arizona H 2793  . 
32 Nevada A 134  . 
33 Arizona S .B . 1503 ; Colorado S 7; Georgia H 325 ; Georgia S 71 ; Georgia S 
241; Pennsylvania  H 25  and S 402  . 
34 Georgia H 270 ; Georgia S 202 ; Iowa SF 413 ; North Carolina S 326 ; Arizona 
S 1713 ; Colorado H 1086 ; Michigan S .B . 285 ; Virginia  H 1970 ; Wisconsin S 
204 . 
35 Michigan S .B . SB 287  .
36 South Carolina H 3771 ; Arizona S 1593 ; Fluorida S 90 ; Georgia S 202 ; Iowa 
HF 590 ; Iowa SF 413 ; Michigan S .B . 286 ; Wisconsin S 209  .
37 Michigan H 4127 ; South Carolina S 365  .
38 Arizona H .B . 2302 ; Arizona S 1068  . See “A Democracy Crisis in the Making: 
How State Legislatures Are Politicizing, Criminalizing, and Interfering 
With Election Administration, ” Protect Democracy, April 22, 2021 . Link  . 
39 Florida  S 90  . 
40 Amy Gardner and Amy Wang, “Georgia governor signs into law sweeping 
voting bill that curtails the use of drop boxes and imposes new ID 
requirements for mail voting, ” Washington Post, March 25, 2021 . Link  . 
41 “Black Church Leaders in Georgia on the Importance of ‘Souls to the 
Polls, ” NPR (Morning Edition), March 22, 2021 . Link  . 
42 “Black Executives Call On Corporations to Fight Restrictive Voting Laws, ” 
Black Economic Alliance, March 31, 2021 .  Link  . 
43 Hannah Denham and Jenna McGregor, “HP , Dow, Under Armour among 
nearly 200 companies speaking out against voting law changes in Texas, 
other states, ” Washington Post, April 2, 2021 . Link  .
44 “Joint Statement on Protecting Voting Access, ” Civic Alliance, April 2, 
2021 . Link  . 
45 “We Stand For Democracy, ” Black Economic Alliance, April 14, 2021 Link  . 
46 We suspect there are more since we looked exclusively at the primary 
sponsors of just 43 of the 361 anti-voter bills introduced by the end of 
March . See notes on methodology  . 
47 The results can be found here  . A more detailed description of the 
methodology used can be found here  . In a similar, but broader analysis, 
Public Citizen found that since 2015 corporations have contributed $50 
million to state legislators supporting voter suppression bills, including 
$22 million during the 2020 election cycle . See Public Citizen, “The 
Corporate Sponsors of Voter Suppression, ” April 2021 . Link  . 
48 A longer list of companies that contributed to sponsors of these state 
anti-voter bills is included in this spreadsheet: Link  .
49 Jennifer Tonti and Jill Mizell, “As the 2020 Election Approaches, 
Americans Say Companies Have a Role to Play in Upholding and 
Protecting Democracy, ” JUST Capital, October 2020 . Link  . 
50 For a list of companies that suspended PAC contributions, go here  . 
According to the Conference Board, many more corporate PACs 
suspended contributions than were reported or revealed . “Survey: 
Corporate PACs Took Unprecedented Action by Broadly Suspending 
Political Contributions Following Capitol Riot, ” The Conference Board, 
February 12, 2021 . Link  . 
51 “Survey: Corporate PACs Took Unprecedented Action by Broadly 
Suspending Political Contributions Following Capitol Riot, ” The 
Conference Board, February 12, 2021 . Link  . For a list of companies that 
suspended PAC contributions, go here  . According to the Conference 
Board, many more corporate PACs suspended contributions than were 
reported or revealed . 52 See column E in this spreadsheet  . 
53 The Center for Political Accountability and Zicklin Center for Business 
Ethics Research’s Model Code of Conduct for Business Political Spending  
requires  that companies disclose payments made to trade associations 
that it anticipates being used for political expenditures, and that the 
company require such associations to report how they are used and 
the candidates whom the spending supports . Although companies are 
currently not required to do so, the 2020 CPA-Zicklin Index  found that 
corporate political spending disclosure is on the rise . 
54 Center for Responsive Politics . US Chamber of Commerce  . 
55 Alyssa Katz, The Influence Machine , Random House, 2015 . See also 
Chamber Watch , Public Citizen . 
56 Center for Responsive Politics . Link  . 
57 See, for example, lobbying disclosure reports filed  by the U  .S . Chamber 
with the Senate .
58 See U  .S . Chamber, “Key Vote Alert” to members of the U  .S . House, March 
2, 2021 . Link ; and U  .S . Chamber, “Key Vote Alert” to members of the U  .S . 
Senate, April 13, 2021 .  Link  . 
59 See U  .S . Chamber, “Key Vote Alert” to members of the U  .S . House, March 
2, 2021 . Link ; and U  .S . Chamber, “Key Vote Alert” to members of the U  .S . 
Senate, April 13, 2021 .  Link  . 
60 Jane Mayer, “Inside the Koch-Backed Effort to Block the Largest Election-
Reform Bill in Half a Century, ” New Yorker, March 29, 2021 .  Link  . Polling 
released to the public confirms that the vast majority of Americans — 
across the political spectrum — support the reforms contained in both 
the For The People Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement 
Act (H .R . 4) . See Newsweek , “As GOP Opposes H .R . 1, Poll Finds Majority 
of Republicans Support Election Reform Bill, ” February 25, 2021
61 Relevant section of the bill  . For a summary see Brennan Center’s 
annotated guide to the For The People Act, Subtitle B (Congressional 
Elections), Part 2 - Small Donor Financing . Link  . 
62 Glenn Kessler, Fact Checker, “ Washington Post, March 18, 2019 . Link  . The 
text of the relevant section is here  . It should also be pointed out that the 
Chamber is hardly in the position to be lecturing members of Congress 
about how taxpayer funds are used, given how many of its members 
have paid little to no taxes in recent years . See Citizens for Tax Justice’s 
analysis for 2018  and 2020  . A positive result of this provision is that it 
would create a kind of virtuous circle that rewards candidates for being 
less dependent upon wealthy individuals and companies for the funds 
needed to run a viable campaign, and therefore less beholden to them 
once they are in office, making them more likely to work to ensure that 
laws holding companies accountable are strongly enforced . 
63 Although the Chamber does not disclose its members, we were able to 
determine that well over half of the top corporate contributors to state 
sponsors of anti-voter legislation are members of the Chamber  . To check 
specific companies see companies’ own reports to shareholders, the 
Public Citizen 2017 “Chamber of Secrets” report , and the Chamber’s 
current and past list of members of its board of directors  . Additional 
evidence of membership can be deduced from participation in the 
Chamber’s overseas business councils , as well as awards and news 
references by the Chamber’s Foundation . 
64 Scott Horsley, “Companies Quit the U  .S . Chamber Over Climate Policy, ” 
All Things Considered (NPR), October 6, 2009 . Link  . Although Exelon 
announced it would also leave the Chamber over its climate policy, 
the company gave the Chamber $250,000 in 2017 . Link  . In 2020, a new 
student-led campaign called Change the Chamber  was launched to 
pressure the Chamber and calling on members companies such to either 
quit the Chamber or push it to end is pro-fossil fuel lobbying . See Sharon 
Kelly, “After Calling for Climate Action, US Chamber of Commerce Pushes 
Pro-Fossil Fuel Agenda, ” DeSmogBlog , September 29, 2020 . 

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 30
65 U .S . Chamber of Commerce, “Executive Leadership: Board of Directors” 
(Link ) . Full list of board members: Link  . A list of Chamber board members 
and other member companies, indicating which endorsed the “We Stand 
for Democracy” statement can be found here  . 
66 A partial list of U  .S . Chamber members can be found here  . 
67 Constitutional scholars point out that the Supreme Court has repeatedly 
emphasized that political speech receives the maximum protection 
under the First Amendment  . See, e .g ., Grace Nosek, The Fossil Fuel 
Industry’s Push to Target Climate Protesters in the U  .S ., 38 Pace Envtl . L . 
Review 53, esp  . Footnote 23 . Link  . As Nosek points out, whether or not 
specific legislation violates the First Amendment, “taken together, ” the 
pattern of legislation and related activities, including lawsuits against 
protesters and their supporters “threatens to profoundly chill free speech 
and democratic engagement in a critical moment for climate action . 
Indeed, some have argued that the intent behind many of these tactics is 
the unconstitutional deterrence of climate protest  .” 
68 “U .S . Current Trend: New Wave of Legislation Targeting Black Lives 
Matter Protesters“ International Center for Not-For-Profit Law, January 
15, 2021 . Link  . 
69 Brennan Center for Justice, “Anti-Protest Laws Threaten Indigenous 
and Climate Movements, ” March 21, 2021 . Link  . Other states where 
the legislation was supported by the industry include West Virginia, 
Louisiana and Minnesota . See Gabrielle Colchete and Basav Sen, 
“Muzzling Dissent: How Corporate Influence Over Politics Has Fueled 
Anti-Protest Laws, ” Institute for Policy Studies, October 2020 . Link  . For 
analysis of specific anti-protest legislation see the International Center 
for Non-For-Profit Law anti-protest  tracker  .
70 See International Center for Not-For-Profit Law (ICNL), “U.S. Current 
Trend: New Wave of Legislation Targeting Black Lives Matter Protesters . ” 
(link )
71 As of April 30, 2021, three federal and 94 state anti-protest bills have been 
introduced since May 2020 . Six of the state bills were enacted into law  . 
See ICNL bill  tracker  .
72 Erica Chenoweth and Jeremy Pressman, “This summer’s Black Lives 
Matter protesters were overwhelmingly peaceful, our research finds; 
Police and counterprotesters sometimes started violence, ” Washington 
Post, October 10, 2020 . Link  . 
73 Nicole Narea, “Why progressives are lining up against new criminal 
penalties for domestic terrorism, ” Vox March 22, 2021 . Link ; Robert 
O’Harrow et al ., “The rise of domestic extremism in America, ” Washington 
Post, April 13, 2021 . Link  . 
74 Examples include Alabama H .B . 445; Florida H .B . 1; Tennessee S .B . 451 ; 
Wisconsin S .B . 296 . Detailed analysis of these and other bills can be 
found on the  ICNL tracker  . 
75 See Indiana General Assembly digest of the bill . Link  .
76 ICNL, Analysis of Indiana H .B . 1205 .  Link  . 
77 See, for example, International Center for Not-For-Profit-Law, “Critical 
Infrastructure Bills: Targeting Protesters Through Extreme Penalties, ” 
2019 . Link  . 
78 Alabama H .B . 94 allows protesters who disrupt a public speech while 
committing another infraction (e .g . trespassing) to be charged with a 
Class B felony, punishable by up to 20 years in prison . Link
79 Sam Levin and Will Parrish, “Keystone XL: Police discussed stopping 
anti-pipeline activists ‘by any means’ , ” The Guardian, November 25, 2019 . 
Link ; Will Parish and Jason Wilson, “Revealed: anti-terror center helped 
police track environmental activists, ” The Guardian, October 2, 2019 . 
Link  . 
80 Jack Evans et al ., “DeSantis’ protest bill questioned by Tampa Bay’s top 
cops, not just ‘far left’ , ” Tampa Bay Times, September 23, 2020. Link  . 81 See summary description of H .B . 1/S .B . 484, ICNL anti-protest bill tracker  . 
Link  . 
82 Nancy Metayer, “Gov  . Ron DeSantis’ H .B . 1 is un-American, ” Florida 
Politics, March 10, 2021 . Link  . 
83 Florida News Service, “Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, AG and sheriff sued 
over protest crackdown by civil rights attorneys, ” April 21, 2021 . Link .
84 Eileen Kelly, “Sheriff’s Office backs away from anti-riot law; Executive 
director worried that civil rights could be violated, ” South Florida Sun-
Sentinel, April 23, 2021 .  Link  . 
85 Brian Kahn, “Montana Is About to Become the Most Dangerous Place in 
America to Protest Fossil Fuels, ” Gizmodo, April 30, 2021 . Link  . Bill text is 
available here  . See analysis by ICNL Link  . 
86 See ICNL analysis of H .B . 1295, available  here  .
87 See ICNL analysis of S .B . 198, available here  . 
88 See ICNL analysis of H .B . 321, available here  . 
89 Link  . 
90 ICNL bill tracker  . Link  . 
91 Grace Nosek, The Fossil Fuel Industry’s Push to Target Climate Protesters 
in the U  .S ., 38 Pace Envtl . L . Review 53, page 70 . Link  .
92 See ICNL bill tracker description for Indiana S .B .198 . Link  . 
93 Grace Hauck, “Cars have hit demonstrators 104 times since George Floyd 
protests began, ” USA Today, September 27, 2020 (Updated) . Link  . 
94 Florida H .B . 1/S .B . 484, the bill enacted into law and signed by Gov  . 
DeSantis on April 19, 2021, “creates a new affirmative defense in civil 
lawsuits for personal injury, death, or property damage, such that a 
defendant could avoid liability by establishing that the injury, death, or 
damage they committed “arose from” conduct by someone “acting in 
furtherance of a riot  .” Oklahoma H.B. 1674 , which was enacted into law, 
shields drivers from civil or criminal liability who injure or kill someone 
while “fleeing from a riot, ” as long as they did so “unintentionally, ” 
were “exercising due care, ” and held a “reasonable belief” that they 
needed to flee to protect themselves. Another bill introduced in Florida 
(S.B. 1096/H.B. 1419 ) would have eliminated driver liability for hitting 
protesters . In Iowa, SF 534 : would provide immunity from civil liability 
for drivers who injures someone who is participating in a “protest, 
demonstration, riot, or unlawful assembly, ” engaging in “disorderly 
conduct, ” and blocking traffic, as long as the driver was exercising “due 
care” and the protester did not have a permit to be in the street  . A similar 
bill (HF 251) was introduced in the Iowa House . As of this writing, similar 
driver immunity bills are pending in Missouri (S .B . 66; H .B . 56), Nevada 
(AB 168), Tennessee (H .B . 513/S .B . 843) and Washington State (S .B . 5456; 
S .B . 5310) . Others have been introduced and defeated or withdrawn in 
Mississippi (S .B . 2374), Kentucky (H .B . 53), North Dakota (H .B . 1203) and 
other states . See ICNL anti-protest bill tracker  . Link  
95 Rosanna Smart et al ., “The Science of Gun Policy, ” RAND Corporation, 
2020 . Link
96 “‘Open Season’: Heather Heyer’s Mother Slams New Laws Giving 
Immunity to Drivers Who Hit Protesters, ” Democracy Now, April 26, 2021 .  
Link  . 
97 “U .S . Downgraded as Civic Freedoms Deteriorate, ” CIVICUS, December 8, 
2020 . Link  . 
98 Former UN Special Rapporteur, “Country Visit: United States of America, ” 
2016 . Link  . 
99 For the full list of 100 companies, see “2021 Anti-Protest Bills: Funding to 
Legislative Sponsors” ( Google sheet ) . Contributions were limited to the 
most recent election cycle (2019-2020) . A more detailed explanation of 
the methodology used can be found here  .

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY  | 31
100 Berkshire Hathaway has a few subsidiaries that are heavily involved with 
fossil fuels, including utilities — MidAmerican, Pacificorp, NV Energy. 
BNSF Railway (another subsidiary) hauls coal, and the company is also 
invested  in other fossil fuel companies .
101 NextEra not only uses fossil fuels for their generation fleet, but they are 
an investor in the Mountain Valley Pipeline . 
102 For a detailed description, chronology and list of recently introduced 
“critical infrastructure” bills, along with a bibliography of media reports 
and & references, see Connor Gibson, “State Bills to Criminalize Peaceful 
Protest of Oil & Gas “Critical Infrastructure, ” PolluterWatch (Greenpeace), 
updated February 23, 2021 .  Link  . 
103 Matea Gold, “Ready for a surprise? Money DOES equal access in 
Washington, ” Washington Post, March 11, 2014 .  Link  . 
104 Lee Drutman, The Business of America is Lobbying , Oxford University 
Press, 2015 . 
105 Connor Gibson, “Ranking Companies Lobbying for State Anti-Protest 
Laws, 2017-2021” Link  . 
106 https://www  .stopline3 . org/  
107 Will Parrish and Alleen Brown, “How Police, Private Security, and Energy 
Companies are Preparing for a New Pipeline Standoff, ” The Intercept, 
1/30/19 . Link  . For more about anti-protest bills in Minnesota, including 
related lobbying by Enbridge, see PolluterWatch page on anti-protest 
bills in Minnesota . Link  . 
108 Mike Hughlett, “Proposed Minnesota law targets those who train or 
recruit protesters who damage ‘critical infrastructure’ , ” Star Tribune, 
April 7, 2018 . Link  . Information about MN 1558 can be found on the state 
legislature’s website . Link  . 
109 Gabrielle Colchete and Basav Sen, “Muzzling Dissent: How Corporate 
Influence Over Politics Has Fueled Anti-Protest Laws, ” Institute for Policy 
Studies, October 2020 .  Link  Alleen Brown and Will Parrish, New Arrests 
Under New Anti-Protest Law Spotlight Risks That Off-Duty Cops Pose to 
Pipeline Opponents, ” The Intercept, August 22, 2018 . Link  . 
110 David Hasemyer, “Marathon Reaches Deal with Investors on Human 
Rights . Standing Rock Hoped for More . ” Inside Climate News, February 
13, 2018 . Link . 
111 Drew Costley, “The blackest city in the US is facing an environmental 
justice nightmare, ” The Guardian, January 9, 2020 . Link  . 
112 Erin Cox and Gregory S . Schneider, “Energy companies abandon long-
delayed Atlantic Coast Pipeline, ” Washington Post, June 5, 2020 .  Link  . 
113 Mark Heffinger, “TRANSCANADA CALLS NEBRASKA RANCHERS AGRESSIVE 
AND ABUSIVE, TALKS OF TERRORISM“ Bold Nebraska, June 11, 2013 . 
Link  . 
114 Phil McKenna, “South Dakota Backs Off Harsh New Protest Law and ‘Riot-
Boosting’ Penalties, ” Inside Climate News, October 25, 2019 .  Link  . 
115 Tyler Crowe, “Here’s How Valero’s Management Thinks Trump’s Policies 
Will Impact The Business, ” Motley Fool, February 1, 2017 . Link  . 
116 Tim Donaghy, “Valero Energy: Blocking Climate Solutions, Taking 
Subsidies, ” Greenpeace, September 21, 2020 . Link  . 
117 The emails can be seen here  . More about the bill can be found on 
PolluterWatch  . 
118 Connor Gibson, Ranking Companies’ Lobbying for State Anti-Protest 
Laws, 2017-2021 . Link  Campaign contributions: See our campaign 
contributions analysis  . 
119 “Texas — Oil and Gas Infrastructure Bills, ” PolluterWatch (Updated March 
5, 2020) . Link  . 
120 Frank Hopper, “‘Kill the bill! Save the land!’ Native protectors disrupt 
Texas legislature, ” Indian Country Today, May 10, 2019 . Link  . 121 David Voorman, Senior Policy Analyst for Free Speech and Peace, 
Americans for Prosperity, “‘Anti-Riot’ Measures Open a Wide Door to 
Censorship, ” Newsweek, March 9, 2021 . Link  . Text of the bill is here  . 
122 Jennifer A . Dlouhy, “Industry Flexes Muscle In States To Criminalize 
Peaceful Protests, ” Insurance Journal, August 20, 2019 .  Link  . 
123 “Koch Industries leads industry effort to kill 9/11 legislation, ” Greenpeace 
USA, August 24, 2011 . Link  
124 “Preventing Chemical Disasters, ” Greenpeace . Link  . 
125 John Aloysius Farrell et al ., “Since 9/11, Koch Industries Has Fought 
Against Tougher Government Rules on Chemical Plants, ” Center for 
Public Integrity, May 19, 2014 (updated) . Link  . 
126 Rick Hind and Mae Stevens (Greenpeace) Testimony before the Senate 
Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee, March 3, 2010.  
Link  . 
127 See DeSmogBlog  profile of AFPM  . Members of AFPM include Koch 
Industries, Marathon Petroleum, Chevron, ExxonMobil, and Valero  .
128 See the “Trade Association Lobbying” (second tab) in the anti-protest 
lobbying spreadsheet  . 
129 Lee Fang, “Oil Lobbyist Touts Success in Criminalizing Pipeline Protests, 
Leaked Recording Shows, ” The Intercept , August 19, 2019 . Link
130 Gin Armstrong and Derek Seidman, “Fossil Fuel Industry Pollutes Black 
& Brown Communities While Propping Up Racist Policing, ” LittleSis, July 
27, 2020 . Link  . Nina Lakhani, “Revealed: oil giants help fund powerful 
police groups in top US cities, ” Guardian, July 27, 2020 . Link  .  . 
131 Alleen Brown and Will Parrish, “Recent Arrests Under New Anti-Protest 
Law Spotlight Risks That Off-Duty Cops Pose to Pipeline Opponents, ” 
The Intercept, August 18, 2018 . Link ; Karen Savage, “Louisiana Law 
Enforcement Officers Are Moonlighting for a Controversial Pipeline 
Company, ” The Appeal, August 28, 2018 . Link
132 Alleen Brown, Will Parrish and Alice Speri, “Dakota Access-Style Policing 
Moves to Pennsylvania’s Mariner East 2 Pipeline, ” The Intercept, June 21, 
2017 . Link  . 
133 Ohio Senate Bill 33, “ LInk  . 
134 Sarah Lazare and Simon Davis-Cohen, “Fossil Fuel Companies Are 
Enlisting Police to Crack Down on Protesters, ” In These Times, April 16, 
2019 . Link  . Alexander C . Kaufman, “Ohio Quietly Passes a Bill That Could 
Bankrupt Churches Linked to Fossil Fuel Protests, ” Huffington Post, 
December 19, 2020 .  Link  . 
135 The Lobbyist was Andrew Huffman. See Polluter Watch  . 
136 For examples go here  and here  . 
137 Ifeoma Ajunwa, “Can We Trust Corporate Commitments to Racial 
Equity?” Forbes, February 23, 2021 . Link
138 See “Talking About Race, ” National Museum of African American History 
and Culture . Link ; Lauren Weber, “Companies Have Promised $35 Billion 
Toward Racial Justice . Where is the Money Going?” Wall Street Journal, 
December 21, 2020 . Link  . For an analysis of recent corporate actions 
see Earl Fitzhugh et al ., “It’s time for a new approach to racial equity, ” 
McKinsey & Company, December 2, 2020 .  Link  . 
139 For an incomplete list of such companies go here  . We know there are 
many more companies than those on our list since a Conference Board 
survey of executives found that “only about a quarter of companies 
publicly announced their PACs’ response to the events of January 6th . ” 
The Conference Board reported that many companies explained that 
they suspended their contributions out of concern for their reputation . 
See “Survey: Corporate PACs Took Unprecedented Action by Broadly 
Suspending Political Contributions Following Capitol Riot, ” The 
Conference Board, February 12, 2021 . Link  .

DOLLARS VS. DEMOCRACY: COMPANIES AND THE 
ATTACK ON VOTING RIGHTS AND PEACEFUL PROTEST
MAY 2021140 In 2014, two eminent political scientists published the results of an 
examination of 1,779 cases of proposed changes in federal policy, including  
369 in which “mass-based interest groups took a stand, ” reaching the  
conclusion that “majorities of the American public actually have little 
influence over the policies our government adopts.  Americans do enjoy  
many features central to democratic governance, such as regular elections,  
freedom of speech and association, and a widespread (if still contested) 
franchise.  But we believe that if policymaking is dominated by powerful 
business organizations and a small number of affluent Americans, then 
America’s claims to being a democratic society are seriously threatened . ” 
Martin Gilens and Benjamin I . Page, “Testing Theories of American 
Politics: Elites, Interest Groups, and Average Citizens, ” Perspectives 
on Politics  , Volume 12  , Issue 3  , September 2014 , pp  . 564 - 581 . Link  . 
This was seven years ago, before the attack on such “features central 
to democratic governance” described in this report had become the 
legislative priority of one of America’s two major political parties . 
141 For a list go here  . 
142 “U .S . Chamber CEO Statement on Presidential Transition, January 12, 
2021 . Link  . The National Association of Manufacturers denounced the 
“armed thugs” that attacked the Capitol, describing it as “sedition” and 
calling upon VP Pence to consider invoking the 25th Amendment to 
remove Trump from office. “Manufacturers Call on Armed Thugs to Cease 
Violence at Capitol, ” January 6, 2021 . Link  
143 “Black Executives Call on Corporations to Fight Restrictive Voting Laws,“ 
Black Economic Alliance, March 31, 2021 . Link ; “We Stand for Democracy, ’ 
Black Economic Alliance, April 14, 2021 . Link  . 
144 They can do this by endorsing Business for Voting Rights’ “Business 
Letter to Congress in Support of the VRAA . ” Link  .
145 End Citizens United, “New Poll: Overwhelming Majority of Americans 
Support the For the People Act, ” March 2, 2021 .  Link ; Equal Citizens 
and Data for Progress, “The For The People Act is extremely popular 
among the American people, ” April 27, 2021 . Link  . In addition to issuing 
their own statement of support, companies can express support for the 
For The People Act (H .R . 1/S . 1) by endorsing the statement of support 
sponsored by the Declaration for American Democracy (DFAD) coalition . 
Link , and 2) By joining Fair Fight Action’s call to ”Endorse/Speak Out to 
Support S1 and VRAA”  by publicly releasing a statement of support for 
these two bills, addressed to members of Congress . Link  .
146 “Corporate Leaders Urged to Wade Into Debates Over Voting Laws, ” April 
12, 2021 . Link  . 147 The Voting Rights Lab’s legislative bill tracker includes a comprehensive 
list of state anti-voter bills, along with bill sponsors and status . Link  . The 
Brennan Center’s State Voting Bills Tracker is another useful source .  Link  . 
148 Karl Evers-Hillstrom, “Impact of corporate PAC promises may be limited, ” 
Center for Responsive Politics, January 14, 2021 . Link  . 
149 Anna Massoglia, “Corporations Rethinking PACs Leave the Door to ‘dark 
money’ open, ” Center for Responsive Politics, January 15, 2021 . Link  . 
150 Ephrat Livni , Lauren Hirsch  and Andrew Ross Sorkin , “Money in Politics, 
One Month Later, ” New York Times, February 6, 2021 . Link  .For a detailed 
description of specific forms of corporate political spending see the 
Center for Political Accountability, CPA-Zicklin Index  . Link  . 
151 “50+ Groups Sign Open Letter to Corporate America, ” Public Citizen, 
January 27, 2021 . Link  
152 “H .R . 1 — For The People Act: Impact of Select H .R .1 Policy Changes on 
Black and Brown Political Power” (powerpoint), Demos . Link  . 
153 The For the People Act includes provisions introduced in the DISCLOSE 
Act of 2019 .  Link  . 
154 See CPA-Wharton-Zicklin “Model Corporate Code of Conduct for Political 
Spending . ” Link  
155 Elizabeth Hira, ” The For The People Act is America’s Next Great Civil 
Rights Bill, ” Brennan Center for Justice, March 1, 2021 . Link  . 
156 US Chamber, “Executive Leadership: Board of Directors . ” Link  . U .S . 
Chamber of Commerce, “Board of Directors, ” accessed on April 20, 2021 .  
Link  . “Other companies that signed the statement and appear to be U  .S .  
Chamber of Commerce members include Facebook, Target, General 
Motors, Johnson & Johnson, and Merck, according to a reporter for  
Sludge . See Donald Shaw, “These Companies Claim to Support Expanding  
Voting Rights . Their Actions Say Otherwise, ” Sludge, April 14, 2021 . Link  .
157 A list of Chamber members indicating which signed the statement is 
available here  . 
158 State and regional chambers of commerce have done in at least six 
states . See “Trade Association Lobbying” in the Greenpeace anti-protest 
lobbying spreadsheet  . Link  .