# Archivo original: dollars-vs-democracy-2.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:38 -03 2025

702 H Street, NW, Suite 300, Washington, DC 20001 
Tel: 202-462-1177  Fax: 202-462-4507 
1-800-326-0959  www.greenpeaceusa.org 
Before the 
Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee 
U.S. Senate 
on 
“CHEMICAL SECURITY: ASSESSING PROGRESS AND CHARTING  A PATH 
FORWARD” 
Testimony of: 
Rick Hind, Legislative Director 
Mae Stevens, Policy Analyst 
Greenpeace 
HOMELAND SECURITY REGULATIONS (CFATS) ARE WHOLLY IN ADEQUATE 
COMPREHENSIVE LEGISLATION IS ESSENTIAL TO SECURITY 
INHERENTLY SAFER TECHNOLGIES 
WILL ELIMINATE THE CATASTROPHIC CONSEQUENCES OF AN ATTACK 
March 3, 2010 


2"There are other ways to reduce risk that need to b e part of the 
equation. Specifically, by employing safer technolo gies, we can 
reduce the attractiveness of chemical plants as a t arget." 
--- Senator Barack Obama, March 30, 2006 
“It’s time for the big chemical companies to do the ir part to help protect America.
They should stop manufacturing dangerous chemicals when safer substitutes are 
available.  And if they won’t do it, Congress shoul d do it for them...” 
--- Association of American Railroads, February 27,  2008 
CONVENTIONAL SECURITY IS NOT ENOUGH 
The September 11th terrorist attacks successfully u sed our own infrastructure against us 
with tragic results. They also demonstrated that ti ght perimeter security, such as in the 
case of the Pentagon, is incapable of preventing su ch attacks. Should a chemical plant
be targeted, a truck bomb, a small plane, helicopte r or a high powered rifle would easily 
render the industry’s current reliance on fence-lin e security totally useless. In fact, U.S.
chemical facilities have been referred to by then S enator Obama on the Senate floor as 
“stationary weapons of mass destruction.” 
The recent domestic terrorist attack on an Internal  Revenue Service (IRS) office building 
in Austin is a sobering reminder of the nearly nine  years of neglect following the 9/11 
attacks. The vulnerability of U.S. chemical plants to terrorism and serious accidents such 
as the 1984 disaster in Bhopal, India and in 2008 i n Institute, West Virgina have been 
widely recognized. The potential magnitude of these  risks far surpasses the 9/11 
attacks. Once released these chemicals and gases ca n remain dangerous for up to 14 
miles in an urban area (20 miles in a rural area) a nd put the lives of millions of 
Americans at risk. A December 2009 Congressional Re search Service analysis of 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) data identifi ed 91 chemical facilities that each 
put 1,000,000 or more Americans at risk. 
The nature of these risks meets any definition of a  weapon of mass destruction. The 
manner in which people would be killed and injured is terrifying. Poison gases such as 
chlorine will literally melt the lungs of its victi ms causing them to drown in their own lung 
fluid (pulmonary edema). Survivors could be left wi th life long disorders. 
Following the 9/11 attacks it was reported that 9/1 1 ringleader, Mohamed Atta, visited a 
Tennessee chemical plant asking lots of questions ( December 16, 2001 Washington 
Post). In the first six months of 2007 at least fiv e successful terrorist attacks in Iraq used 
relatively small (150 to 250 pound) cylinders of ch lorine gas to kill dozens of people. As 
a result the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) began briefing local bomb squads 
and chemical plants across the country. (April 24, 2007 USA Today) In February and 
April of 2007 thefts of 150 pound cylinders of chlo rine gas occurred in California 
prompting questions by members of this Committee to  the DHS about their response to 
these thefts, any other thefts and plans to elimina te these vulnerabilities by using 
inherently safer technologies. 
U.S. chemical facilities were not built or designed  to defend against terrorist attacks. And 
predicting where an attack will take place is a foo l’s errand. No one predicted that 
Timothy McVeigh would attack the Federal Building i n Oklahoma City in 1995, killing 168 
innocent people. 

3On June 25, 2007, duPont Chairman Charles O. Hollid ay Jr. told the media that he 
worries most about a computer system failure or a s ecurity breach at one of the 
company's chemical plants around the world. "I feel  very comfortable that we've taken all
the reasonable steps, but obviously if someone want s to fly an airplane into a plant, it's 
very hard to guard against it," said Holliday. 
Stephen Flynn, Senior Fellow in National Security S tudies at the Council on Foreign 
Relations warned in his 2007 book, The Edge of Disa ster, " "...While attacks on the 
electric grid, oil and gas facilities, major ports,  and the food-supply system have the 
potential to create the greatest cascading economic  effects, it is chemical facilities near 
urban population centers that have the potential to  inflict the greatest casualties. Placing 
them at the top of the list of priorities is obviou s...In most cases, chemical plants that 
threaten nearby populations can switch to less dang erous substances. This practice is 
known as “inherently safer technology,” or IST…With out a strong mandate from the 
federal government, it’s unrealistic to think they ever will. Yet voluntary compliance is the 
premise of the legislation Congress passed last fal l [2006]; the new rules rest on the 
assumption that companies will now suddenly begin t aking steps they have so far 
refused to contemplate.” 
The Result Could be Catastrophic: 
--- In July, 2004, the Homeland Security Council es timated that an attack on a single 
chlorine facility could kill 17,500 people, severel y injure an additional 10,000 and result
in 100,000 hospitalizations and 70,000 evacuations.
--- In January, 2004, the U.S. Naval Research Labor atory testified before the 
Washington, D.C. City Council warning that 100,000 people could be killed or injured in 
the first 30 minutes of a catastrophic release of a  tank car of chlorine or similar chemical
within blocks of Capitol Hill. They further estimat ed that people could “die at rate of 100 
per second.” 
--- In June, 2003 FBI specialist on weapons of mass  destruction, Troy Morgan, in a 
speech at a chemical industry conference warned, “Y ou’ve heard about sarin and other 
chemical weapons in the news. But it’s far easier t o attack a rail car full of toxic industrial
chemicals than it is to compromise the security of a military base and obtain these 
materials.” 
THE CURRENT REGULATIONS ARE FATALLY FLAWED: 
The best that can be said for the Department of Hom eland Security (DHS) chemical
security regulations, "Chemical Facilities Anti-Ter rorism Standards" (CFATS) is that they 
represent an official recognition of the widespread  vulnerability of U.S. chemical plants to 
terrorism. The new DHS rules are based on a 744 wor d “rider,” Sec. 550 of the 
Homeland Security Appropriations Act 2007. Sec. 550  authorizes “interim” regulations 
that will expire on October 4, 2009. The Obama Admi nistration subsequently asked for 
and received a subsequent extension until October 4 , 2010 explicitly to allow Congress 
to enact comprehensive legislation that will “super sede” Sec. 550’s regulations. 
The DHS rules finalized on November 20, 2007 fail t o provide adequate protection for 
the nation and communities living in the shadow of thousands of U.S. chemical plants.

4Specifically, the interim chemical security law and  DHS rules (CFATS): 
--- Prohibit the DHS from requiring any “particular  security measure” including safer 
technologies that can reduce or eliminate the magni tude of an attack at virtually any 
chemical facility. To satisfy the chemical lobby, t his was added to Sec. 550 (a) to prevent
the use of safer technologies as a security measure  but it also undermines the 
effectiveness of the entire statute by undercutting  the DHS to credibly require ANY 
“particular security measure.” 
--- Fail to ensure priority protection of the 3,400  to 4,391 facilities each of which put 
1,000 or more people at risk according to the DHS e stimates. The DHS reports that they 
now have approximately 6,023 facilities in one of t he four risk tiers with 793 in risk tiers 1 
and 2. This leave approximately 5,230 in the lower two tiers with risk profiles that likely 
put 1,000 or more people at risk. Furthermore, Sec.  550 gives the Secretary of the DHS 
full discretion in determining which facilities wil l be considered to “present high levels of
security risk.” Clearly more guidance is needed in prioritizing high-risk facilities. 
--- Fail to protect approximately 2,400 U.S. water treatment plants as well as several
other exempted categories. Approximately 73 water t reatment plants each put 100,000 
or more people at risk. This exemption, also in Sec . 550 (a), covers public water systems 
regulated by the Safe Drinking Water Act and the Fe deral Water Pollution Control Act. In 
June 2007 Secretary Chertoff spoke to water facilit ies operators warning them that even 
though they are exempt under the interim law they a re “on the hook because you’re 
going to have to do this yourselves because the con sequences of ignoring risks…will be 
quite severe.” Once again this gap needs to be clos ed with comprehensive legislation.
--- Fail to protect 400 to 600 facilities regulated  under the Maritime Transportation 
Security Act of 2002 also exempted by Sec. 550 (a).
--- Fail to protect the public’s right-to-know by a sserting authority to classify previously 
public information as secret, including information  used in civil or criminal enforcement
actions. Sec. 550 (c) and resulting new DHS regulat ions overreach by going beyond 
protecting common sense security plans and vulnerab ilities into undermining 
enforcement and covering up governmental incompeten ce or corporate liability. 
--- Fail to require meaningful involvement of plant  employees in developing Security 
Vulnerability Assessments and Site Security Plans. The DHS responded to comments 
saying “there is nothing in the rule that prohibits  chemical facilities from involving 
employees in their security efforts.” While we shou ld be thankful for that, such a policy 
fails to tap the expertise of a workforce that is f ormally trained in chemical hazard 
protection, accident prevention and emergency respo nse. Employees are the first line of
defense and the eyes, ears and noses of chemical fa cilities. The failure to formally 
involve employees in developing vulnerability asses sments and security plans is foolish 
from both a security and scarce resource perspectiv e. 
--- Fail to include whistleblower protections that would enhance enforcement. The DHS 
rules promise to set up an anonymous tip line but i gnores the long history of 
whistleblowers who have exposed waste, fraud and ab use. In this case they could save 
thousands of lives. 

5--- Fail to enhance enforcement by allowing citizen s to sue to enforce the law, while 
allowing companies liberal appeals procedures to ch allenge DHS orders and decisions.
Sec. 550 (d) prevents anyone but the DHS from suing  a plant owner or operator to 
enforce any provision of this law. Once again, the law is balanced in favor of protecting 
the rights of recalcitrant facilities and/or violat ors and leaving innocent citizens facing 
overriding lethal risks with no legal recourse. 
--- Prohibit the public from knowing which faciliti es are regulated under CFATS, if they 
are in compliance. Both DHS and corporate credibili ty will be in jeopardy if communities 
cannot determine if local chemical plant that pose these risks are being made safe or if
they are in violation or is resisting orders by the  DHS. Nor will communities even have 
the peace of mind of knowing whether a plant has vo luntarily converted to safer 
technologies and no longer poses a threat to their community. 
S. 2996 is a Continuation of the Same Flawed Progra m: 
On February 4 th  Senator Collins (R-ME) introduced a bill (S. 2996)  that would do nothing 
but extend this flawed law for five more years. We strongly oppose this bill and any 
further delay in comprehensive chemical security le gislation. 
Until now, Senator Collins has consistently said, o n the Senate floor and in public 
statements, that the 2006 law (Section 550 which au thorized CFATS) was “NOT” a 
comprehensive statute. 
For a full copy of Senator Collins’ floor statement , please visit: 
http://thomas.gov/cgi-bin/query/D?r109:10:./temp/~r 109SJf200:: 
For a copy of Senator Collins’ press release, pleas e visit: 
http://hsgac.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?FuseAction =Press.MinorityNews&ContentRecord_id=d6 
21b3f6-62c9-4b63-985d-6a41bbeb00e4&Region_id=&Issue _id= 
She elaborated extensively on this point in her for mal February 7, 2007 comments to the 
DHS on CFATS in which she criticized the Bush admin istration for suggesting that they 
could extend the temporary law without approval by Congress.  Below are few examples 
of her comments DHS about the interim nature of CFA TS and the intent of Congress to 
revisit comprehensive legislation: 
“In drafting Section 550, the intent of Congress wa s clear and unambiguous – this 
statutory provision provides the Department strong,  interim authority for up to 
three years until permanent, comprehensive authorit y can be enacted. 
 “Section 550 was a streamline version of chemical s ecurity legislation; it was not 
the comprehensive authorizing legislation that Cong ress intended to be the final
authority on this matter. 
“This period also provides Congress an opportunity to oversee implementation of 
the Department’s interim program, to examine what w orks under the program and 
what can be improved, and to revisit the complex is sue of chemical facility 
security within three years to enact more comprehen sive authorizing legislation 
based on the Department’s experiences. 

6“The Department does not have broad discretion to r egulate beyond the interim 
three-year period without a comprehensive authoriza tion from Congress.  Any 
contrary interpretation of the ‘sunset’ provision i s plainly wrong.”  
For a full copy of Senator Collins’ formal comments , please visit: 
http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/assets/binaries/colli ns-letter 
We agree with Senator Collins 2006 and 2007 stateme nts that CFATS is “NOT” 
comprehensive and that the “interim” law was passed  to give Congress time to enact 
comprehensive legislation.  However, merely adoptin g an extension of the current law,
as Senator Collins suggests with the introduction o f S. 2996, without incorporating 
lessons learned and new authorities that DHS is req uesting, as the House passed bill
(H.R. 2868) does, would in no way be comprehensive or responsible legislation. 
The interim law has already been extended for one y ear until October 4, 2010. It would 
be irresponsible to postpone action any longer on p ermanent, comprehensive legislation 
that would eliminate catastrophic risks and close t he gap on thousands of exempted 
facilities such as ports and water treatment plants . 
SMART SECURITY IS SAFER MANUFACTURING PROCESSES ELI MINATE THE 
CONSEQUENCES OF AN ATTACK AND THEY ARE IN WIDESPREA D USE 
In February 2008, the CEO of Association of America n Railroads said, “It’s time for the 
big chemical companies to do their part to help pro tect America. They should stop 
manufacturing dangerous chemicals when safer substi tutes are available.  And if 
they won’t do it, Congress should do it for them….”
There are commercially available safer alternatives  for virtually all of the poison gas or 
toxic-by-inhalation (TIH) substances that pose the greatest risks to hundreds of urban 
areas. The Center for American Progress (CAP) condu cted an analysis of EPA’s Risk 
Management Program data and identified 284 faciliti es that have converted since 1999.
See full report at: 
http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/2006/04/b681 085_ct2556757.html
Examples of conversions from TIH chemicals and cont inuing threats include: 
--- More than 550 water treatment facilities (including  Washington, D.C.) converted to 
safer alternatives such as ultraviolet light, elimi nating the use of chlorine and sulfur 
dioxide gas. At least 73 water treatment plants still threa ten more than 100,000 people.
--- Ninety-eight petroleum refineries use safer alterna tives to hydrogen fluoride (HF) .
But 50 refineries still threaten millions of people  with the use of HF. 
--- At least 36 electric power plants use safer alterna tives to anhydrous ammonia gas 
such as dry urea. But 166 power plants still use an hydrous ammonia gas each 
threatening an average of 21,506 people. 
--- The Blue Plains sewage treatment plant (like mo re than 550 other water treatment
plants all over the US) in Washington, D.C. halted its use of chlorine and switched to 
safer chemicals just eight weeks after the 9/11 att acks due to fears of another attack. 
The plant had seven rail cars of chlorine on sight following the 9/11 attacks. The 

7conversion only cost approximately $0.50 per year f or each water customer. In other 
words, by using safer technologies we can neutraliz e and eliminate targeting by 
terrorists and prevent catastrophic accidents as we ll at negligible costs. 
--- In November 2009, the Clorox Company announced plans to convert all seven of its 
U.S. facilities. This conversion will eliminate Clo rox’s bulk use of chlorine gas and risks 
to more than 13 million people in nearby communitie s. 
--- In December 2008 Dow Chemical and K2 Pure Solut ions announced an agreement in 
which K2 Pure would supply Dow’s Pittsburgh, Califo rnia facility with small quantities of
chlorine gas produced in just-in-time batches by K2  Pure, thus eliminating the risks 
associated with bulk on-site storage and transport of chlorine gas. 
This CAP analysis shows that 87% of the converted f acilities spent less than $1 million 
and one third expected to save money, particularly from reduced liability costs and 
reduced regulation compliance costs. Clearly these conversion costs pale in comparison 
to the cost of disaster response, relocating commun ities, defending against personal
injury law suits or resolving environmental clean u p liability or even conventional security 
costs. 
While the CAP analysis also proves the feasibility of safer alternatives, CAP estimates 
that at this rate of conversion, without any new re gulatory requirements, it will take 45 
years to eliminate hazards that pose the highest ri sk to America’s hometowns. A 2008 
CAP analysis identified 300 chemical facilities tha t together put 110 Million Americans at
risk. The DHS needs the authority to prioritize the  conversion of the highest risk plants 
first. 
A 2006 GAO report (GAO-06-150), Homeland Security D HS Is Taking Steps to Enhance 
Security at Chemical Facilities, But Additional Aut hority Is Needed, concluded, 
“Implementing inherently safer technologies potenti ally could lessen the consequences 
of a terrorist attack by reducing the chemical risk s present at facilities, thereby making 
facilities less attractive targets.” 
A Government Accountability Office report (GAO-05-1 65) identified chlorine gas and 90- 
ton chlorine rail cars as "among the top five terro rist-related wastewater system 
vulnerabilities." Among the top three recommendatio ns: "Replacing gaseous chemicals 
used in wastewater treatment with less hazardous al ternatives." In addition, the largest
majority of experts gave replacing these chlorine f acilities the highest priority for federal
funding. 
The Benefits of Safer Technologies: 
The use of safer technologies offers a more competi tive and stable business plan with 
fewer regulations, potentially zero liability, sust ainable profitability, better relationships 
with workers and neighboring communities and no thr eat of a catastrophic attack or 
accident. Specifically, the use of safer technologi es will likely result in a facility no longer 
being subject to DHS’s CFATS regulations. 
Obviously, chemical facilities located on site at n uclear power plants, water treatment
works, iconic facilities such as Disney World, Camp  David, etc. also need to be 
considered for priority protection. However, using safer technologies as a 

8countermeasure at these facilities will lessen the lethality that an attack on them would 
pose. Given DHS’s finite resources and the late sta rt the nation has in addressing 
chemical security it is urgent that we use safer te chnologies to mitigate the consequence 
of an attack. By doing so we eliminate risks, safeg uard communities and save scarce 
money and resources to protect targets that cannot be so neutralized (airports, U.S. 
Capitol, etc.). 
COMPREHENSIVE CHEMICAL SECURITY IS NEEDED 
On June 21, 2006 then Senator Obama said, "But ther e is one thing we can all agree on:
any chemical plant security legislation must be com prehensive and rational.  It should 
balance the need to keep us safe with the need to c ontinue producing chemical products 
that are essential to our economy.  I believe the I ST approach needs to be a part of 
rational comprehensive security legislation." 
To truly protect employees and surrounding communit ies, a comprehensive law should: 
1)  Use “smart security” to prevent the catastrophi c consequences of an attack by 
implementing cost-effective safer and more secure c hemicals and processes at all  of the 
highest risk facilities. 
2)  Include all categories of facilities such as po rt facilities and water treatment plants.
3)  Involve plant employees in developing plant sec urity programs, including participation 
in workplace inspections, and provide employees wit h both an appeals and a waiver 
procedure to protect against excessive background c hecks. 
4)  Allow citizen suits to enforce the law by chemi cal facilities and government agencies 
and require reporting measures that strengthen acco untability. 
5)  Allow states to set more protective security st andards. 
6)  Require collaboration between the DHS, EPA and other agencies to avoid regulatory 
redundancy or inconsistency. 
To correct the flaws in the interim law and enact c omprehensive legislation, we urge you 
to support companion legislation in the Senate to l egislation passed in the House of 
Representatives on November 6, 2009, the “Chemical and Water Security Act of 2009” 
(H.R. 2868).  H.R. 2868 is a compromise that builds  seamlessly on CFATS.  It maintains 
the DHS as the lead agency regulating privately own ed chemical plants, including port
facilities, and authorizes the EPA as the lead agen cy regulating publicly owned water 
and wastewater treatment facilities and provides fu nding for publicly owned water 
facilities to adopt the most protective security me asures.   
While H.R. 2868 exempts more than 90 percent of dis tributors of agricultural fertilizers, it
also provides $3 million each year in compliance as sistance grants to the very largest
wholesalers. In addition it makes no changes to the  indefinite exemption that the DHS 
has given to agricultural “end users.” (e.g. all fa rms and growers)   H.R. 2868 also 
requires the DHS to assess the regulatory impacts o n small businesses. 
In addition H.R. 2868: 
--- Requires high risk facilities to “assess” safer  chemical processes and conditionally 

9requires the highest risk plants that pose a catast rophic gas release scenario 
(approximately 107) to use safer chemical processes  where feasible and commercially 
available and includes a technical appeals process to challenge DHS decisions; 
--- Provides up to $100 million in the first year t o assist privately owned plants to use 
safer and more secure processes, $125 million for d rinking water facilities and an 
unspecified portion of $200 million for wastewater facilities to use safer more secure 
processes; 
--- Involves plant employees in the development of security plans and provides 
protections for whistleblowers and limits backgroun d check abuses; 
--- Preserves state’s authority to establish strong er security standards; 
--- Bars citizen suits against private facilities b ut allows suits against DHS to enforce 
non-discretionary duties. 
Greenpeace believes H.R. 2868 is a valuable piece o f compromise legislation, and looks 
forward to working with the members of this Committ ee and their staffs in passing 
legislation at least as strong. 
Appendices: 
A – March 2010 Blue-Green Coalition Letter 
B – Clorox Press Release 
C – History of Chemical Security Legislation 
C – Q&A on Section 2111 of H.R. 2868 as passed by t he House November 6, 2009 
D – Biblio 
E – December 11, 2009 RMP data update from CRS 

10 

11 Appendix A: 
American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) 
Communications Workers of America (CWA) – Internati onal Brotherhood of Teamsters 
International Chemical Workers Union Council/UFCW –  NJ Work Environment Council 
Service Employees International Union (SEIU) – Unit ed Automobile Aerospace and 
Agricultural Implement Workers of America (UAW) – U nited Steelworkers (USW) 
Clean Water Action – Earthjustice – Environment Ame rica – Friends of the Earth 
Greenpeace – League of Conservation Voters – OMB Wa tch – Physicians for Social 
Responsibility – Sierra Club – U.S. Public Interest  Research Group 
Alaska Community Action on Toxics – Advocates for E nvironmental Human Rights 
Beyond Pesticides – Breast Cancer Fund – Center for  Health, Environment and Justice 
Center for International Environmental Law – Citize ns’ Environmental Coalition – Clean 
New York – Connecticut Coalition for Environmental Justice – Connecticut Council on 
Occupational Safety and Health – Deep South Center for Environmental Justice – Ecology 
Center – Empire State Consumer Project – Environmen tal Health Strategy Center 
Environmental Justice Action Group of WNY – Galvest on Houston Association for Smog 
Prevention and Mothers for Clean Air (GHASP/MfCA) –  Global Community Monitor – Green 
Education and Legal Fund, Inc. – Maine People’s All iance – MDPIRG – Natural Resources 
Council of Maine – Northwest Atlantic Marine Allian ce – Oregon Toxics Alliance – Science 
and Environmental Health Network – Urban Semilas 
Kristen Breitweiser, 9/11 Widow 
March 1, 2010 
Dear Senator, 
On November 6, 2009, the House of Representatives p assed the Chemical and Water Security 
Act of 2009  (H.R.2868) a comprehensive chemical security bill.  The undersigned organizations 
supported this legislation and would like to work w ith you to pass even more protective legislation 
in the U.S. Senate this year before the interim law  expires on October 4, 2010. 
Chemical plants and other chemical facilities remai n one of the most vulnerable sectors of 
America’s infrastructure to terrorist attacks. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has 
identified approximately 6,023 “high-risk” U.S. che mical facilities. In 2004, the Homeland Security 
Council planning scenario projected that an attack on a chemical facility would kill 17,500 people 
and send an additional 100,000 people to the hospit al.  A December 2009 Congressional
Research Service review of EPA data shows that 91 c hemical facilities each put 1 million or more 
people at risk. 
The current interim statute enacted as a rider to t he 2007 Homeland Security appropriations bill
temporarily authorized the Chemical Facility Anti-T errorism Standards (CFATS) to give Congress 
time to enact comprehensive legislation.  As a secu rity program CFATS was only an interim first 
step.  It fails to protect the millions of American s at risk by eliminating preventable catastrophic 
hazards. 
The interim statute: 
a. Prohibits the DHS from requiring any specific “s ecurity measure” whatsoever.
b. Fails to develop the commonsense use of safer an d more secure chemical
processes that can cost-effectively eliminate catas trophic hazards posed by poison 
gas. 
c. Explicitly exempts thousands of chemical and por t facilities, including approximately 
2,400 water treatment facilities and 400-600 port f acilities. 

12 d. Fails to involve knowledgeable employees in the development of vulnerability 
assessments and security plans, or protect employee s from excessive background 
checks. 
e. Denies the public the information needed to ensu re an effective, accountable 
program. 
On February 4 th  Senator Collins (R-ME) introduced a bill (S. 2996)  that would do nothing but 
extend this flawed law for five more years. We stro ngly oppose this bill and any further delay in 
comprehensive chemical security legislation.  In fa ct, Senator Collins’ own comments to the DHS 
in 2007 were clear. She said, “The Department does not have broad discretion to r egulate 
beyond the interim three-year period without a comp rehensive authorization from Congress.  Any 
contrary interpretation of the ‘sunset’ provision i s plainly wrong.” 
In their October 1 st  testimony before the House, both the DHS and the E PA called for 
comprehensive legislation to include water treatmen t plants and port facilities as well as 
conditional requirements to use safer available che mical processes where feasible at the highest 
risk facilities .
To correct the flaws in the interim law and enact c omprehensive legislation, we urge you to 
support companion legislation in the Senate to H.R.  2868.  H.R. 2868 is a compromise that builds 
seamlessly on CFATS .  It maintains the DHS as the lead agency regulati ng privately owned 
chemical plants, including port facilities, and aut horizes the EPA as the lead agency regulating 
publicly owned water and wastewater treatment facil ities and provides funding for publicly owned 
water facilities to adopt the most protective secur ity measures. 
While H.R. 2868 exempts more than 90 percent of dis tributors of agricultural fertilizers, it also 
provides $3 million each year in compliance assista nce grants to the very largest wholesalers. In 
addition it makes no changes to the indefinite exem ption that the DHS has given to agricultural
“end users.” (e.g. all farms and growers)   H.R. 2868 also requires the DHS to assess the 
regulatory impacts on small businesses. 
In addition H.R. 2868: 
- Requires high risk facilities to “assess” safer ch emical processes and conditionally requires 
the highest risk plants (approximately 107) to use safer chemical processes where feasible 
and commercially available and includes a technical  appeals process to challenge DHS 
decisions; 
- Provides up to $100 million in the first year to a ssist privately owned plants to use safer and 
more secure processes, $125 million for drinking wa ter facilities and an unspecified portion of 
$200 million for wastewater facilities to use safer  more secure processes; 
- Involves plant employees in the development of sec urity plans and provides protections for 
whistleblowers and limits back ground check abuses;
- Preserves state’s authority to establish stronger security standards; 
- Bars citizen suits against private facilities but allows suits against DHS to enforce non- 
discretionary duties. 
Passing comprehensive legislation this year is vita l to our national security. Since 1999, more 
than 500 facilities have used “smart security” to e liminate these risks to more than 40 million 
Americans. In a March 2006 floor statement, then Se nator Obama said, "by employing safer 
technologies, we can reduce the attractiveness of c hemical plants as a target...Each one of these 
methods reduces the danger that chemical plants pos e to our communities and makes them less 
appealing targets for terrorists." In November 2009 , the Clorox Company announced plans to 
convert all seven of its U.S. facilities to elimina te the bulk use of chlorine gas and inherent risks to 
nearby communities. 

13 The Association of American Railroads issued a stat ement in 2008 saying, “It’s time for the big 
chemical companies to do their part to help protect  America. They should stop manufacturing 
dangerous chemicals when safer substitutes are avai lable.  And if they won’t do it, Congress 
should do it for them...” 
To truly protect employees and surrounding communit ies, a comprehensive law should: 
1)  Use “smart security” to prevent the catastrophi c consequences of an attack by implementing 
cost-effective safer and more secure chemicals and processes at all  of the highest risk facilities. 
2)  Include all categories of facilities such as po rt facilities and water treatment plants. 
3)  Involve plant employees in developing plant sec urity programs, including participation in 
workplace inspections, and provide employees with b oth an appeals and a waiver procedure to 
protect against excessive background checks. 
4)  Allow citizen suits to enforce the law by chemi cal facilities and government agencies and 
require reporting measures that strengthen accounta bility. 
5)  Allow states to set more protective security st andards. 
6)  Require collaboration between the DHS, EPA and other agencies to avoid regulatory 
redundancy or inconsistency. 
We look forward to working with you and your staff on this urgently needed legislation. 
Sincerely, 
John Morawetz 
International Chemical 
Workers Union 
Council/UFCW 
Liz Hitchcock 
U.S. Public Interest 
Research Group 
Rick Hind 
Greenpeace Holly Hart 
United Steelworkers (USW) 
Brian Turnbaugh 
OMB Watch 
Kristen Welker-Hood 
Physicians for Social 
Responsibility Alan Reuther 
United Automobile 
Aerospace and Agricultural 
Implement Workers of 
America (UAW) 
Ed Hopkins 
Sierra Club 
Pam Miller 
Alaska Community Action on Toxics 
Nathalie Walker & Monique Harden 
Advocates for Environmental Human Rights 
Charles Loveless 
American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) 
Jay Feldman 
Beyond Pesticides 
Jeanne Rizzo, R.N. 
Breast Cancer Fund 
Lois Gibbs, Executive Director 
Center for Health, Environment and Justice 

Daryl Ditz 
Center for International Environmental Law 
Barbara Warren 
Citizens' Environmental Coalition 
Kathy Curtis 
Clean New York 
Lynn Thorp 
Clean Water Action 
Dave LaGrande 
Communications Workers of America (CWA) 
Mark A. Mitchell 
Connecticut Coalition for Environmental Justice 
Mike Fitts 
Connecticut Council on Occupational Safety and Heal th 
Dr. Beverly H. Wright 
Deep South Center for Environmental Justice 
Emily Enderle 
Earthjustice 
Tracey Easthope 
Ecology Center 
Judy Braiman 
Empire State Consumer Project 
Anna Aurilio 
Environment America 
Michael Belliveau 
Environmental Health Strategy Center 
Judith M. Anderson 
Environmental Justice Action Group of WNY 
Erich Pica 
Friends of the Earth 
Matthew S. Tejada 
Galveston Houston Association for Smog Prevention a nd Mothers for Clean Air 
(GHASP/MfCA) 
Denny Larson 
Global Community Monitor 
Mark A. Dunlea 
Green Education and Legal Fund, Inc. 
LaMont Byrd 
International Brotherhood of Teamsters 

Kristen Breitweiser 
9/11 Widow 
Tiernan Sittenfeld 
League of Conservation Voters 
Ryan Tipping-Spitz 
Maine People’s Alliance 
Johanna E. Neuman 
MDPIRG 
Denny Larsen 
National Bucket Brigade Coalition 
Matt Prindiville 
Natural Resources Council of Maine 
Rick Engler 
NJ Work Environment Council 
Niaz Dorry 
Northwest Atlantic Marine Alliance 
Dona Hippert 
Oregon Toxics Alliance 
Ted Schettler 
Science and Environmental Health Network 
Bill Borwegen 
Service Employees International Union (SEIU) 
Miguel Luna 
Urban Semilias 



Appendix B: 
The Clorox Company  News Release 
Clorox Announces Plans to Begin Transitioning U.S. Operations to High-Strength Bleach 
OAKLAND, Calif., Nov. 2, 2009 – The Clorox Company (NYSE: CLX) today 
announced that it plans to modify manufacturing pro cesses in its U.S. bleach 
operations. The initiative calls for Clorox to begi n transitioning from chlorine to 
high-strength bleach as a raw material for making i ts namesake bleach. 
“This decision was driven by our commitment to stre ngthen our operations and add 
another layer of security,” said Chairman and CEO D on Knauss. 
Clorox will start with its Fairfield, Calif., plant . The company expects to complete the 
transition there within six months, followed by a p hased, multiyear transition for six 
additional plants. 
“This process requires significant expertise, train ing, and changes in infrastructure and 
equipment,” Knauss said. “Our plant-by-plant approa ch will also enable us to apply what we 
learn along the way, ensure supply availability, mi nimize business disruptions and help 
make sure the transition is undertaken in the most effective manner possible.” 
“Clorox leads our industry in safety and security,”  Knauss said. “Our bleach plant 
employees are experts at handling chlorine, and we’ re proud of the fact that we’ve used 
it responsibly for our entire 96-year history. Even  so, we’re pleased to begin 
implementing this process change to make our produc ts using high-strength bleach.” 
The Clorox Company 
The Clorox Company is a leading manufacturer and ma rketer of consumer products with fiscal
year 2009 revenues of $5.5 billion. Clorox markets some of consumers' most trusted and 
recognized brand names, including its namesake blea ch and cleaning products, Green 
Works ® natural cleaners, Armor All® and STP ® auto-care products, Fresh Step ® and Scoop 
Away ® cat litter, Kingsford ® charcoal, Hidden Valley ® and K C Masterpiece ® dressings and 
sauces, Brita ® water-filtration systems, Glad ® bags, wraps and containers, and Burt’s Bees ®
natural personal care products. With approximately 8,300  employees worldwide, the company 
manufactures products in more than two dozen countr ies and markets them in more than 100 
countries. Clorox is committed to making a positive  difference in the communities where its 
employees work and live. Founded in 1980, The Cloro x Company Foundation has awarded 
cash grants totaling more than $77 million to nonpr ofit organizations, schools and colleges. In 
fiscal 2009 alone, the foundation awarded $3.6 mill ion in cash grants, and Clorox made 
product donations valued at $7.8 million. For more information about Clorox, visit 
www.TheCloroxCompany.com. 
Forward-looking statements 
This press release contains forward-looking stateme nts, including statements relating to 
completion and effectiveness of modifying bleach ma nufacturing processes in U.S. 
Bleach operations, ensuring supply availability, mi nimizing business disruption, 
strengthening operations, reducing potential supply  chain constraints, complexity and 
risks, increasing security, the company’s costs, in cluding volatility and increases in raw 
materials costs such as high-strength bleach, the f inancial condition of our suppliers; 
risks related to the handling and/or transportation  of hazardous substances, including 
but not limited to chlorine; and the ability of the  company to successfully manage legal


and regulatory matters.  These forward-looking stat ements are subject to risks and 
uncertainties that could cause actual results to di ffer materially from those set forth 
herein, including the risks and uncertainties discu ssed under the caption “Risk Factors” 
and elsewhere in Clorox’s Form 10-K or Form 10-Q mo st recently filed with the 
Securities and Exchange Commission. These forward-l ooking statements speak only as 
of the date hereof and investors are cautioned not to place undue reliance on any such 
statements. Clorox disclaims any intent or obligati on to update these forward-looking 
statements. 
Media relations 
Dan Staublin 510-271-1622, dan.staublin@clorox.com 
Kathryn Caulfield 510-271-7209, kathryn.caulfield@clorox.com 
Investor relations 
Li-Mei Johnson 510-271-3396, li-mei.johnson@clorox.com 
Steve Austenfeld 510-271-2270, steve.austenfeld@clorox.com 

Appendix C: 
Chronology of Legislation on Chemical Security 
1999:  Senator Frank Lautenberg (D-NJ)  introduces S. 1470, The Chemical Security Act
of 1999.  In April 2000 he calls on Senator James I nhofe (R-OK) to hold hearings on the 
bill which was never adopted. 
October 31, 2001:  Senator Jon Corzine (D-NJ) intro duces the "Chemical Security Act of
2001" (S. 1602), requiring chemical facilities to u se safer available technologies where 
available to prevent catastrophic attacks. 
May 16, 2002:  An internal EPA briefing document en titled “Proposal for Chemical
Security  Legislation” says that new legislation is  needed because security of industry 
cannot be assured under current law. 
June 11, 2002:  EPA proposes White House roll out o f chemical security policy through 
new guidance and regulations saying, "EPA is not se eking legislation on chemical
security at this time."  Guidance was to be issued in July 2002 along with an inspection 
of 30 high-risk chemical facilities. 
July 25, 2002:  The Senate EPW Committee unanimousl y adopts a compromise version 
of Senator Jon Corzine’s (D-NJ) bill (S. 1602) to r equire safer technologies or chemicals 
where available to prevent catastrophic attacks. 
October 23, 2003:  The Senate EPW Committee adopts a flawed bill (S. 994) on a close 
party-line vote.  The bill has no enforceable provi sion to prevent catastrophic attacks by 
requiring safer technologies or chemicals and rubbe r stamps industry’s voluntary 
programs and never makes it to the floor. 
March 30, 2006:  Senators Lautenberg (D-NJ), Obama (D-IL),  Kerry (D-MA), Menendez 
(NJ), Durbin (D-IL), Biden (D-DE) introduces a broa d chemical security bill (S. 2486) that
requires  safer technologies when feasible at chemi cal plants, protects state authority to 
adopt stronger protections, gives plant employees m eaningful participation in security 
programs and ensures a role for the EPA in oversigh t of facilities. 
May 18,  2006:  Senators Biden (D-DE), Jeffords (I- VT) and Boxer (D-CA) introduce the 
Community Water Treatment Hazards Reduction Act of 2006 (S. 2855) which requires 
high risk water facilities to identify safer techno logies to eliminate hazards posed by the 
use of chlorine gas.  The bill also authorizes $125  million a year over five years in grants 
to the highest risk facilities for capital costs ne eded to convert plants to safer 
technologies, including ultra-violet light, ozone o r bleach. 
May 19, 2006:  Senator Inhofe, chair of the Environ ment and Public Works Committee,
schedules a Committee vote for May 23rd on his wast ewater security  bill (S. 2781).  The 
bill will squander millions of dollars on outdated security measures instead of funding the 
elimination of hazards posed by chlorine gas throug h the use of safer technologies as 
recommended by a 2005 Government Accountability Off ice report. 
June 14-15 2006:  Senate Homeland Security and Gove rnmental Affairs Committee 
votes out  weak chemical security legislation (S. 2 145).  Senator Voinovich (R-OH) 

proposes 14 weakening amendments.  A Voinovich amen dment to preempt states is 
rejected by a 9 to 7 vote.  A Lieberman (D-CT) amen dment to add cost-effective safer 
technology requirements is rejected 11 to 5. 
July 28, 2006:  House Homeland Security Committee c ompletes mark up of H.R. 5695.
The Committee embraces a compromise requiring the u se of safer technologies at high 
priority facilities offered by Representative Marke y (D-MA).  An amendment by 
Representative James Langevin (D-RI) improves the r ight of state and local
governments to set stronger security standards but falls short of a similar provision in S.
2145. 
September 25, 2006:  In a rush to show voters they have done “something”  the 
Conference Committee on DHS Appropriations approved   a 740 word unenforceable 3 
year chemical security amendment supported by the c hemical industry. 
October 4, 2006: President Bush signs temporary che mical security statute which will
expire in October 3, 2009. 
June 12, 2007:  President Bush threatened to veto a  Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) spending bill.  Among their objections was “s trong” opposition to a chemical plant
security provision that would have restored the aut hority of states to set stronger security 
standards at chemical plants than the federal gover nment.  The chemical industry began 
lobbying for federal preemption to overrule state a uthority in 2005 when New Jersey 
announced stronger chemical security regulations.  The bill was vetoed and the 
provision was eliminated in the final DHS spending bill. 
December 27,  2007:  President Bush signs $500 bill ion omnibus spending that includes 
an amendment by Senator Lautenberg  (D-NJ) to the D HS funding bill that will allow 
states to set more stringent security standards. 
March 6, 2008:  House Homeland Security Committee a dopts H.R. 5577 which requires 
high risk facilities to use safer more secure techn ologies as long as they are feasible, 
cost effective and do not shift risks to other faci lities. 
June 15, 2009:  Representatives Bennie Thompson, (D -MS), Henry Waxman (D-CA),
Sheila Jackson-Lee (D-TX), Ed Markey (D-MA) introdu ced H.R. 2868 which is even 
stronger than H.R. 5577. 
June 23, 2009: House Homeland Security Committee re jects the most crippling 
amendments but adopts several weakening amendments to H.R. 2868. 
October 1, 2009: Homeland Security Department and E PA officials testified before 
House Subcommittee on Energy and Environment callin g for legislation that conditionally 
requires the use of safer chemical processes at the  highest risk chemical plants where 
feasible and cost-effective. 
October 21, 2009: House Energy & Commerce Committee  rejects crippling amendments 
and adopts a stronger version of H.R. 2868 on chemi cal plant security and also adopts 
H.R. 3258 on drinking water plant security.  Both b ills conditionally require the use of 
safer chemical processes at the highest risk plants  where feasible and cost-effective. 

November 6, 2009:  In a vote of 230 to 193, the Hou se of Representatives passed a 
compromise bill, the Chemical and Water Security Ac t (H.R. 2868), which conditionally 
requires the use of safer chemical processes at som e of the highest risk facilities where 
feasible and cost-effective.  The bill also puts th e EPA in charge similar regulations over 
publicly owned water treatment facilities. 



Appendix D: 
Q&A on the Inherently Safer Technology (IST) & Citi zen Suits Provisions In "The 
Chemical and Water Security Act of 2009” (H.R. 2868 ) 
Does H.R. 2868 require ALL chemical facilities to a dopt “methods to reduce the 
consequences (MRC) of a terrorist attack” or inhere ntly safer technology (IST)?
No. This requirement is conditional and covers a na rrow universe of approximately 107 
facilities in the highest-risk tiers (1&2) that pos e a risk of catastrophic “release” to 
densely populated areas.  It will NOT cover facilit ies in tiers 1&2 that pose a risk only 
from chemical “theft.” 
The conditions for implementing safer methods and t echnologies are: 
***  They must significantly reduce the risk of dea th or injury in a terrorist attack 
***  They must not shift risks to another location 
***  They must be technically feasible 
***  They must not impair the plant’s ability to do  business at that location 
***  Water treatment systems must also meet state a nd federal safe drinking water 
standards 
Can facilities challenge the requirement to impleme nt safer chemical 
technologies? 
Yes.  All facilities must conduct a feasibility ass essment of their ability to utilize safer 
chemical technologies.  For those facilities subjec t to conditional requirements to 
implement safer technologies in risk tiers 1 & 2 be cause they pose a catastrophic 
“release” risk to nearby communities, they will als o submit a feasibility assessment. If the 
DHS disagrees with a facility’s assessment that the y are NOT subject to the 
implementation requirements, the facility has 120 d ays to appeal. In making a ruling on 
the appeal, the DHS must consult a wide range of ex perts and must include those expert
opinions in their ruling. 
Will H.R. 2868 burden farms and agricultural facili ties? 
No. In January of 2008 the Department of Homeland S ecurity (DHS) indefinitely 
exempted all “end-users” of regulated chemicals use d in agriculture, including family 
farms, ranches and other crop, feed or livestock fa cilities from Chemical Facility Anti- 
terrorism Standards (CFATS).  1   The new legislation does nothing to change DHS’s
regulatory deferral of these facilities.  In the ag ricultural sector, only manufacturers of 
agricultural chemicals and large wholesalers remain  in CFATS and only 7 of these 
facilities are in risk tiers 1 or 2.  The rest are in tiers 3 and 4 and are only responsible for 
assessing safer chemical processes.  In addition, R epresentatives Ross (D-AR) and 
Space (D-OH) added an amendment to H.R. 2868 that r equires the DHS to provide 
assistance to agricultural chemical wholesalers, in cluding technical assistance grants to 
conduct assessments of safer technologies. It also requires the DHS to assess potential
impacts on the agriculture sector for complying wit h the new statute. 
                                                          
1 73 FR 1640 (January 9, 2008). 

Will this requirement hurt jobs or the economy?
No. Plants that invest in the safety and security o f their infrastructure invest in American 
communities, reduce or eliminate their liability an d regulatory costs, and improve 
workplace safety and long term job security.  Major  trade unions, such as the United 
Steelworkers, United Auto Workers, International Ch emical Workers/UFCW, 
International Association of Fire Fighters, Teamste rs, SEIU, AFSCME and 
Communication Workers of America support H.R. 2868.
Does H.R. 2868 allow citizens to sue private partie s to enforce the law?
No.  The compromise bill eliminates citizen enforce ment suits against private parties. 
Only suits against government agencies except the D epartment of Defense are 
permitted.  The bill does, however, allow for a cit izen petition process that can trigger a 
government investigation into potential violations by a chemical facility. 
Are water treatment facilities treated differently?
Yes. The EPA, not DHS, will have the lead authority  in regulating drinking water AND 
waste facilities. Drinking water systems that serve  more than 3,300 people are covered,
smaller systems are exempt. Waste water systems ser ving approximately 25,000 or 
more people are covered. The States have the lead a uthority to require the use of safer 
chemical processes. Smaller water systems will also  be eligible for technical assistance 
to conduct assessments of safer technologies. The h ighest risk systems will be eligible 
for assistance to implement safer technologies base d on risk and need.  The bill makes 
available $125 million a year for three years to as sist implementation of safer 
technologies for drinking water systems and $200 mi llion a year for waste water 
systems. 
Can facilities save money by using safer and more s ecure chemical processes?
Yes, in some cases, and in other cases costs are ma nageable. Surveys by the Center 
for American Progress identified 284 facilities tha t switched to safer methods since 1999.
They found that 87 percent spent less than $1 milli on, and one half reported spending 
less than $100,000 on the conversion.  Additionally , 34% of facilities expected “ cost 
savings or improved profitability. ” Twenty large city water utilities adopted safer a nd 
more secure options at a maximum cost of $1.50 per customer per year – less than a 
bag of potato chips – and often much less. Washingt on, D.C. converted its sewage 
treatment plant within 90 days after the 9/11 attac ks for less than $0.50 per water 
customer per year. H.R. 2868 provides up to $225 mi llion and H.R. 3258 provides up to 
$375 million for assistance in implementing safer c hemical processes over a three-year 
period. 
Will requiring the use of safer chemical processes shift risks locally or nationally? 
No. H.R. 2868 specifically prohibits requirements t hat shift these risks to other facilities 
in the U.S. or to facilities outside of the United States and prohibits EPA or states from 
requiring facilities to adopt changes that shift ch emicals to interim storage off-site. 

Does H.R. 2868 mandate the use of specific technolo gies or can facilities choose 
which safer and more secure technologies to use?
Each high-risk facility is free to choose the most appropriate “feasible” and cost-effective 
technology or process identified in the facility’s own assessment. 
Should government require safer design and technolo gies to be used in the 
private sector?
Yes. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has required airplane security and 
safety standards for decades.  The feasibility and cost-effectiveness are balanced 
against security and safety needs.  After 9/11 all commercial airliners were required to 
harden cockpit doors and X-ray machines for airline  baggage were installed at hundreds 
of airports. 
Are safer design requirements appropriate for secur ity legislation?
Yes. In 2006 the GAO (GAO-06-150), concluded that “ Implementing inherently safer 
technologies potentially could lessen the consequen ces of a terrorist attack by reducing 
the chemical risks present at facilities, thereby m aking facilities less attractive targets.” 
And a June 2006 National Academy of Sciences study endorsed safer technologies as 
"the most desirable solution to preventing chemical  releases" from a terrorist attack. 
In a February 27, 2008 statement the Association of  American Railroads said, “It’s time 
for the big chemical companies to do their part to help protect America. They should stop 
manufacturing dangerous chemicals when safer substi tutes are available.  And if they 
won’t do it, Congress should do it for them in the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Act
2008.” 
Can different types of chemical facilities use safe r methods to reduce the 
consequences of risks at more than 6,000 regulated facilities?
Yes. Many types of facilities are among the 284 fac ilities that have already converted 
since 1999.  Most facilities (89%) are “users” of c hemicals rather than chemical makers.
These plants can often switch to safer methods even  faster than chemical makers.
Types of facilities that are already using  safer and more secure technologies include 
bleach manufacturers, water utilities, petroleum re fineries, paper mills, power plants, and 
diverse manufacturers of products that include soap s and detergents, fuel additives, and 
polyurethane foam. 
Four substances account for 55 percent of the proce sses that pose a catastrophic risk to 
communities according to the EPA.  These substances  are chlorine, ammonia, hydrogen 
fluoride and sulfur dioxide.  They are also among t he hazards eliminated at 284 plants 
that have converted since 1999. 



Appendix E: 
Bibliography and Quotations 
Amnesty International: 
Clouds of Injustice: Bhopal Disaster 20 Years On 
November 29, 2004 
http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/ASA20/015/2 004/en/dom- 
ASA200152004en.html
"Ensuring public participation and transparency in decisions relating to the location, 
operational safety and waste disposal of industries  using hazardous materials and 
technology is an essential step to heighten risk aw areness and responsible behavior as 
well as to ensure better preparedness to prevent an d deal with disasters like Bhopal." 
p.6 
In the Bhopal disaster "At least half a million peo ple had been exposed to the toxic 
fumes." 
p.10 
Argonne National Laboratory 
A National Risk Assessment for Selected Hazardous M aterials Transportation 
December 2000 
http://projects.battelle.org/trbhazmat/Presentation s/TRB2001-002217.doc 
“…Releases of toxic chemicals can kill and injure p eople located relatively far from the 
accident…As a result, failure to identify and evalu ate opportunities to reduce the risks 
from these types of relatively rare accidents could  ultimately lead to thousands of 
fatalities, injuries, and evacuations.” 
Association of American Railroads 
February 27, 2008 
“It’s time for the big chemical companies to do the ir part to help protect America. They 
should stop manufacturing dangerous chemicals when safer substitutes are available.
And if they won’t do it, Congress should do it for them in the Chemical Facility Anti- 
Terrorism Act of 2008.” 
The Brookings Institute: 
Protecting the American Homeland; A Preliminary Ana lysis 
2003 
http://www.brookings.edu/press/Books/2003/protectin gtheamericanhomelandoneyearon.
aspx 

Brookings estimate that a “successful attack on [a] … chemical plant [could result in] 
10,000 fatalities.”  This estimate is modest. 
p.6 
“Prevention must be the highest priority (since it stops all attacks, large and small).” 
p.8 
“In most cases, government intervention should take  the form of mandates on the private 
sector rather than through direct subsidies or tax incentives.” 
p.10 
“…Preventive measures are likely to be particularly  effective because they tend to 
reduce overall levels of risk, rather than just shi fting it from one target to another.” 
p.35-6 
“Shipping by rail poses certain concerns… Chlorine,  for example, a toxic chemical that
can enhance the combustion of other substances, is often stored and shipped in 90-ton 
rail tank cars.  A release of 90 tons of chlorine c ould affect populations up to 14 miles 
away” 
p.46 
“Security at many chemical facilities has not been sufficient, as demonstrated even 
before September 11 by environmentalists from Green peace.” 
p.47 
Center for American Progress: 
Chemical Security 101 
November 2008 
http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/2008/11/chem ical_security.html
“The only certain way to protect our communities is  to remove the possibility of a toxic 
gas release by converting facilities to safer, more  secure alternative technologies.  This 
report identifies opportunities for conversions at the 101 most dangerous facilities, each 
of which threaten roughly 1 million people or more in surrounding areas.  The chemicals 
most often posing the greatest danger at the top 10 1 facilities are chlorine—almost 
always in railcars—followed by hydrofluoric acid an d sulfur chemicals. 
p.1 
“One insurance study found that a major chlorine ra il spill in an urban area could cause 
10,200 fatalities and over $7 billion in damages.” 
p.6 
Toxic Trains and the Terrorist Threat 
April 2, 2007 
http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/2007/04/chem ical_security_report.html

"Cost was a frequently cited reason for not convert ing.  But the survey found such 
conversions are affordable even at large facilities , costing no more than $1.50 per 
person served each year--or the price of a bag of p otato chips." 
p.2 
"Put another way, a single day's expenditures on th e war in Iraq could cover construction 
costs of converting the remaining U.S. water utilit ies off chlorine gas railcars." 
p.2 
"A comprehensive solution can only come from the fe deral level.  In fact, judges in the 
ongoing litigation over rerouting in Washington, D. C., have encouraged the Bush 
administration to develop a national strategy to ad dress the security and safety dangers 
involved in the manufacture, use, and transportatio n of chlorine gas and other hazardous 
chemicals.” 
p.2 
"A RAND Corp. database of worldwide terrorist incid ents recorded over 250 attacks 
against rail targets from 1995 to 2005.  Insurgents  in Iraq have recently targeted trucks 
carrying chlorine gas with several deliberate attac ks." 
p.5 
"Some facilities, however, identified important sav ings in preventative maintenance, 
emergency planning, employee training, regulatory c ompliance, future site security, and 
other factors. 
p.10 
"After all, there is little reason to believe that current security practices would be able to 
withstand a well-executed attack by an armed intrud er.  Nor does enhanced physical
security do anything to protect railcars in transit  to the facility." 
p.10 
"...Recently enacted interim chemical security legi slation exempts water utilities, neglects 
transportation hazards, and ignores safer technolog ies.  Millions of Americans remain 
unnecessarily at risk from a catastrophic chemical release." 
p.14 
"To address this threat, Congress, the administrati on, and industry must make chemical
security an urgent national priority, with the goal  of transitioning to safer, more secure 
technologies." 
p.14 
Preventing Toxic Terrorism: How Some Chemical Facil ities are Removing Danger 
to American Communities 
April 2006 
http://www.crtk.org/library_files/ChemicalSurvey.pd f 
Of the 238 chemical facilities that have already tr ansitioned to safer chemicals or 
technologies, "of respondents that provided cost es timates, roughly half reported 
spending less than $100,000 to switch to safer alte rnatives and few spend over $1 
million." 
p.3 

"Facilities cut a variety of costs and regulatory b urdens by switching to less hazardous 
chemicals or processes.  These facilities need fewe r physical security and safety 
measures and can better focus on producing valuable  products and services" 
 p.3 
"Unfortunately, more than four years after the 9/11  terrorist attacks, the White House and 
Congress have failed to act.   Currently, no federa l law or regulation requires hazardous 
chemical facilities to review or use readily availa ble alternatives. " 
p.4 
"Many chemical facilities have already taken this s tep thereby protecting millions of 
Americans.  Millions more could be taken out of har m's way within a concerted national
effort to convert other high-risk facilities to saf er chemicals and processes." 
p.4 
"Numerous federal agencies and other observers have  warned that terrorists could turn 
hazardous chemical facilities into improvised weapo ns of mass destruction.  These 
agencies include the Department of Homeland Securit y, Department of Justice, 
Government Accountability Office, Environmental Pro tection Agency, Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry, Army Surgeon Gener al, and Naval Research 
Laboratory, among others." 
p.6 
"Some 284 respondents in 47 states reported they ha d switched to less acutely 
hazardous chemicals or processes or moved to safer locations.  As a result, more than 
38 million Americans no longer live under the threa t of a harmful toxic gas release from 
these facilities." 
p.7 
"...Approximately 1,150 wastewater facilities and 1 ,700 drinking water plants remain in 
the RMP program for extremely hazardous chemicals, primarily chlorine gas." 
p.10 
"Ultraviolet light and other options such as ozone are more effective than chlorine 
against certain biological agents such as anthrax t hat could contaminate drinking water." 
p.11 
"Some 18 manufacturing facilities reported process changes that reduced the danger of
an off-site gas release...These manufactures repres ent diverse industries and made an 
array of changes...  Notably, the majority of these  facilities reported neutral costs or 
anticipated cost savings from their changes." 
p.12 
"A catastrophic chemical release at just one of the  nation's most dangerous facilities 
could kill, injure or sicken tens of thousands.  Ad opting less acutely hazardous chemicals 
or processes is the only certain way to protect the public from a toxic gas cloud." 
p.20 

"Many facilities achieved significant safety and se curity improvements...  Nonetheless,
many other facilities that could make similar impro vements remain potential terrorist 
targets.  Accordingly, the chemical industry and go vernment should make conversion of
high-hazard facilities to safer available technolog ies a national strategic priority." 
p.20 
Charles River Associates 
“Assessment of the Economic Benefits of Chlor-Alkal i Chemicals to the United 
States and Canadian Economies” 
April 1993 
http://yosemite.epa.gov/ee/epalib/eelib.nsf/73bc8d7 fb6d3644385256a290076d16f/56978 
f7fc30046d3852566b70051f917!OpenDocument 
“…Any situation where chlorine-dependent processes or chlorine-containing compounds 
create unacceptable health and environmental risks should be corrected.” 
p.1 
 “At some cost, alternatives exist for all uses of chlorine and chlorine-derived 
compounds.” 
p.5 
Chemical and Engineering News 
“Simply Safer,”  by Jeff Johnson 
February 3, 2003 
http://pubs.acs.org/cen/government/8105/8105gov1.ht ml
“Coined ‘inherently safer design’ by British chemic al engineer Trevor Kletz in the late 
1970s, the concept seems simple: It is better to de sign processes that eliminate 
chemical plant hazards at the beginning than to eng ineer ‘add-on’ technologies later to 
try to control them.” 
p.1/9 
“Kletz, who is retired after 38 years with ICI [Imp erial Chemical Industries], puts it like 
this, ‘The very best way to prevent an explosion is  to simply replace the material that 
explodes with one that does not or at least keep th e stock down so low that it hardly 
matters if it all leaks out.’” 
p.1/9 
The concept was seized upon during the terrorism de bate as a hazard reduction solution 
with safety benefits…” 
p.1/9 
“In the end, the result [of ISTs] could be a new wo rld of smaller and highly efficient 
chemical plants.” 
p. 4/9 

“[Trevor] Kletz, [Dennis C.] Hendershot, and others  with long time chemical industry 
experience say industry, academia, and government s hould do much more to encourage 
the spread of what may ultimately be the safest, ch eapest way to make chemicals.” 
p. 4-5/9 
“’In many companies, the gut reaction to an acciden t is to reroute procedures,’ he [Kletz]
says.  ‘They are starting at the wrong end of the h ierarchy.’” 
p. 9/9 
“’There are far, far more opportunities for inheren tly safer designs than we are making 
use of today,’” Kletz adds.” 
p. 9/9 
The Chlorine Institute: 
Estimating the Area Affected by a Chlorine Release— Pamphlet 74 
February 2006 
http://www.chlorineinstitute.org/Bookstore/ProductD etail.cfm?ItemNumber=2303 
"90-Ton Rail Tank Car 
• Total mass release = 180,000 pounds 
• 10 minute release 
• 300 pounds/second steady rate release 
• Release occurs on concrete surface 
• Maximum downwind distance to 3ppm = 41.5 miles 
• Maximum crosswind distance to 3ppm = 2.3 miles 
• Maximum downwind distance to 20ppm = 14.8 miles 
• Maximum crosswind distance to 20ppm =1.9 miles" “E ven a 150 lb cylinder could be 
catastrophic for over 1.5 miles.” 
p.20 
“Even a 150 lb cylinder could be catastrophic for o ver 1.5 miles” 
p.20 
Recommended Practices for Handling Chlorine Tank Ca rs—Pamphlet 66 
December 4, 2007 
http://www.chlorineinstitute.org/Bookstore/ProductD etail.cfm?ItemNumber=2247 
"Tank cars for chlorine use are permitted by regula tion to have a maximum capacity of
90 tons (81648 kg) of chlorine.  Chlorine tank cars  have 55, 85 or 90 ton capacities. 
Tanks may not be loaded with chlorine in excess of the load limit stenciled on the side of
the car." 
p.8 
"The weight of chlorine must not exceed 90 tons...  Gross rail load must not exceed 
263,000 pounds." 
p.21 

Congressional Budget Office:
Homeland Security and the Private Sector 
December 2004 
https://www.cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=6042 
"The security of the chemical industry--which inclu des oil and gas production, 
processing, and transportation--was a concern befor e September 11, but after that date,
the increased national threat... amplified the expe cted losses...that many people already 
deemed vulnerable...." 
p.21 
"...September 11 indicated that the scope of potent ial attacks is now larger." 
p.21 
"EPA reported in 2000 that nearly 15,000 facilities  were handling at least one hazardous 
substance in a quantity greater than threshold limi ts..., a subset of a much larger number 
of businesses handling a 'significant' quantity." 
p.22 
"Much of the overall government effort for chemical  safety occurs at the state and local
level and is oriented toward emergency preparedness . The federal effort (as of Dec. 
2004) includes worker-safety, environmental, and in formation programs that are 
intended to support local activities." 
p.27 
The CBO recommends:  "Better informing the public o n where dangerous chemicals are,
either by regulation or through public/private part nerships to disseminate information." 
p.27 
Congressional Research Service 
Chemical Facility Security 
August 2, 2006 
http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/homesec/RL31530.pdf 
“Facilities handling large amounts of potentially h azardous chemicals (i.e., chemical
facilities) might be of interest to terrorists… [an d] the risks may be increasing—with 
potentially severe consequences for human health an d the environment.  Available 
evidence indicates that many chemical facilities ma y lack adequate safeguards.” 
Summary Page  (first page) 
“Congress might enact legislation to reduce risks, either by ‘hardening’ defenses against
terrorists… or by requiring industries to consider use of safer chemicals, procedures, or 
processes.” 
Summary Page  (first page) 

Council on Foreign Relations 
America the Vulnerable: How Our Government is Faili ng to Protect Us from 
Terrorism 
Stephen Flynn, Senior Fellow in National Security S tudies 
2004 
http://www.foreignaffairs.org/20020101faessay6557/s tephen-e-flynn/america-the- 
vulnerable.html
“Congress should reconsider Senator Corzine’s propo sed provision to end the use of
some especially deadly chemicals at plants near hig h population areas.”   
p.121 
CRO Corporate Responsibility Office 
“Complex Chemistry” 
by Abby Schultz 
June/July 2007 
http://www.thecro.com/node/510 
“Heather Langsner, Director of Research at Innovest  Strategic Value Advisors… says 
Dow is right to develop green chemistries, which sh e notes Dow’s competitors have 
been doing.  However, Langsner is concerned with Do w’s reliance on chlorine based 
products, such as polyvinyl chloride (PVC).” 
p.20 
“Observers of the company question whether Dow will  ever overcome its legacy as a 
maker of Dursban and Agent Orange, as well as the l egacy it inherited when it bought
Union Carbide Corp. in 2001  On Dec. 3, 1984 a leak  of methyl isocyanate (MIC) from 
an agricultural pesticide plant in Bhopal, India—a company in which Union Carbide held 
just more than half the stock—killed several thousa nd people.  It is estimated that 
another 15,000 to 20,000 more people have died of c omplications since then, and the 
region is still contaminated 23 years later.” 
p.18 
Dupont Chairman Charles Holliday 
Security tops DuPont chief's concerns 
News Journal Washington Bureau 
By Nicole Gaudiano 
June 26, 2007 and July 25, 2007 
http://seclists.org/isn/2007/Jun/0120.html
In a presentation on industry risks, Mr. Holliday t old the National Press Club: "I feel very 
comfortable that we've taken all the reasonable ste ps, but obviously if someone wants to 
fly an airplane into a plant, it's very hard to gua rd against it." 

Falkenrath, Richard, Deputy Homeland Security Advis er to President Bush 
Statement before US Senate Committee on Homeland Se curity and Governmental
Affairs, 
January 26, 2005 
http://www.brookings.edu/testimony/2005/0126defense _falkenrath.aspx 
"Of all the various remaining civilian vulnerabilit ies in America today, one stands alone 
as uniquely deadly, pervasive and susceptible to te rrorist attack: toxic- inhalation-hazard 
industrial chemicals.” 
Federal Register 
December 28, 2006 
Proposed Rules 
“The key difference is that they may involve effect s that are more severe than expected 
with accidental risk.” 
Vol. 71, No. 249, p.78317 
The Gardian 
“Chemical Infrastructure Security: Good News and Ba d News” 
By P. J. Crowley 
2006 
http://www.infragardconferences.com/thegardian/Chem icaclInfra.html
“But the security dilemma is that… facilities that manufacture or use the most hazardous 
chemicals… are not moving fast enough to adopt safe r alternatives that have been 
proven to be effective and economical.” 
p.4 
“Entities that use specific chemicals should be req uired to study inherently safer 
technology or other alternatives.  This analysis sh ould be conducted annually and made 
available to the public and investors through annua l reports or corporate filings with the 
Securities and Exchange Commission.” 
p.8 
International Joint Commission: 
Seventh Biennial Report 
February 7, 1997 
http://www.ijc.org/php/publications/html/7bre.html

"Recommendations: 
....7) the Parties, in consultation with industry an d other affected interests, develop 
timetables to sunset the use of chlorine and chlori ne-containing compounds as industrial
feedstocks and that the means of reducing or elimin ating other uses be examined." 
p.54 
Sixth Biennial Report 
February 10, 1997 
http://www.ijc.org/php/publications/html/6bre.html
"...In many cases, alternative production processes  do exist...  We know that when 
chlorine is used as a feedstock in a manufacturing process, one cannot necessarily 
predict or control which chlorinated organics will result, and in what quantity. 
Accordingly, the Commission concludes that the use of chlorine and its compounds 
should be avoided in the manufacturing process.  We  recognize that socio-economic 
and other consequences of banning the use of chlori ne--and subsequent use of 
alternative chemicals or processes--must be conside red in determining the timetable." 
p.29 
"The Commission also recognizes that certain other uses of chlorine are of special
concern because of the overwhelming public health b enefits from their use.  Disinfection 
of drinking water and sewage (as well as production  of certain pharmaceuticals) are 
uses for which public health has been protected and  for which, it is claimed, there are 
limited or no alternatives.  Yet, there is evidence  that chlorinated organics are created in 
water treatment processes and that, in other parts of the world, alternative processes 
have long been in use.  Again, the issue seems to b e cost rather than technology." 
p.29-30 
K2 Pure Solutions 
2007-2009 
http://www.k2pure.com/ 
“Utilizing our new, Inherently Safe Technology (IST ), K2 Pure produces exceptionally 
pure, high-quality bleach with nothing but water, i nert salt and electricity in a vertically 
integrated process that eliminates the need to tran sport chlorine.” 
Ketchum/Clorox 
“Crisis Management Plan for the Clorox Company” 
1991 
http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php?title=Clorox 
“Defining a ‘crisis’ is less important than knowing  one when you see one.” 
p.33 

National Research Council: 
Terrorism and the Chemical Infrastructure; Protecti ng People and Reducing 
Vulnerabilities 
2006 
http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=11597 
“According to a 2004 U.S. Fire Administration surve y, fewer than 16 percent of fire 
departments in this country have hazmat units.” 
p.53 
National Journal 
“Security Leak” 
August 2, 2003 
by Margaret Kriz 
“’These chemical plants have a vulnerability which has a catastrophic characteristic…
that could approximate the World Trade Center,’ Ran d Beers, a White House counter- 
terrorism adviser for 30 years, told National Journal. ”
p.2477 
“’EPA initially said that one of the things facilit ies ought to at least look at as part of a 
comprehensive vulnerability assessment is whether t here are steps they can take to 
reduce hazards that are present at the site,’ recal ls a former EPA official.” 
p.2478 
“’Chemical companies make dangerous things,’ added Greg Lebedev, president of the 
American Chemistry Council, which represents 180 gi ants of the chemical manufacturing 
industry.  ‘Getting into the technology of what you  make and how you make it is a 
subject for an environmental or technology context,  not security.  I don’t want us to 
wander down an exotic path here.’” 
p.2479 
“Corzine describes that defeat and industry’s conti nuing effort to water down his bill as ‘a 
classic case of the special interest trumping the p ublic interest.’” 
p.2480 
“But the battle continues over Corzine’s desire to encourage industry to use inherently 
safer technology at the chemical facilities.” 
p.2480 
“’The problem you have in an open society is that i t’s physically impossible to make any 
large industrial site terrorist-proof,’ Barton said  in an interview.  ‘If there are enough 
terrorists who are dedicated enough and equipped we ll enough, they’re going to 
overwhelm everything that you put up short of some sort of Fort Knox—which doesn’t
make much sense, given the cost and the relatively remote possibility that any specific 
site is going to be targeted.’” 
p.2481 

National Security Advisor to the President 
Richard Clarke UPI 
August 31, 2005 
“Clarke criticized the administration and the Repub lican-controlled Congress for not 
giving priority to pushing through legislation yet.   ‘Congress has diddled for three years 
on a Chemical Security Act.’” 
New Jersey Work Environment Council 
Safety and Security First: Protecting Our Jobs, Fam ilies, and Hometowns from 
Toxic Chemical Disasters 
May 2006 
http://inquirer.philly.com/pdfs/2006/safety.pdf 
In the likely case of a terrorist attack, not to me ntion the “far more frequent and 
continuing ‘routine’ accidents, spills, fires, and explosions 
p.16 
New York City Comptroller 
One Year Later: The Fiscal Impact of 9/11 On New Yo rk City 
September 4, 2002 
http://www.comptroller.nyc.gov/bureaus/bud/reports/ impact-9-11-year-later.pdf 
Palm Beach Post 
“Hijacking Suspect Cased Targets, Experts Say Moham med Atta Called a ‘Little 
Bomb Walking Around” 
by Joel Engelhardt 
October, 2001 
http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/assets/binaries/falke nrath-testimony 
“On October 28, 2001, Danny Whitener reported Moham med Atta’s (terrorist involved in 
9/11 attacks) interest in the status of a chemical storage facility—the Palm Beach Post:
“According to Whitener the man asked ‘So tell me ab out this factory I just flew over,’
referring to a former copper processing plant nearb y, with dozens of round steel tanks 
and flanked by towering smokestacks.  At the time, hundreds of rail tanker cars were 
parked near the plant, Whitener said… ‘He was just persistent about the chemical
company,’ Whitener said.  ‘I told him the tanks wer e empty.  He came back and said 
‘Don’t tell me that.  What about all the… [rail] ta nker cars?’” 

Paper, Allied-Industrial, Chemical and Energy Worke rs International Union 
(PACE): 
PACE International Union Survey: Workplace Incident  Prevention and Response 
Since 9/11 
October 2004 
http://www.google.com/search?hl=en&client=firefox-a &rls=org.mozilla%3Aen- 
US%3Aofficial&hs=8f7&q=PACE+International+Union+Sur vey%3A+Workplace+Incident
+Prevention+and+Response+Since+9%2F11+PACE&btnG=Sea rch 
“PACE-represented industries… [namely] chemical man ufacturing… facilities may be 
targets.  The communities surrounding these facilit ies are also at-risk.” 
p.ii
Of PACE workers surveyed at 133 high-risk chemical facilities…
“Less than half (44%) of the respondents indicated that their company’s preventative 
actions, including security efforts, were effective  (…very effective, moderately effective,
…[or] slightly effective) in reducing the vulnerabilities of their site to a catastrophic event
caused by a terrorist attack.   Over one-third (36%) were neutral about the 
effectiveness, and one-fifth (21%) said the actions  were ineffective.” 
p.v 
“When considering responding to an event caused by a terrorist attack , 44% of 
respondents who characterized their sites as high risk found their company’s actions 
ineffective.” 
p. vi
“A strong majority of respondents reported no actio n had been initiated by the 
companies at their sites to involve the local union  or hourly workers in company plans or 
actions to prevent  or respond to a catastrophic event caused by a possible terrorist 
attack ….  Involvement of the community regarding company plans or actions was even 
lower. 
p. vi
“It is especially sobering for those who work at or  live near refineries… chemical plants.
“On February 12, [2003, the DHS sounded] another al ert… warning of possible 
‘conventional attacks against the U.S. nuclear/chem ical-industrial infrastructure…
Based on information, …industrial chemical plants r emain viable targets.” 
p.3 
“This adds up to nearly 4,000 sites and tens of mil lions of people at risk. 
p.4 
Pittsburgh Tribune-Review 
“Chemicals pose risks nationwide” 
June 11, 2002 
By Carl Prine 

http://www.pittsburghlive.com/x/pittsburghtrib/news /specialreports/potentialfordisaster/s_ 
69664.html
“A month-long probe by the Pittsburgh Tribune-Revie w into chemical plant security in 
Baltimore, Chicago and Houston found safeguards so lax that a potential terrorist can 
easily reach massive tanks of toxins that endanger millions of residents.” 
Risk Management Solutions, Inc. 
http://www.rms.com/NewsPress/PR_042904_CasualtyStud y.asp 
“The chlorine spill scenario results in 42,600 tota l casualties, over 10,000 of which are 
fatal. Insurance claims covering these casualties w ould exceed $7 billion.” 
p.56 
“Explosions, transportation accidents, and chemical  releases all pose a threat to people 
living, working, or traveling in the vicinity of th e accident.” 
p.54 
“Chlorine is one of many industrial agents that are  harmful, yet used extensively in 
processing and transported in bulk. Chlorine gas is  so deadly that it was used as a 
chemical weapon in the trenches of World War I.” 
p.56 
Securities Exchange Commission 
10K Report submitted by The Dow Chemical Company De cember 31, 2008 
http://ccbn.tenkwizard.com/filing.php?repo=tenk&ipa ge=5477624&doc=1&total=&attach 
=ON&TK=DOW&CK=0000029915&FG=0&CK2=29915&FC=000000&B K=FFFFFF&SC= 
ON&TC=FFFFFF&TC1=FFFFFF&TC2=FFFFFF&LK=0000FF&AL=FF0 000&VL=800080 
“Local, state and federal governments have begun a regulatory process that could 
lead to new regulations impacting the security of c hemical plant locations and the 
transportation of hazardous chemicals. 
“Growing public and political attention has been pl aced on protecting critical
infrastructure, including the chemical industry, fr om security threats. Terrorist attacks 
and natural disasters have increased concern regard ing the security of chemical
production and distribution. In addition, local, st ate and federal governments have begun 
a regulatory process that could lead to new regulat ions impacting the security of 
chemical plant locations and the transportation of hazardous chemicals, which could 
result in higher operating costs and interruptions in normal business operations.” 
p. 10 
Teamsters Rail Conference: 
High Alert: Workers Warn of Security Gaps on Nation ’s Railroads 
September 2005 

http://www.ble.org/pr/news/newsflash.asp?id=4185 
"Engineers report that there's no distress code or signal... to alert authorities of a crisis,
even as they pass through or work in rail yards clo se to schools, government buildings 
and densely populated areas." 
p1 
"In short, workers say, America's rail lines appear  one step shy of disaster." 
p1 
"As Americans debate and examine the nation's post- 9/11security... serious questions 
regarding the safety and security of the U.S. rail system remain unanswered and serious 
flaws go uncorrected--leaving the American public v ulnerable." 
p1 
"...Hazardous materials, says the Department of Tra nsportation, are potentially weapons 
of mass destruction, and as such, are likely target s for terrorism." 
p1 
"Fatigue was the focus of the NTSB investigation in to the deadly June 28, 2004 train 
crash in Macdona... in which three people including  a train conductor, died from a 
chlorine gas release." 
p.6 
"More than half the workers surveyed who saw runnin g, unattended locomotives... said 
the trains were hauling hazardous materials--deadly  agents like chlorine that, if released,
could kill people as far as 15 miles away, accordin g to the pamphlet 'Estimating the Area 
Affected by a Chlorine Release,' issued by the Chlo rine Institute." 
p.8 
“The FBI’s words were chilling: al Qaeda cells coul d be targeting trains carrying 
hazardous materials.  The Bureau had captured al Qa eda photographs of railroad 
engines, cars and crossings, and officials said tha t terrorists could choose a number of
strategies, ‘such as destroying key rail bridges an d sections of track to cause 
derailments or targeting hazardous material contain ers.’” 
p.15 
“Weapons of mass destruction, the workers knew, had  become part of their daily lives.” 
p.16 
“Nearly 85% of the world’s chlorine… is shipped by rail, according to the International
Labour Organization (ILO).” 
p.16 
“By the time the green, gaseous cloud had passed ov er Graniteville on January 6, 2005,
nine people were dead… Thousands of people were eva cuated from their homes. 
Hundreds were injured.  The full extent of environm ental damage is still unknown.” 
p.16-17 
“…Since 9/11, the nation’s rail carriers have, by v irtually all accounts, failed to provide 
significant, measurable safety and security improve ments to deter or respond to a 

terrorist attack on the U.S. rail network.” 
p.18 
“Restrict remote control use to non-hazmat shipment s.” 
p.18 
U.S. Army 
Draft Medical NBC Hazard Analysis of Chemical-Biolo gical-Radiological-Nuclear- 
High Explosive Threat, Possible Scenarios & Plannin g Requirements 
By, Army Office of the Surgeon General 
October 2006 
http://www.fas.org/irp/doddir/dod/jp3_41.pdf 
As summarized by the Washington Post (http://www.wa shingtonpost.com/ac2/wp- 
dyn/A10616-2002Mar11): 
“A previously undisclosed study by the Army surgeon  general concludes that as many as 
2.4 million people could be killed or injured in a terrorist attack against a U.S. toxic 
chemical plant in a densely populated area.” 
U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board
CSB Board Member John Bresland 
February 28, 2007 
http://www.chemsafety.gov/index.cfm?folder=news_rel eases&page=news&NEWS_ID=3 
43 
"Chlorine is a highly toxic substance that needs ap propriate safeguards to prevent 
releases and protect the public, facility personnel , and emergency responders." 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Lessons Learned in the Aftermath of September 11, 2 001 
February 1, 2002 
“General authority exists under the Safe Drinking W ater Act (SDWA)/Clean Water Act
(CWA) to perform vulnerability assessments, but EPA  has only limited Authority to 
require corrective actions.” 
p.2-1 
“Two specific incidents where security was a specif ic concern were identified: 
(1)railroads did not want to ship chlorine in tanke rs after attacks, but chlorine is needed 
to guarantee the safety of water supplies, and (2) EPA received requests to reroute 
chemical tankers and trucks away from the populatio n centers.” 
p.D-14 

Chemical Accident Risks in U.S. Industry 
By James C. Belke 
September 25, 2000 
http://www.epa.gov/ceppo/pubs/stockholmpaper.pdf 
“A chemical plant could effectively be converted in to a weapon of mass destruction 
(WMD) relatively easily.” 
p.5 
“Toxic chemicals… particularly ammonia and chlorine … account for the majority of RMP 
processes.” 
(with table) 
p.13 
“The median [negatively impacted] population for… t oxic worst case scenarios is 1500 
people.” 
p.25 
“The high number of facilities in both class interv als is primarily due to the prevalent use 
of 90-ton rail tank cars for chlorine storage in th e United States.” 
p.26 
Letter from William H. Sanders III, Dr., P.H., P.E. , Director, Office of Pollution 
Prevention and Toxics, to Rick Hind, Legislative  D irector of Greenpeace USA 
 “All chemical companies have a fundamental respons ibility and a general duty to 
design, operate, and maintain a safe plant, prevent  accidents, and to mitigate the 
consequences of those releases that do occur under section 112(r) of the Clean Air Act
Amendments of 1990." 
President Clinton’s Clean Water Initiative 
February 1994 
“…The Administration will develop a national strate gy for substituting, reducing, or 
prohibiting the use of chlorine and chlorinated com pounds: 
Within 6 months following enactment, the Administra tor should convene a task 
force… to comprehensively assess the use, environme ntal and health impacts of 
chlorine and chlorinated compounds, and availabilit y and relative efficacy and safety of
substitutes for these substances as used in… solven ts, PVC and other plastics…” 
p.22 
U.S. Government Accountability Office 
Protection of Chemical and Water Infrastructure 
March 2005 
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05327.pdf 
"In March, 2003, we recommended that Secretary of H omeland Security and the 
Administrator of EPA jointly develop, in consultati on with the Office of Homeland 
Security a comprehensive national chemical security  strategy to include... legislative 

proposal to require chemical facilities to expediti ously assess their vulnerabilities... and...
require these facilities to take corrective action. " 
p.6 
"The nation's drinking water systems are not requir ed to implement any risk reduction 
actions based on their vulnerability assessments.” 
p.7 
"The majority of officials at the community water s ystems we visited reported that the 
federal government should provide technical support  and guidance to help the water 
sector in developing and implementing security enha ncements." 
p.7 
"The majority of officials we interviewed also supp orted the need for the federal
government to expand financial support for the secu rity enhancements in the water 
sector by providing funding designated for communit y water systems." 
p.7 
“According to a 1999 study by the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 
(ATSDR), security at chemical plants in two communi ties was fair to poor.” – General
Accounting Office (GAO-03-439) , March 2003 
Homeland Security: DHS Is Taking Steps to Enhance S ecurity at Chemical 
Facilities but Additional Authority Is Needed 
January 27, 2006 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-06-150 
"...Industry officials told us that they face a num ber of challenges in preparing facilities 
against a terrorist attack.  They reported that the  cost of security improvements can be a 
burden, particularly for smaller companies that may  lack the resources larger chemical
companies have to devote to security." 
p.6 
"Because chemical facilities pose significant risks  to millions of Americans, additional
legislation is needed to give DHS the authority to require security improvements at these 
facilities." 
p.6 
"...Stakeholders had mixed views, however, on the s pecific contents of any legislation,
such as requirements that facilities substitute saf er chemicals and processes--referred to 
as "inherently safer technologies"--that could less en the potential consequences of an 
attack by reducing the risks present at these facil ities, but could be costly or infeasible 
for some plants." 
p.6 
"We are also recommending that DHS... work with EPA  to study the advantages and 
disadvantages of substituting safer chemicals and p rocesses at some chemical
facilities.” 
p.7 

Homeland Security: Voluntary Initiatives Are Under Way at Chemical Facilities, but 
the Extent of Security Preparedness is Unknown 
March 2003 
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d03439.pdf 
“Chemical facilities may be attractive targets for terrorists intent on causing massive 
damage.  The risk of an attack varies among facilit ies, depending upon several factors,
including their location and the types of chemicals  they use, store, or manufacture.” 
p.3 
“Many facilities are located in populated areas, wh ere a chemical release could result in 
injuries or death as well as economic harm.” 
p.3-4 
 “Furthermore, both the Secretary of Homeland Secur ity and the Administrator of EPA 
have stated that voluntary efforts alone are not su fficient to assure the public of the 
industry’s preparedness.” 
p.5 
“The Army has also estimated the high potential dam age to the population from a toxic 
gas release…  The Army Office of The Surgeon Genera l propose, based on generic 
estimates, that it was conceivable that as many as 2.4 million people could request 
medical treatment if a terrorist caused a release o f a toxic chemical.” 
p.11 
“ACC’s security code generally requires that third parties… verify that [stated] 
improvements were implemented.  The code does not r equire, however, that third 
parties verify that the vulnerability assessment is  conducted appropriately or that the 
actions taken by the facility adequately address se curity risks.” 
p.26 
“While industry recognizes the contribution that in herently safer technologies can make 
to reducing the risk of a terrorist attack, industr y officials noted that decisions about 
inherently safer technologies require thorough anal ysis.” 
p.29 
"Chemical facilities may be attractive targets for terrorists intent on causing economic 
harm and loss of life.  Many facilities exist in po pulated areas where a chemical release 
could threaten thousands.  EPA reports that 123 che mical facilities located throughout
the nation have toxic 'worst-case' scenarios where more than a million people in the 
surrounding area could be at risk of exposure to a cloud of toxic gas if a release 
occurred." 

U.S. Homeland Security Council :
Planning Scenarios: Executive Summaries 
Scenario 8: Chemical Attack—Chlorine Tank Explosion
Copyright valid through 2009 
http://www.globalsecurity.org/security/ops/hsc-scen -8.htm 
“Assuming a high-density area, as many as 700,000 p eople may be in the actual
downwind area, which could extend as far as 25 mile s.  Of these, 5% (35,000) will
receive potentially lethal exposures…  An additiona l 15% (105,000 people) will require 
hospitalization…  However, approximately 450,000 “w orried well” will seek treatment at
local medical facilities….  Most of the injured wil l recover in 7 to 14 days, except for 
those with severe lung damage.  These individuals w ill require long-term monitoring and 
treatment.” 
Section 8, p.2 
“There will be significant damage to the plant as a  direct result of the attack. 
Decontamination of waterways may present a signific ant challenge as well. 
Environmental impacts especially public safety conc erns, are likely to significantly delay 
rebuilding efforts. 
Section p.8-3 
Casualties  - 17,500 fatalities; 10,000 sever injuries; 100,00 0 hospitalizations 
Infrastructure Damage  - In immediate explosions areas, and metal corrosi on in areas 
of heavy exposure 
Evacuations/Displaced Persons  - Up to 70,000 (self evacuate) 
Contamination  - Primarily at explosion site, and if waterways ar e impacted 
Economic Impact  - Millions of dollars 
Potential for Multiple Events  - Yes 
Recovery Timeline  - Weeks 
Section 8, p.1 
U.S. Justice Department: Federal Bureau of Investig ation 
Troy Morgan FBI Agent and expert on weapons of mass  destruction 
June 2003 
“You’ve heard about sarin and other chemical weapon s in the news. But it’s far easier to 
attack a rail car full of toxic industrial chemical s than it is to compromise the security of a 
military base and obtain these materials.” 

U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
Edward McGaffigan, Commissioner 
November 2001 
“There is no chemical regulatory commission that lo oks at the petrochemical plants and 
has requirements for security that are inspected by  chemical regulatory agency staff, 
and there are no on-force exercises, and none of th e apparatus that we have in place is 
in place for much of the rest of the infrastructure .  It is quite clear that you can get 
catastrophic consequences in industries other than the nuclear industry…” 
U.S. Naval Research Laboratory 
Dr. Jay Boris, Testimony before the Committee on Pu bic Works and the 
Environment of the Council of the District of Colum bia 
January 23, 2004 
http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/assets/binaries/analy sis-by-us-naval-research 
“Terrorist attacks in an urban environment can put 100,000 people or more at risk in a 15 
to 30-minute time span…lethally exposed people can die at the rate of 100 per second.” 
U.S. Public Interest Group Education Fund 
Protecting Our Hometowns; Preventing Chemical Terro rism in America 
2002 
http://www.environmentillinois.org/uploads/vX/q5/vX q5bctEDlM08AzFaZHlxg/Protecting_ 
our_Hometowns.pdf 
“The threat of terrorism require eliminating or red ucing hazards through the use of 
inherently safer technologies wherever feasible.” 
p.1 
“The use of airplanes on September 11 th  and the use of truck bombs in previous attacks 
show that terrorists need not penetrate a site’s pe rimeter to cause destruction, and 
security alone is inadequate to prevent a terrorist  attack.” 
p.5 
“While some attention has focused on the potential for terrorists to use chemicals to 
build chemical weapons, national security experts h ave asserted that the enormous 
complexity of creating a chemical weapon makes such  a scenario less likely than an 
intentionally triggered chemical release from an in dustrial facility. Industrial facilities 
provide relatively easy access to chemicals at loca tions from which a significant 
chemical release could harm large numbers of people . Amy Smithson, director of the 
Chemical and Biological Weapons Non-Proliferation P roject at the Henry L. Stimson 
Center, testified in a House of Representatives com mittee hearing: 
‘Although assembling from scratch an unconventional  weapons capability that could 
cause mass casualties is not that elementary, there  are tangible routes whereby 
terrorists could inflict considerable harm with che mical and biological substances. One 

shortcut involves foul play with industrial chemica ls….  Logic dictates that if the same 
result [mass casualties from a chemical release] ca n be achieved through a less 
arduous route, terrorists intent on causing mass ca sualties with chemicals would 
probably engineer the intentional release of indust rial chemicals rather than wrestle with 
the complexities of making large quantities of the classic chemical warfare agents.’” 
p.6 
U.S. Senator (former), Garry Hart, D-CO 
Washington Post, op-ed 
August 11, 2003 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/ac2/wp-dyn/A42185-200 3Aug10?language=printer 
“As hard as it is to believe, the chemical industry  has refused to take adequate 
precautions to safeguard its facilities and surroun ding communities. Some plants have 
strengthened on-site security by adding guards, bui lding fences or installing surveillance 
cameras. Others have committed to reducing or phasi ng out their use of highly 
hazardous processes or chemicals in favor of safer ones. Unfortunately, however, it is 
still business as usual at most plants. They contin ue to deal with high volumes of 
dangerous chemicals -- even when safer materials or  processes are readily available.
That is why the government must require industry co operation in homeland security.” 
U.S. Senator (former) Barack Obama, D-IL 
Senate Floor Statement 
March 30, 2006 
http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi- 
bin/getpage.cgi?position=all&page=S2611&dbname=2006 _record 
“These plants are basically stationary weapons of m ass destruction.” 
pS2612, CONGRESSIONAL RECORD—SENATE, March 30, 2006 
“While plant owners would not be able to substitute  their own security standards, they 
would be able to come up with security plans that a re tailored to each facility.” 
pS2612, CONGRESSIONAL RECORD—SENATE, March 30, 2006 
“The Lautenberg-Obama bill also protects state and local rights to establish security 
standards that match their local needs.” 
pS2612, CONGRESSIONAL RECORD—SENATE, March 30, 2006 
“The legislation also gives employees a seat at the  table…” 
pS2612, CONGRESSIONAL RECORD—SENATE, March 30, 2006 
“But there are other ways to reduce risk that need to be part of the equation. 
Specifically, by employing safer technologies, we c an reduce the attractiveness of 
chemical plants as a target. 
This concept, known as Inherently Safer Technology,  involves methods such as 
changing the flow of chemical processes to avoid da ngerous chemical byproducts, 

reducing the pressures or temperatures of chemical reactions to minimize the risk of 
explosions, reducing inventories of dangerous chemi cals and replacing dangerous 
chemicals with benign ones.  Each of these methods reduces the danger that chemical
plants pose to our communities and make them less a ppealing targets for terrorists.” 
pS2612, CONGRESSIONAL RECORD—SENATE, March 30, 2006 
“Even the chemical industry itself has embraced IST , and many facilities across the 
country have already employed safer technologies.” 
pS2612, CONGRESSIONAL RECORD—SENATE, March 30, 2006 
“So far, because the industry wields so much influe nce in Washington, it’s been getting 
its way.” 
pS2612, CONGRESSIONAL RECORD—SENATE, March 30, 2006 
“We cannot allow our security to be hijacked by cor porate interests.” 
pS2612, CONGRESSIONAL RECORD—SENATE, March 30, 2006 
Statement at Senate Environment and Public Works Co mmittee hearing 
June 21, 2006 
“For instance, we've heard that IST is in "the earl y stages of development," even though 
it's been used in the chemical industry for nearly 30 years.  Saying IST is in its infancy is 
a little like saying the personal computer is in it s infancy.” 
“We've heard that IST is an environmental issue, no t a security one, even though the 
Departments of Justice and Homeland Security, and e ven the American Chemistry 
Council have embraced IST as part of chemical plant  security in the past.  And most 
recently, a National Academy of Sciences study, com missioned by DHS, endorsed the 
adoption of IST as "the most desirable solution to preventing chemical releases" from 
terrorist attack.  Time and again, experts have agr eed that IST is the most effective 
approach to eliminating terrorist threats at chemic al facilities.” 
“…But there is one thing we can all agree on: any c hemical plant security legislation 
must be comprehensive and rational.  It should bala nce the need to keep us safe with 
the need to continue producing chemical products th at are essential to our economy.  I
believe the IST approach needs to be a part of rati onal comprehensive security 
legislation.” 
U.S. Senator (former), Warren Rudman, R-NH 
CBS 60 Minutes 
November 16, 2003 
http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2003/11/13/60minutes /main583528.shtml

"You know, the threat is just staring us in the fac e. I mean, all you'd have to do is to have 
a major chemical facility in a major metropolitan a rea go up and there'd be hell to pay 
politically," says Rudman. "People will say, 'Well,  didn't we know that this existed?' Of
course, we knew." 
Washington Post 
Study Assesses Risk of Attack on Chemical Plant 
By Eric Pianin 
March 12, 2002 
http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P2-326046.html
 “A previously undisclosed study by the Army surgeo n general concludes that as many 
as 2.4 million people could be killed or injured in  a terrorist attack against a U.S. toxic 
chemical plant in a densely populated area.” 
Toxic Chemicals' Security Worries Officials 
By Eric Pianin 
November 12, 2001 
http://www.mapcruzin.com/news/rtk111201a.htm 
“’No one needed to convince us that we could be-and  indeed would be-a target at some 
future date,’ said Frederick L. Webber, president o f the American Chemistry Council, an 
industry group representing 180 major companies inc luding Dupont, Dow, and BP 
Chemical.” 
Working Group on Community Right-to-Know: 
Unnecessary Dangers: Emergency Chemical Release Haz ards at Power Plants 
July 2004 
http://www.crtk.org/library_files/PowerPlantsReport .pdf 
“The data in this report also show that… just two-d ozen power plants account for two- 
thirds of the people in danger.  By using readily a vailable safer chemicals these two- 
dozen plants could all but eliminate the danger to 2.4 million people.” 
p.3 
“Some 166 power plants report using anhydrous ammon ia, endangering an average of
21,506 people around each facility.” 
p.3 
“Forty power plants report chlorine gas as their gr eatest emergency release hazard, 
endangering an average of 4,618 nearby residents.” 
p.3 
“National data show frequent ammonia and chlorine s pills at industrial facilities.  The 
National Response Center received reports of… 2,200  releases involving chlorine gas.
Spills reported… range from minor to very large.” 
p.6 

 
Congressional Research Service 7-5700 www.crs.gov MEMORANDUM December 11, 2009 
To: Honorable Edward Markey 
   Attention: Michal Freedhoff 
From: Dana A. Shea, Specialist in Science and Technology Policy, x7-6844 
Subject: RMP Facilities in the United States as of December 2009 
  
This memorandum responds to your request regarding facilities submitting risk management plans 
(RMPs) to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). You requested an analysis of RMP facilities 
within the United States by potentially affected po pulation. You also requested an analysis of facilit ies 
that were required by regulation to resubmit their information to the EPA but had not done so. 
Under the Clean Air Act, Section 112(r), the EPA es tablished a program requiring facilities possessing  
greater than certain threshold quantities of 140 ch emicals to provide risk management plans to the EPA . 1 
As part of this reporting requirement, facilities a re required to determine the worst-case scenario re lease 
from a single chemical process, using EPA criteria and guidelines. 2 Facilities are also required to estimate 
the population potentially at risk from this worst- case scenario release by calculating the population  that 
resides within a circle surrounding the facility. T he distance the worst-case scenario release might t ravel 
determines the radius of the circle.3 
The population potentially affected under an EPA wo rst-case scenario release is calculated in a circle  
around the facility. In the event of an actual cata strophic chemical release, meteorological effects w ould 
determine the direction of the release and therefor e those potentially affected. Furthermore, how such  a 
release would affect those exposed would vary depen ding on many factors, such as the demographics of 
the population and the surrounding geography and we ather. In addition, worst-case scenarios do not tak e 
into account emergency response measures that facil ity operators or others might take to mitigate harm . 
Therefore, it is unlikely that this entire populati on would be affected by any single chemical release , even 
if it is a result of a worst-case accident. 
Facilities may register and deregister from the RMP  program as their chemical processes and the amount s 
of chemicals they store and use change. If a facili ty no longer possesses a regulated chemical above t he 
                                                 
1 The list of 140 chemicals, including 77 toxic and 63 flammable chemicals, and their threshold quantit ies is found at 40 CFR 
68.130. 
2 The criteria and guidelines for determining the wo rst-case scenario release are found at 40 CFR 68.25 . Some facilities have 
submitted information on multiple worst-case scenar io releases. 
3 This requirement is found at 40 CFR 68.30. The cri teria for determining the distance a worst-case sce nario release might travel 
are found at 40 CFR 68.22. 

Congressional Research Service 2 
 
  threshold quantity, it is required to inform the EP A and deregister from the program. 4 Facilities are 
required to review and update their RMP plans filed  with the EPA at least once every five years. 5 For the 
purposes of this memorandum, facilities that have n ot reviewed and updated their RMP plan within five 
years of their submission will be termed facilities  with overdue updates. The deadline for submissions  
under the RMP program was June 21, 1999. 6 The EPA maintains this information in the RMP*Nati onal 
Database. 
In 1999, Congress passed the Chemical Safety Inform ation, Site Security and Fuels Regulatory Relief Ac t 
(CSISSFRRA). 7 This act removes from RMP program coverage any fla mmable fuel used as fuel or held 
for sale as fuel by a retail facility. In implement ing this act, the EPA allowed facilities that had p reviously 
filed under the RMP program the options of withdraw ing from the program, which would delete the 
information from the EPA database, or taking no fur ther action, which would leave the information in t he 
EPA database as a voluntary submission. 8 Facilities exempted under CSISSFRRA that voluntari ly 
submitted information are not required to update th ese submissions. 
The data available in the RMP*National Database is not sufficient to determine the full scope of actua l 
compliance or noncompliance with the RMP program. F acilities that were required to, but did not, submi t 
an RMP plan to the EPA would not be present in the RMP*National Database, but would be out of 
compliance with the RMP program. As a result of the  EPA’s implementation of CSISSFRRA, some 
entries in the EPA database that have not been upda ted within the five year requirement are likely to be 
facilities falling under CSISSFRRA that opted to ta ke no action. These facilities are not identified a s such 
in the RMP*National Database. 9 Thus, the number of facilities identified in this memorandum as having 
overdue updates is likely not equal to the total nu mber of facilities not complying with the RMP progr am. 
At your request, CRS has searched the December 2009  update of the EPA RMP*National Database (with 
off-site consequence analysis (OCA) data) for facil ities that have registered under the RMP program. 
Facilities that have deregistered from the RMP prog ram were excluded. You requested that the facilitie s 
be classified by state according to the population potentially affected by a worst-case release, accor ding to 
the EPA worst-case scenario criteria, using thresho lds of 1,000 people, 10,000 people, 100,000 people,  
and 1,000,000 people. Additionally, you requested t hat facilities with overdue RMP updates be identifi ed 
for each population category. Facilities with an RM P filing due to be updated by December 1, 2009, tha t 
had not been updated were considered overdue for th e purposes of this analysis. These facilities inclu de 
CSISSFRRA-exempted facilities as well as facilities  that are covered by the regulation. All of the 
information in this memorandum is drawn from the EP A RMP*National Database (with off-site 
consequence analysis (OCA) data). This information is presented in Table 1 . 
Since facilities may register and deregister from t he RMP program as chemical processes and amounts of  
chemicals stored and used change, the number of fac ilities listed in Table 1  should be considered as 
illustrative of the current industry profile, rathe r than absolute. 
                                                 
4 This requirement is found at 40 CFR 68.190. Facili ties must deregister from the program within six mo nths. 
5 This requirement is found at 40 CFR 68.36. Facilit ies not excluded by the Chemical Safety Information , Site Security and Fuels 
Regulatory Relief Act (P.L. 106-40) that do not rev iew and update the RMP plan are not in compliance w ith the RMP regulation. 
They may be subject to enforcement actions by the E PA under the Clean Air Act, Section 113. 
6 61 Federal Register  31,668 (June 20, 1996). 
7 P.L. 106-40. 
8 See 65 Federal Register  March 13, 2000, p. 13,247. 
9 Personal communication with EPA staff, September 2 5, 2007. 

Congressional Research Service 3 
 
  Table 1. Compliant, Update Overdue, and Total RMP F acilities in Each State, by Potentially 
Affected Population in EPA Defined “Worst Case” Sce narios (Parameters Designated by 
Requester) 
 0 - 999 1,000 - 9,999 10,000 - 99,999 100,000 - 99 9,999 1,000,000+ 
State Compliant Update Overdue Total Compliant Update 
Overdue  Total Compliant Update 
Overdue  Total Compliant Update Overdue Total Compliant Update 
Overdue  Total 
AK 17 1 18 13 0 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
AL 78 6 84 88 3 91 36 0 36 9 0 9 0 0 0 
AR 34 6 40 68 5 73 52 3 55 2 0 2 0 0 0 
AS 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 
AZ 24 2 26 42 7 49 32 6 38 0 0 0 2 0 2 
CA 288 34 322 285 25 310 248 29 277 49 4 53 9 1 10 
CO 106 11 117 53 3 56 24 2 26 0 0 0 2 0 2 
CT 9 0 9 11 2 13 10 1 11 1 0 1 0 0 0 
DC 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 
DE 10 0 10 12 0 12 3 0 3 2 0 2 1 0 1 
FL 71 4 75 109 11 120 89 5 94 19 2 21 4 1 5 
GA 113 7 120 117 10 127 39 4 43 6 0 6 1 0 1 
GU 4 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
HI 5 0 5 8 1 9 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 
IA 428 10 438 397 13 410 48 7 55 3 0 3 0 0 0 
ID 25 2 27 23 1 24 16 2 18 0 0 0 0 0 0 
IL 527 49 576 302 19 321 73 4 77 17 0 17 11 1 12 
IN 181 26 207 160 13 173 71 9 80 11 0 11 3 0 3 
KS 442 6 448 189 4 193 35 0 35 5 0 5 0 0 0 
KY 75 4 79 72 11 83 38 2 40 13 0 13 0 0 0 
LA 111 21 132 88 10 98 62 3 65 39 4 43 2 0 2 
MA 14 5 19 23 3 26 21 3 24 1 0 1 0 0 0 
MD 33 0 33 26 1 27 36 0 36 1 0 1 1 0 1 
ME 8 2 10 8 3 11 5 0 5 1 0 1 0 0 0 
MI 67 12 79 65 21 86 42 4 46 8 2 10 3 1 4 
MN 153 50 203 182 36 218 47 7 54 6 0 6 1 1 2 
MO 185 21 206 136 6 142 39 1 40 5 0 5 1 0 1 
MS 44 4 48 60 9 69 22 7 29 1 1 2 0 0 0 
MT 34 3 37 15 1 16 7 0 7 1 0 1 0 0 0 
NC 101 13 114 88 14 102 38 5 43 4 0 4 0 0 0 

Congressional Research Service 4 
 
   0 - 999 1,000 - 9,999 10,000 - 99,999 100,000 - 99 9,999 1,000,000+ 
State Compliant Update Overdue Total Compliant Update 
Overdue  Total Compliant Update 
Overdue  Total Compliant Update Overdue Total Compliant Update 
Overdue  Total 
ND 173 69 242 57 15 72 13 1 14 0 0 0 0 0 0 
NE 286 3 289 173 2 175 40 0 40 2 0 2 0 0 0 
NH 6 0 6 4 0 4 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 
NJ 37 0 37 18 0 18 10 0 10 6 0 6 5 0 5 
NM 49 3 52 7 1 8 6 0 6 2 0 2 0 0 0 
NV 22 6 28 6 1 7 5 0 5 1 0 1 2 0 2 
NY 44 2 46 65 2 67 36 0 36 18 0 18 1 0 1 
OH 124 20 144 168 17 185 71 14 85 11 3 14 5 0 5 
OK 173 25 198 68 16 84 36 1 37 8 0 8 0 0 0 
OR 44 3 47 42 1 43 25 1 26 4 0 4 0 0 0 
PA 116 1 117 145 4 149 79 0 79 9 0 9 2 0 2 
PR 6 0 6 39 1 40 46 0 46 1 0 1 0 0 0 
RI 1 0 1 5 0 5 6 0 6 3 0 3 0 0 0 
SC 63 2 65 91 2 93 18 0 18 7 0 7 0 0 0 
SD 46 6 52 27 4 31 4 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 
TN 57 7 64 72 7 79 38 5 43 16 1 17 1 0 1 
TX 474 91 565 333 57 390 291 22 313 69 5 74 31 1 32  
UT 40 6 46 22 1 23 9 3 12 4 0 4 3 0 3 
VA 56 1 57 63 0 63 23 1 24 7 0 7 0 0 0 
VI 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 
VT 2 0 2 3 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
WA 118 6 124 88 4 92 29 2 31 10 0 10 0 0 0 
WI 88 21 109 91 25 116 47 5 52 3 0 3 0 0 0 
WV 28 0 28 26 1 27 15 0 15 7 0 7 0 0 0 
WY 55 1 56 6 1 7 4 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total 5295 572 5867 4259 395 4654 1991 159 2150 393  22 415 91 6 97 
Source: CRS analysis of the EPA RMP*National Database (with off-site consequence analysis (OCA) data), updated 
December 1, 2009. 
Notes: Facilities due to update their RMP filing by Decemb er 1, 2009, that had not done so are categorized as  “update 
overdue.” Some of those facilities may be exempted from regulation by CSISSFRRA. In cases where facilit ies report 
multiple worst-case scenario releases, the worst-ca se scenario potentially affecting the most people h as been considered. 
The column labeled State also includes American Sam oa (AS), Guam (GU), Puerto Rico (PR), and the Distri ct of Columbia 
(DC). 

Congressional Research Service 5 
 
  You also requested that facilities with overdue RMP  updates be classified by EPA region according to t he 
population criteria described above. The EPA has te n regional offices, each of which is responsible fo r 
several states and, in some cases, territories. 10  This information is provided in Table 2 . 
Table 2. RMP Facilities with Overdue Updates in Eac h EPA Region, by Potentially Affected 
Population in EPA Defined “Worst Case” Scenarios (P arameters Designated by Requester) 
EPA Region 0 - 999 1,000 - 9,999 10,000 - 99,999 10 0,000 - 999,999 1,000,000+ Total 
1 7 9 4 0 0 20 
2 2 3 0 0 0 5 
3 2 6 1 0 0 9 
4 47 67 28 4 1 147 
5 178 131 43 5 3 360 
6 146 89 29 9 1 274 
7 40 25 8 0 0 73 
8 96 25 6 0 0 127 
9 42 34 35 4 1 116 
10 12 6 5 0 0 23 
Total 572 395 159 22 6 1,154 
Source: CRS analysis of the EPA RMP*National Database (with off-site consequence analysis (OCA) data), updated 
December 1, 2009. 
Notes: Facilities due to update their RMP filing by Decemb er 1, 2009, that had not done so were considered as  “update 
overdue.” Some of those facilities may be exempted from regulation by CSISSFRRA. In cases where facilit ies report 
multiple worst-case scenario releases, the worst-ca se scenario potentially affecting the most people h as been considered.  
Facilities might not review and update their filed RMP plans for several reasons: the facility is out of 
regulatory compliance; the facility is no longer in  business; the facility has reduced the amount of 
reportable chemical to below threshold levels, but neglected to inform the EPA; or the facility falls under 
CSISSFRRA and is no longer covered by the RMP requi rement. Any user of this data should use caution 
when drawing further conclusions from this analysis . 
If you have any further questions regarding this to pic or questions regarding the information in this 
memorandum, please contact me at 7-6844. 
 
 
 
                                                 
10  For a description of the various EPA regions, incl uding the states located in each region, see online  at 
http://www.epa.gov/epahome/locate2.htm. 

“By switching to readily available and inherently s afer pollution control options these 
power plants could eliminate or significantly reduc e dangers that accidents or acts of 
terrorism pose to surrounding communities.” 
p.7 
“Agencies that have issued such warnings include th e Department of Homeland 
Security, Department of Justice, Environmental Prot ection Agency, General Accounting 
Office, Congressional Research Service, Agency for Toxic Substances an Disease 
Registry, Naval Research Laboratory, and Army Surge on General.”  … (list continues) 
p.12 
“The power industry should curtail unnecessary dang ers by: converting high hazard 
power plants in populated areas to readily availabl e safer alternatives to anhydrous 
ammonia and chlorine gas.” 
p.15