# Archivo original: dow-inspection-report.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:05 -03 2025

1
The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)


Author
Yang Ailun  Rashid Kang Zhao Xingmin Huang Xu
Zhou Hanhua Su Miaohan Tang Hongyuan Li Fei
English Translation and ProofreadingDinah Gardner       Shelley Jiang         Gabriel Wisniewski
Photographer 
Zhao Gang           Simon Lim
Designer
Song Yubi
August 2010. Solidified coal ash at a wet ash pond belonging to the Yuanbaoshan Power Plant, Inner Mongolia. © Zhao Gang/Greenpeace

Key Findings
PrefaceChapter One  Coal Ash in ChinaChapter Two  Results of the Greenpeace InvestigationChapter Three  Government Agencies Responsible for Handling Coal AshChapter Four  Current ProblemsChapter Five  Policy RecommendationsReferenceAppendices 
i
ii
01
06
13
15
19
2123September 2010. A month earlier, part of 
a coal ash dam collapsed at the Shentou 
Number 2 Power Plant, Shanxi province, 
flooding ash slurry over 600 mu (40 hectares) 
of farmland. © Zhao Gang/Greenpeace
June 2010. A Greenpeace activist takes a sample at the Shentou Number 2 
Power Plant, Shanxi province. © Zhao Gang/Greenpeace

Key Findings
1.Coal ash production has grown by 2.5 times in the eight years since 2002, when China began to rapidly 
expand its installed capacity of coal-fired plants. Coal ash is now the country’s single largest source of solid industrial waste. 
2.In 2009, China produced in excess of 375 million tons of coal ash, equivalent to more than twice that year’s 
urban waste production. The total volume came to 424 million cubic metres (m3) – enough to fill one standard 
swimming pool every two and a half minutes or one Water Cube (National Aquatics Center) every day. 
3.Climate change increases the risk of extreme weather events like heavy rains and floods. These events in 
turn increase the risk of disasters at coal ash disposal sites, which, with their vast quantities of harmful waste, become a grave danger to public health and the environment. 
4.In this investigation, Greenpeace detected more than 20 different kinds of harmful substances (heavy metals 
and chemical compounds) in samples collected from the coal ash disposal sites of 14 power plants across the country. 
5.Greenpeace estimates that the total coal ash waste produced by China’s coal power sector each year 
contains 358.75 tons of cadmium, 10,054.25 tons of chromium, 9,410 tons of arsenic, 4.25 tons of mercury and 5,345.5 tons of lead. Altogether, that’s 25,000 tons of heavy metals.
6.In samples of surface water taken near ash disposal sites, Greenpeace detected pollutants in excess of 
concentrations stipulated in the “Environmental Quality Standards for Surface Water” and “Standards for Irrigation Water Quality” at four out of six power stations.
7.In samples of underground well water taken near ash disposal sites, Greenpeace detected pollutants in 
excess of concentrations stipulated in the “Sanitary Standards for Drinking Water” at three out of eight power stations.
8.The majority of the 14 power stations investigated failed to observe site selection criteria when locating their 
coal ash disposal sites. Many of the coal ash disposals had inadequate measures to prevent dust dispersal, leakage and run-off of pollutants into the environment.  
9.While it is widely believed that over 60% of coal ash is reutilized in China, in reality the rate is likely less than 
half of this. This deceptive impression results from the reporting of false data by the power companies as well 
as inadequate government supervision, and is one of the key reasons for the long neglect of the problems of 
coal ash pollution in China.
10.China lacks effective policy to monitor coal ash once it is reutilized and recycled into other products. There 
is a severe lack of safeguards for public health in regards to harmful substances found in bricks and other 
products made from coal ash.
i

Preface
Some 200 years ago, coal helped to bring about the industrial revolution and advance the development of 
modern civilization. Today, coal is still part of the backbone of world economic growth. In 2009, China – home 
to one-fifth of the global population – consumed over 3 billion tons of coal, more than any other country in the 
world and more than three times greater than the amount used by the second-ranked country, the U.S. Over 
70% of China’s energy needs are met by coal. Over the last two decades, coal has provided a crucial energy 
foundation for the country’s economic boom. 
Seen from another angle, however, China’s staggering, coal-powered economic ascent comes with huge 
environmental, social and economic costs. Coal pollution has already become the country’s biggest 
environmental problem. Three years ago, in association with several other organizations, Greenpeace published 
a report called The True Cost of Coal, which examines China’s coal use from a macroeconomic perspective. 
That report showed the total external cost of coal used in 2007 alone to be RMB 1.745 trillion, equivalent to 
7.1% of China’s GDP . Every ton of coal burned that year cost RMB 150 in environmental damages. This figure 
does not even include the substantial costs associated with climate change, which coal combustion emissions 
of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases help fuel. 
Building on that report, in August 2010 Greenpeace collaborated with the Chinese Centre for Disease Control 
and Prevention to publish The True Cost of Coal – Air Pollution and Public Health, a new research report geared at educating the Chinese public about the health threats of air pollution from coal combustion. 
This latest report, The True Cost of Coal – An Investigation into Coal Ash in China, focuses on a long-ignored 
type of coal pollution. An inevitable byproduct of coal power generation, coal ash is also China’s largest single 
source of industrial solid waste. In 2009 alone, China generated at least 375 million tons of coal ash – more 
than twice the amount of urban domestic waste produced in the same time period. Coal ash is also toxic, 
containing large quantities of pollutants such as heavy metals and radioactive substances, which pose a huge threat to both the environment and public health.  
However, because of regulatory loopholes and poor policy implementation by governments and industry, coal 
ash’s environmental problem has long been over-looked and underestimated. One of the key issues is that coal 
ash re-utilization rates have been widely exaggerated to over 60%. The reality, however, is that the rate is likely 
not even half that.
To better understand the current state of coal ash pollution in China, Greenpeace conducted an onsite 
investigation into 14 power plants across the country, collecting samples of coal ash for analysis and conducting 
interviews with specialists, industry and government departments. We present this research with the hope that 
it will help lead to improvements in China’s coal ash pollution prevention legislation, strengthen environmental 
law enforcement and provide a valuable source of information. At the same time, we hope that it will encourage 
more policy makers and researchers to pay more attention to this topic.
We would like to extend our special thanks to Professor Zhou Hanhua and his team at the Law Institute of the 
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences for providing policy analysis and legal recommendations. We would also like to thank Mr Hao Zhibang, an Inner Mongolia environmental protection senior engineer, who offered advice 
and guidance during the writing of this report. Finally, we would like to thank our volunteers Ma Zhiyao and 
Zhang Zheng for meticulously and patiently checking the data in this report.
Due to limitations in time and research capability, this report definitely has room for improvement. We sincerely 
welcome and value any suggestions from experts, people in the industry and other readers for improvements.
  Climate & Energy Campaign team, Greenpeace China
September 2010
ii

Chapter One 
Coal Ash in China
Coal ash1 is the solid particulate matter produced when coal is burned in power 
stations. The term coal ash includes both fly ash, trapped by dust collection 
systems, and waste materials (often called bottom ash) that collect on the furnace floor.  Fly ash that is not captured by the dust collection systems escapes into the atmosphere and becomes particulate-matter air pollution.
June 2010. Ash darkens the sky above a coal ash dam owned by the Shentou Number 2 Power Plant, 
Shuimotou village, Shuozhou, Shanxi province. © Zhao Gang/Greenpeace

The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)
21. Current situation
China has long been over-dependent on coal for its energy 
needs. Currently, more than 70% of China’s energy is generated by burning coal, and as the economy continues to grow at a fast rate, so too does its coal consumption. The power sector is one of the largest consumers of coal, 
with more than half of national coal consumption going 
towards electricity generation.
Coal ash is the inevitable waste product from coal 
combustion. Generally speaking, every four tons of coal 
burned produce one ton of coal ash
2. In 2009, China 
consumed more than three billion tons of coal, more than half of which was used to generate electricity. Using conservative estimates, the coal ash produced that year reached 375 million tons. This is equivalent to more than twice the urban domestic waste produced in the same year
3 and a volume of 424 million cubic metres4—enough 
to fill one standard swimming pool every two and a half minutes or one Water Cube (National Aquatics Center) per day.
5. If not dealt with properly, such enormous 
quantities of coal ash pose a dangerous threat to China’s environment and public health. 
There are two methods to dispose of coal ash. It can 
be buried in an “impoundment” on land procured by the power station either as wet ash disposal (in an ash pond) or dry ash disposal (in a dry landfill). Or it can be recycled 
(comprehensive utilization) into other materials, such as 
concrete and other construction materials.
6
2. Coal ash pollution
(1) The composition of coal ash
Coal contains harmful heavy metals and radioactive substances, which are left behind after combustion in coal ash in much higher concentrations. The main chemical components of coal ash are silicon dioxide, aluminium oxide, calcium oxide, magnesium oxide, potassium oxide, 
sodium oxide, sulfur trioxide and partially burned organic 
matter
7. Coal ash also contains antimony, arsenic, boron, 
cadmium, chromium, cobalt, copper, lead, manganese, mercury, molybdenum, nickel, selenium and vanadium, among other heavy metals and radioactive elements such as radium, thorium, and uranium.(2) Air pollution
About 20% of coal ash particles are hollow, making them easily dispersible by wind. Regardless of whether dry or wet disposal methods are used, without a properly enclosed storage system, coal ash can easily be scattered into the atmosphere as secondary dust pollution. This will 
have serious consequences for people living downwind of 
the coal ash impoundment. When wind speeds reaches level four (5.5-7.9 m/s), coal ash can spread over an area spanning 100,000 and 150,000 square kilometre (km
2)8. 
Thus, coal ash-induced air pollution can affect areas far from their original location. The strong northwestern winds originating from provinces such as Inner Mongolia, Shanxi and Xinjiang, where big coal and power industries are 
located, further intensifies the spread of coal ash pollution 
towards southeastern China
9. 
(3) Water pollution
If the impoundment is not properly secured against 
leakages, pollutants in coal ash can leach into the groundwater. This is especially common at wet ash ponds, where the coal ash is mixed with water. As the coal ash soaks in the water, the heavy metals and 
other harmful substances can leach out into the earth, 
ultimately seeping into the groundwater. This can cause the contamination of local water sources, the discharge of suspended matter into drinking wells, the fluoridation and alkalization of water and so on. Coal ash can also be blown by the wind into rivers and lakes.
(4) Soil pollution
As China continues to expand its fleet of coal-fired power plants, the problem of coal ash disposal is becoming increasingly serious. Scattered by wind across the lands, coal ash can cause soils to turn alkaline, which damages agricultural production and the ecology.  The spilled coal ash can seep into nearby fields, reducing yields or even killing crops.
(5) Human health impacts
Figure 1 shows how coal ash pollution from a coal-fired power plant can threaten human health, either by directly entering the body or indirectly through contamination of the food chain. Coal ash can pollute the environment through many channels, including air, water and soil. 

8
  Figure 1  Coal Ash Pollution Chain 

The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)
4Harmful substances Health impacts
Antimony Eye irritation, heart damage, lung problems
Arsenic Cancer, skin lesions, hand warts
Barium Gastrointestinal problems, muscle weakness, heart damage
Beryllium Lung cancer, pneumonia, respiratory problems
Boron Reproductive problems, gastrointestinal problems
Cadmium Lung disease, kidney disease, cancer
Chromium Cancer, ulcers and other stomach problems
Cobalt Lung, heart, liver and kidney problems; dermatitis
Copper Respiratory and nervous system damage, liver disease
Lead Nervous system damage, brain damage, development and behavioural problems
Manganese Nervous system damage, muscle problems, neurological problems
Mercury Cognitive deficiency, stunted growth, behavioural problems
Molybdenum Mineral imbalance, anemia, developmental problems
Nickel Cancer, lung problems, allergic reactions
Selenium Birth defects, impaired bone growth in children
Vanadium Birth defects; lung, throat and eye problems
Zinc Gastrointestinal and reproductive problems
Chlorides High blood pressure 
Fluorides Dental fluorosis, skeletal fluorosis
Nitrates Reacts in stomach to form carcinogenic substances  
Sulphates Stimulates the gastrointestinal tract
Table 1  The health impacts of key harmful substances pr esent in coal ash11Even when coal ash has been recycled into tiles or other 
building materials, it can still threaten human health.
Once the heavy metals and other harmful substances 
from coal ash build up to a certain concentration in the 
body, they can cause many serious diseases (see Table 
1). The radioactive elements in coal ash also pose a threat to human health. Present in naturally occurring coal, thorium and uranium are not changed chemically by combustion and are left behind as contaminants in coal ash. Radioactive elements are about three times more concentrated in coal ash than in “raw” coal
10.(6) Geological hazards
Most coal ash waste deposits are deeper than 20 metres, while the height of an ash dam is usually around 30 metres. Heavy rains, floods or other natural disasters increase the chance of accidents such as ash dam collapse, landslides and mudslides. In the event of such 
disasters, the heavy metals and other pollutants in coal 
ash can leak into the environment and threaten human health. As the frequency of extreme weather events is increasing with climate change, it is beyond doubt that the likelihood of coal ash disasters will only grow as well.

5Example of coal ash dam disasters: 
December 2008. The site of the coal ash spill at the Kingston Fossil Fuel Plant, Tennessee, US. © Wade Payne /Greenpeace
Kingston Fossil Fuel Plant, Tennessee, U.S.
On December 22, 2008, in the U.S. state of T ennessee, the r etaining wall of a five-hectar e ash pond collapsed, 
spilling 500 million gallons (2 million cubic metres) of coal ash. The spill destr oyed houses, polluted the earth, 
rivers, and air, causing hundr eds of millions of dollars in losses. Accor ding to the Tennessee Valley Authority , 
owner of the Kingston Fossil Fuel Plant, the ash spill covered more than 160 hectares of road and lands, 
affecting an ar ea gr eater than the 1989 Exxon V aldez oil spill. It took six weeks to clean up the accident12. 
Cases of ash dam failures in China:In 2009, a dam belonging to the Jiangdian Coal-fir ed Plant failed, causing a large surface impoundment of coal 
ash to collapse
 (Jiangyou city , Sichuan pr ovince)13.  
In 2006, a 30-metr e deep ash dam failed at the Pan County Power Plant when a r etaining wall near the bottom 
gave away . All the coal ash contained flooded out, pouring directly into the Tuozhang River, part of the Pearl 
River system. According to experts¡¯ estimates, in the space of a few minutes about 300,000 tons of ash 
slurry spilled dir ectly into the T uozhan g River , polluting both the T uozhang and Beipan Rivers14,15.
In 2006, an ash dam belonging to the Chenming Paper Factory failed, spilling over 110,000 cubic metres of 
coal ash. The ash slurry flooded 12 hectar es of farmland and flowed into the Tumenjiang River (Longjing city, 
Jilin pr ovince )15.
In 2005, the collapse of a 40-metr e-high ash dam at the Neijiang Power Company of the China Huadian Gr oup 
caused the death of a worker . After the collapse, the edge of the ash dam had moved forwar d by 30 metres 
(Neijiang city , Sichuan pr ovince)16.
In 2004, an ash dam of the Nayong Power Plant failed at its lower part (Liupanshui city , Guizhou pr ovince)17.

The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)
Chapter Two
 Results of the Greenpeace Investigation
June 2010. The drainage outlets of the wet ash ponds at Datong City Number 2 Power Plant's 
Dangliuzhuang coal ash disposal site. © Zhao Gang/Greenpeace

7To gain a better understanding of the current state of China’s 
coal ash pollution, Greenpeace conducted investigations at impoundments owned by 14 coal-fired power stations from 
January to August this year (see table 2.1). When selecting 
power stations, we made efforts to choose samples from a range of different regions, operational ages, installed capacities and parent companies. Seven of the power plants are in northern China; three are located in central China; four are in southwestern China. Eight power plants belong to the country’s “big five” power companies (China Datang,  China Guodian,  China Huadian,  China Huaneng,  and China 
Power Investment). The starting years of operation for the 
plants spans from 1963 to 2005. The total installed capacity of the 14 power plants is 26.15 GW, or about 4% of the current installed capacity of China’s coal-fired power plants
18.
Name Parent companyFirst year of 
operationLocationInstalled capacity (10 MW)Annual production of coal ash (10, 000 tons)
19 
1Datang International Power Generation Co.,  Ltd.,  Douhe Power (Douhe Power Plant)China Datang Corporation (Datang)1973 Tangshan,  Hebei 135 170
2Chifeng Thermal Power PlantChina Power Investment 
Corporation (CPI)1963Chifeng,  Inner Mongolia 30 30
3Fengzhen Power PlantChina Huaneng Group 
(Huaneng) 1986Fengzhen,  Inner Mongolia 120 50
4Yuanbaoshan Power Company (Yuanbaoshan Power Plant)CPI 1978Chifeng,  Inner Mongolia 210 160
5Inner Mongolia Datang International Togtoh Power Plant Co. Ltd.,  (Togtoh Power Plant)Datang 1995Hohhot,  Inner Mongolia 540 459
6Shentou Number 2 Power PlantState Grid Corporation of China (State Grid) 1988Shuozhou,  Shanxi 200 145
7Guodian Electric Power Datong Number 2 
Power Plant China Guodian Corporation (Guodian) 1978 Datong,  Shanxi 370 73
8State Development and Investment Corp 
Qujing Power Co. Ltd.,  (Qujing Power Plant)State Development and Investment Corporation (SDIC) 1998 Qujing,  Yunnan 120 190
9Guodian Xuanwei Power Co. Ltd.,  (Xuanwei 
Power Plant)Guodian 1958 Xuanwei,  Yunnan 180 118
10Guizhou-Guangxi Power Co. Ltd.,  (Panxian 
Power Plant)Guangxi Development & Investment Company Ltd and Guizhou Development and Investment Company Ltd1993Liupanshui,  Guizhou10093(calculated from the plant’s annual coal consumption for electricity generation)
11Guizhou,  Guangdong and Guizhou Electric Power Co. Ltd.,  (Pannan Power Plant)Guangdong  Yudean Group and Guizhou Jinyuan Group2003Liupanshui,  Guizhou240192(calculated from the plant’s annual coal consumption for electricity generation)
12State Electric Power Co. Ltd.,  Jiujiang 
(Jiujiang Power Plant)Guodian 1977 Jiujiang,  Jiangxi 110 60
13Jiangxi Fengcheng Power Co. Ltd.,  phase 
one (Fengcheng Number 1 Power Plant)Jiangxi Investment Company and Guodian 1993Fengcheng,  Jiangxi120 200
14Jiangxi Fengcheng Power Company phase two (Fengcheng Number 2 Power Plant)Jiangxi Provincial Investment  Group Corp and Jiangxi Ganneng Company2005Fengcheng,  Jiangxi140 50
Table 2.1  Key data on the 14 power plants investigated by Greenpeace, 2010

The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)
8Onsite investigations by Greenpeace focused on three 
key areas: 1) the heavy metals and chemical compounds contained in the coal ash; 2) the pollutants found in water sources close to the coal ash disposal site; 3) the management of the coal ash disposal site.
1. Investigation of the components of coal ash
In order to minimize the interference of any external environmental influence on the coal ash samples, Greenpeace staff took care to collect only coal ash that was newly discharged to inside or outside the disposal site. The analysis was arranged by the Greenpeace 
Research Laboratory at the University of Exeter
20. In this 
investigation, Greenpeace detected more than 20 different 
kinds of harmful substances (heavy metals and chemical compounds) in samples collected from the coal ash disposal sites of the 14 power plants across the country. 
See Table 2.2 for a summary of the results.
Every year, through the burning of coal, power plants 
release a substantial quantity of harmful substances into our 
environment. While the concentration of heavy metals and 
other toxic substances in coal ash is not so high compared to that of some types of industrial pollution, the scale of coal ash production is so great as to make it a highly serious pollutant indeed. What’s more, coal ash’s effects on the environment and human health are usually long-term and chronic, and thus even more likely to escape notice.
Many heavy metals and harmful pollutants are not formally 
monitored under China’s environmental laws, and related standards are lacking, rendering pollution-prevention measures even less effective. However, the government is starting to pay more attention to heavy metal pollution. At the end of 2009, seven government bodies, including the Ministry of Environmental Protection, put forward the 
“Guiding Principles on Strengthening the Prevention and 
Control of Heavy Metal Pollution.” This document focused on pollution by lead, mercury, cadmium, chromium and arsenic (a metalloid).
Table 2.3 displays the results of testing for these five heavy 
metals in the samples from the 14 power stations. Using 
rough estimates
22, China’s coal power generation sector 
produces enough coal ash waste every year to contain 358.75 tons of cadmium, 10,054.25 tons of chromium,  
9,410 tons of arsenic, 4.25 tons of mercury and 5,345.5 tons of lead. Altogether, that’s a total of 25,000 tons of heavy metals. It is important to note, however, that the margin of error in using such estimation methods is undeniably high, as heavy metal content varies depending on the type of coal burned by the coal-fired plant. 
2. Water quality near coal ash disposal sites
To test for coal-ash pollution in water sources near the disposal sites, Greenpeace staff collected water samples 
from the discharge outlets of ash ponds or surface water 
close to ash ponds at six power plants. Greenpeace staff also collected samples from underground well water near the ash-disposal sites of eight power stations. The samples were tested for the presence of heavy metals and other harmful pollutants. See Table 2.4 for a summary of the findings.
Research conducted in China and overseas
23 has shown 
that the action of wind and rain can cause poisonous heavy 
metals inside coal ash (such as cadmium, chromium, arsenic, mercury, and lead) to leach or dissolve into water systems. As coal ash accumulates in an ash pond and soaks 
in alkalized water over a long period of time, an increased 
concentration of poisonous heavy metals leaches out from the coal ash. This can result in the pollution of nearby soil, surface water and groundwater. 
This investigation assessed water samples from the 
discharge outlets of coal ash ponds and surface water 
taken close to the ash ponds against the “Environmental Quality Standards for Surface Water” and “Standards for Irrigation Water Quality” (see Table 2.5). The well water samples were assessed against “Sanitary Standards for 
Drinking Water” (See Table 2.6).
Surface water samples taken from four power stations out 
of six showed concentrations of pollutants that exceeded levels stipulated in the “Environmental Quality Standards for Surface Water” and “Standards for Irrigation Water Quality”. Water samples from Douhe Power Plant had 
traces of fluorides 233% higher than the concentration 
allowed by the “Environmental Quality Standards,” while water samples from Chifeng Thermal Power Plant contained fluoride at concentrations 187% higher than that allowed. As for the “Standards for Irrigation Water Quality,” water samples from Douhe Power Plant contained fluoride at concentrations of 67% over the maximum, while the Chifeng Power Plant’s water sample showed boron at concentrations of 29% over the maximum and fluorides 
at 43% over the maximum. At Fengzhen Power Plant, 
boron exceeded maximum concentrations by 400%, and at Datong Number Two Power Plant, boron exceeded concentrations by 17%.
Of the samples of underground well water taken from 
near eight power stations, three of them contained 
concentrations of pollutants that exceeded levels set by 
the “Sanitary Standards for Drinking Water.” At Douhe Power Plant, the concentration of nitrates was 36% over the maximum; at Chifeng Thermal Power Plant, boron was found in concentrations 80% over the maximum; at Yuanbaoshan Power Plant, boron concentrations exceeded the maximum by 270%, molybdenum concentrations by 103%, nitrate concentrations by 74%, 
and fluoride concentrations by 180%s.

Power plant Sampling site21Metals and chemical compounds detected
Douhe Power Plant Lijiayu coal ash disposal site Barium, boron, chromium, cobalt, copper, lead, manganese, nickel, vanadium, zinc, sulphates, fluorides
Chifeng Thermal 
Power PlantDongjiao Badui coal ash disposal siteAluminium,  arsenic, barium, beryllium, boron, cadmium, calcium, chromium, cobalt, copper, iron, lead, 
lithium, magnesium, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, phosphorus, potassium, selenium, sodium, 
strontium, titanium, vanadium, zinc, fluorides, chlorides
Fengzhen Power 
PlantFengzhen coal ash disposal 
siteAluminium, arsenic, barium, beryllium, boron, cadmium, calcium, chromium, cobalt, copper, iron, lead, lithium, magnesium, manganese, molybdenum,  nickel, phosphorus, potassium, selenium, sodium, 
strontium, titanium, vanadium, zinc, fluorides, chlorides
Yuanbaoshan Power PlantYuanbaoshan coal ash 
disposal siteAluminium, arsenic, barium,  beryllium, boron, cadmium, calcium, chromium, cobalt, copper, iron, lead, lithium, magnesium, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, phosphorus, potassium, selenium, sodium, strontium, titanium, vanadium, zinc, fluorides
Togtoh Power PlantTogtoh coal ash disposal siteBarium, boron, chromium, cobalt, copper, lead, manganese, mercury, molybdenum, nickel, vanadium, 
zinc, sulphates, fluorides
Shentou Number 2 
Power PlantShentou coal ash disposal siteAluminium, arsenic, barium, beryllium, boron, cadmium, calcium, chromium, cobalt, copper, iron, lead, 
lithium, magnesium, manganese, nickel, phosphorus, potassium, selenium, sodium, strontium, titanium, 
vanadium, zinc, sulphates, fluorides, chlorides
Datong Number 2 Power PlantT i a n  v i l l a g e  c o a l  a s h disposal siteBarium, boron, chromium, cobalt, copper, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, vanadium, zinc
Dangliu village coal ash disposal siteBarium, boron, chromium, cobalt, copper, lead, manganese, mercury, molybdenum, nickel, vanadium, zinc, sulphates, fluorides
Qujing Power PlantWayao coal ash disposal siteAluminium, arsenic, barium, beryllium, boron, cadmium, calcium, chromium, cobalt, copper, iron, lead, 
lithium, magnesium, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, phosphorus, potassium, selenium, sodium, 
strontium, titanium, vanadium, zinc, sulphates, fluorides
Xuanwei Power 
PlantMiaohou coal ash disposal siteAluminium,arsenic,barium,beryllium,boron,cadmium,calcium,chromium,cobalt,copper,iron,lead,lithium,magnesium,manganese,molybdenum,nickel,phosphorus,potassium,selenium,sodium,strontium,titanium,vanadium,zinc, sulphates, fluorides, chlorides
Panxian Power PlantNumber 4 coal ash disposal siteAluminium, arsenic, barium, beryllium, boron, cadmium, calcium, chromium, cobalt, copper, iron, lead, lithium, magnesium, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, phosphorus, potassium, selenium, sodium, strontium, titanium, vanadium, zinc, sulphates, fluorides
Pannan Power PlantJialuji coal ash disposal siteAluminium, arsenic, barium, beryllium, boron, cadmium, calcium, chromium, cobalt, copper, iron, lead, lithium, magnesium, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, phosphorus, potassium, selenium, sodium, strontium, titanium, vanadium, zinc, sulphates, fluorides
Jiujiang Power PlantPhase 2 Weijiachong  coal ash disposal siteAluminium, arsenic, barium, beryllium, boron, cadmium, calcium, chromium, cobalt, copper, iron, lead, lithium, magnesium, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, phosphorus, potassium, selenium, sodium, strontium, titanium, vanadium, zinc, sulphates, fluorides
Fengcheng Number 1 Power PlantPhase 1 coal ash disposal siteAluminium, barium, beryllium, boron, cadmium, calcium, chromium, cobalt, copper, iron, lead, lithium, magnesium, manganese, nickel, phosphorus, potassium, selenium, sodium, strontium, titanium, vanadium, zinc, sulphates, fluorides, chlorides
Fengcheng Number 2 Power PlantPhase 2 Yun village coal ash disposal siteAluminium, arsenic, barium, beryllium, boron, cadmium, calcium, chromium, cobalt, copper, iron, lead, lithium, magnesium, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, phosphorus, potassium, selenium, sodium, strontium, titanium, vanadium, zinc, sulphates, fluorides, chlorides
9Power plantAnnual Production of Heavy Metals (estimates in tons)
Cadmium Chromium Arsenic Mercury Lead
1 Douhe Power Plant - 18.70 - - 10.20
2 Chifeng Thermal Power Plant 0.47 7.92 19.02 - 2.27
3 Fengzhen Power Plant 0.46 20.12 9.13 - 21.53
4 Yuanbaoshan Power Plant 1.82 40.56 64.56 - 10.11
5 Togtoh Power Plant - 26.99 - - 59.67
6 Shentou Number 2 Power Plant 0.48 5.95 5.74 - 15.40 
7 Datong Number 2 Power Plant - 5.45 - 0.17 8.03 
8 Qujing Power Plant 1.80 34.20 43.20 - 9.61 
9 Xuanwei Power Plant 1.00 28.54 19.60 - 7.52 
10 Panxian Power Plant 1.85 28.30 72.19 - 13.30 
11 Pannan Power Plant 3.54 67.20 131.81 - 32.64 
12 Jiujiang Power Plant 0.31 8.94 4.37 - 2.78 
13 Fengcheng Number 1 Power Plant 2.32 100.5 - - 17.30 
14 Fengcheng Number 2 Power Plant 0.296 8.80 6.78 - 3.46 
Sub-total 14.35 402.17 376.4 0.17 213.82
Estimated national production 358.75 10054.25 9410.00 4.25 5345.50Table 2.2  Heavy metals and chemical compounds found in coal ash samples from 14 power plants
Table 2.3  Presence of the five nationally targeted heavy metals in coal-ash sites at 14 power plants

The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)
10Table 2.4  Heavy metals and other compounds found in water samples collected near coal ash disposal sites
Table 2.5  Pollutants detected at concentrations exceeding standards in surface water samples
Table 2.6  Pollutants detected at concentrations exceeding standards in underground well water samples 27Power station Sample location Heavy metals and compounds detected
Douhe Power 
PlantLijiayu coal ash disposal site (surface water sample) Barium, boron, iron, molybdenum, titanium, vanadium, zinc, nitrates, chlorides, fluorides
Ganyugou village (well water sample) Barium, boron, zinc, nitrates, chlorides, fluorides
Chifeng Thermal 
Power PlantDongjiao Badui coal ash disposal site (surface water sample)Barium, boron, manganese, molybdenum, zinc, nitrates, chlorides, fluorides
Dongjiao Badui village (well water sample) Barium, boron, molybdenum, zinc, nitrates, chlorides, fluorides
Fengzhen Power PlantFengzhen ash disposal site (surface water sample)Aluminium, barium, boron, cadmium, calcium, chromium, copper, iron, lithium, magnesium, nickel, potassium, sodium, strontium, zinc, sulphates
Jiuquan village (well water sample)Aluminium, barium, boron, calcium, chromium, iron, magnesium, mercury, molybdenum, 
potassium, sodium, strontium, zinc, sulphates
Yuanbaoshan Power PlantXinglongpo village (well water sample) Barium, boron, molybdenum, zinc, nitrates, chlorides, fluorides
Shentou 
Number 2 
Power PlantShuimotou village (well water sample)Barium, calcium, chromium, copper, magnesium, potassium, sodium, strontium, zinc, 
sulphates
Datong 
Number 2 Power PlantDangliu village ash disposal site  (surface water sample)Aluminium, barium, boron, cadmium, calcium, chromium, copper, lithium, magnesium, nickel, potassium, sodium, strontium, zinc, sulphates
Xuanwei Power PlantMiaohou village (well water sample) barium, calcium, magnesium, potassium, sodium, strontium, sulphates
Jiujiang Power 
PlantPhase 2 Weijiachong  coal ash disposal site (surface 
water sample)Aluminium, barium, boron, calcium, chromium, copper, iron, magnesium, manganese, nickel, potassium, sodium, strontium, zinc, sulphates
Yujiahe village (well water sample) Aluminium, barium, calcium, magnesium, potassium, sodium, strontium, zinc, sulphates
Fengcheng 
Number 1 Power PlantPhase 1 coal ash disposal site (surface water sample) Aluminium, barium, boron, cadmium, calcium, chromium, copper, iron, lithium, magnesium, nickel, potassium, sodium, strontium, zinc, sulphates
Houtanggang village (well water sample)Aluminium, barium, calcium, magnesium, manganese, nickel, potassium, sodium, 
strontium, titanium, vanadium, zinc, sulphates
Power station PollutantMaximum concentration 
allowed in surface water
24(ug/L unless stated 
otherwise)Maximum allowed concentration in irrigation water
25(ug/L unless stated 
otherwise)Detected concentration(ug/L unless stated otherwise)Percentage excess for surface water pollutantPercentage excess for irrigation water pollutant
Douhe Power Plant Fluorides 1500 3000 5000 233% 67%
Chifeng Thermal Power PlantBoron - 3000 
263870 - 29%
Fluorides 1500 3000 4300 187% 43%
Fengzhen Power Plant Boron - 3000 15000 - 400%
Datong Number 2 Power PlantBoron - 3000 3510 17%
Power Station PollutantMaximum concentration allowed in drinking water
28(ug/L unless stated 
otherwise)Detected concentration (ug/L unless stated otherwise)Percentage excess
Douhe Power Plant Nitrates 20 (mg/L) 27.12 (mg/L) 36%
Chifeng Thermal Power PlantBoron 500 898 80%
Yuanbao Shan Power PlantBoron 500 1850 270%
Molybdenum 70 142 103%
Nitrates 20 (mg/L) 34.72 (mg/L) 74%
Fluorides 1 (mg/L) 2.8 (mg/L) 180%

113. Investigation on the environmental 
management of coal ash disposal sites 
Coal ash is treated as a solid industrial waste in China, 
with the main regulations governing its management laid out in the “Standards for Pollution Control on the Storage and Disposal Sites for General Industrial Solid Waste.” These standards cover storage and handling, site 
selection, design, operations management, site closure, 
and pollution control and monitoring. However, from Greenpeace’s onsite investigations, we discovered that the majority of coal ash disposal sites had far from adequate site selection and preventative measures against dust dispersal, leakages and run-off of pollutants.
(1) Site selection
According to Regulation 5 in the “Standards for Pollution Control on the Storage and Disposal Sites for General Industrial Solid Waste,” sites for a coal ash-disposal facility “should be consistent with the locality’s overall planning requirements, be located downwind of industrial and 
residential areas, and be at least 500 metres away from 
the nearest residential area.” 
However, during Greenpeace’s onsite investigations, we 
discovered that the majority of ash disposal sites were much closer to the nearest villages than 500m.  At Douhe Power Plant, the coal ash disposal dam was less than 50 metres 
away from Lijiayu village as the crow flies. There are villages 
on all four sides of the coal ash disposal sites of Shentou Number 2 Power Plant, Pannan Power Plant, Fengzhen Power Plant, Yuanbaoshan Power Plant, Datong Number 2 Power Plant, Fengcheng Number 1 Power Plant and Fengcheng Number 2 Power Plant. Some well-known dairy 
farms are located very close to the ash disposal sites of Fengzhen Power Plant and Yuanbaoshan Power Plant, while at Chifeng Thermal Power Plant and Jiujiang Power Plant, the ash disposal sites are located within city boundaries, where the population density is very high. Dongjiao Badui 
village is located less than 50 metres downwind of Chifeng 
Thermal Power Plant’s coal ash disposal site. 
(2) Prevention of dust dispersal
During the investigation, we discovered that in the water-scarce region of northern China, coal ash disposal sites tend not to be equipped with effective safeguards (such as water spraying) to prevent the wind dispersal of dry ash. In the southern areas, power plants will add water to coal ash to prevent the wind 
dispersal of dry ash. But this measure has limited effectiveness, 
with nearby villages and farmland still receiving various levels of dust pollution from the coal ash sites. 
Villagers living near the 14 power plants investigated in 
this study all said that they suffered from skin disease and respiratory diseases (including lung problems). 
Near the ash disposal sites of Fengzhen Power Plant, 
Yuanbaoshan Power Plant, Togtoh Power Plant, Shentou Number 2 Power Plant, Fengcheng Number 1 Power Plant and Fengcheng Number 2 Power Plant, cows and sheep suffered from diarrhoea, reduced milk, a fall in birth rates and increased mortality, possibly from eating grass contaminated by coal-ash dust pollution. A substantial amount of dust floats down and contaminates 
neighbouring fields, causing soil salinization.
(3) Leakage prevention
To prevent the leakage of general solid industrial waste 
and leachate, ash disposal sites are required to “construct August 2010. Villagers are forced to drink relatively expensive bottled water after coal ash 
seepage from Yuanbaoshan Power Plant contaminated the groundwater.
 © Zhao Gang/GreenpeaceJuly 2010. A Greenpeace activist samples water from a 
well near the Hongqiaopu coal ash disposal site of the 
Xuanwei Power Station, Yunnan province. © Simon Lim/
Greenpeace

The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)
12retaining walls, embankments, etc, use natural or man-
made impermeable materials, and if necessary, install leachate treatment facilities. At least three water-quality monitoring wells should be established near the coal ash storage and handling facility to assess leachate pollution 
of groundwater”. 
Because all the ash disposal sites at the 14 power stations 
in this investigation had already started operations, it was impossible for Greenpeace to conduct a technical analysis of their leakage prevention facilities. Datong Number 2 Power Plant was the only one that was currently building a new coal ash disposal site. During Greenpeace’s fieldwork, workers were in the process off laying out anti-leakage lining. These 15-centimetres-width liners were laid down at the bottom of 
the newly constructed ash dam and bonded piece by piece 
with only adhesive materials, which lack the effectiveness to prevent leakage in the long run. 
Suspended matter, fluoridisation and alkalization were 
also found in water samples taken from village well water near the coal ash disposal sites of Douhe Power Plant, Chifeng Thermal Power Plant, Fengzhen Power Plant, Yuanbaoshan Power Plant, Shentou Number 2 Power 
Plant and Jiujiang Power Plant. Because ground water 
was contaminated by leachates from coal ash disposal sites, villagers were forced to change their source of drinking water, with some people having no choice but to buy relatively expensive bottled water. 
In addition, the building foundations of houses in Lijiayu and Ganyugou villages near Douhe Power Plant and 
Shuimotou village near Shentou Number 2 Power Plant had cracked and deformed from the absorption of rising ground water due to increasing water-level pressure from the coal ash dams. The majority of these houses are now 
becoming uninhabitable.
(4) Run-off prevention
In June 2006, the ash dam at the Pannan Power Plant 
in Guizhou province (one of the 14 power stations Greenpeace investigated in 2010) failed. About 300,000 tons of ash slurry directly flowed into the Tuochang River.
While investigating Shentou Number 2 Power Plant, 
Qujing Power Plant and Fengcheng Number 1 Power 
Plant, Greenpeace discovered that their coal ash disposal sites did not have a secure dam structure, and in some cases not even a retaining wall. In August 2010, two months after our onsite investigation, a 100-metre section of ash dam gave way at the Shentou Number 2 Power Plant in Shanxi province. Toxic coal ash sludge spilled out, submerging about 120 hectares of fields.
We also discovered that the coal ash disposal sites of 
Fengcheng Number 1 Power Plant and Fengcheng Number 2 Power Plant are both located within the flood zone of Fengcheng city.  In the event of a flood, it is very likely that coal ash could pollute a substantially larger area of farmland and residential land.
August 2010. Coal ash-contaminated grass has severely impacted the health of milk cows at dairy farms near the Yuanbaoshan Power Plant, Inner 
Mongolia. Here Mrs. Chen shows us a dead calf. © Zhao Gang/Greenpeace

Chapter Three 
Government Agencies Responsible for 
Handling Coal Ash
Coal ash is either recycled into other materials (comprehensive utilization) or disposed 
of in a coal ash impoundment. The two government agencies that are most closely connected with coal ash management are the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) and the Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP). The NDRC is responsible for managing coal ash utilization while the MEP is concerned with preventing coal ash from polluting the environment.
July 2010. Hongqiaopu dry ash disposal site of the Xuanwei Power Plant, Yunnan province. © Simon Lim/Greenpeace

The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)
141. The National Development and Reform Commission
Originally, the State Economic and Trade Commission was responsible for 
handling coal ash utilization at the central government level. The NDRC has now taken over these responsibilities. This is the main government body in 
charge of energy conservation and circular economy development. On the 
matter of coal ash, the NDRC’s main duties are “to promote sustainable development strategies and to be responsible for comprehensive emissions reduction and energy conservation coordination work; to oversee planning 
and coordinate the execution of the policies on the development of circular 
economy, the conservation of energy resources, and comprehensive utilization measures; to participate in drawing up ecological construction and environmental protection plans; coordinate the major issues associated 
with ecological construction, conservation of energy resources and 
comprehensive utilization; and harmonize environmental protection and clean production-related promotional tasks.” 
•Development and Planning Division 
The Development and Planning Division’s key responsibilities are to draw up a mid-to-long-term plan that provides the fundamental principles for the national economic and social development. Within this framework, it 
could develop plans that provide clear direction for the handling of coal 
ash disposal and the prevention of environmental pollution within a specific timeframe.
•Regional economic departments, Department of Western 
Region Development, and the Department of Northeastern Region Revitalization
Regional economic departments, the Department of Western Region 
Development, and the Department of Northeastern Region Revitalization all have similar functions. They are responsible for drawing up plans for the 
ecological construction and environmental restoration of specific regions 
and other related coordination tasks. 
•The Department of Resource Conservation and Environmental 
Protection
The Department of Resource Conservation and Environmental Protection is 
divided into seven departments: the General Office, the Energy Conservation and Emissions Reduction Office, the Energy Conservation Office, the Water 
Conservation Office, the Development of Circular Economy Office, the 
Comprehensive Utilization Office and the Environmental Protection Office. Of these, the Energy Conservation and Emissions Reduction Office, the Comprehensive Utilization Office, and the Environmental Protection Office 
are responsible for handling coal ash.
2. The Ministry of Environmental Protection
The ministry is divided into 14 departments. Those responsible for handling 
coal ash are the Department of Science, Technology and Standards; the Department of Total Pollutants Control; the Department of Environmental 
Impact Assessment; the Department of Environmental Monitoring; and the 
Department of Pollution Prevention and Control.
•The Department of Science, Technology and Standards
The Department of Science, Technology and Standards is chiefly responsible for taking charge of technology-related environmental protection work; the development of national environmental standards, environmental benchmarks and technical specifications; and guiding and promoting the development of a circular economy and environmental-protection industry. Within the department, the Environmental Standards Administration is 
responsible for environmental standards covering the handling of coal ash, 
while the Environmental Technology Division is responsible for guidance on coal ash comprehensive utilization technology. For example, the Department of Science, Technology and Standards organized the drafting of "HJ-BAT-001 Best Available Technology for the Prevention of Pollution from Coal-
Fired Power Plants Technical Manual (Trial Implementation)” which provides 
a relatively detailed explanation on coal ash comprehensive utilization technology.
•The Department of Total Pollutants Control
The Department of Total Pollutants Control’s main responsibilities are to draft and oversee the implementation of a permit system aimed at controlling the total emissions of major pollutants, to propose total emissions control 
planning, to assess the total pollutants reduction situation, and to collect 
environmental statistics and identify pollution sources. With regard to coal ash, it is responsible for the control of pollution emissions during coal combustion. 
•The Department of Environmental Impact Assessment
The Department of Environmental Impact Assessment’s main responsibilities are to plan and oversee environmental impact assessments, to evaluate policies’ environmental impacts, to supervise and manage the qualifications 
of environmental impact assessment bodies, and to temporarily suspend 
the approval of environmental assessments for those regions that have either exceeded pollution standards, seriously damaged the environment, or have not yet completed ecological restoration tasks.  These apply to 
all construction projects, excluding emissions-reduction and ecological-
restoration projects.This department is also responsible for conducting environmental impact assessments on coal-fired power plant construction projects.
•The Department of Environmental Monitoring
The Department of Environmental Monitoring’s main responsibilities are to oversee environmental monitoring, to investigate and evaluate national environmental issues, to take responsibility for issuing early-
warning forecasts, and to take charge of the national environmental 
monitoring network and the national environmental information network. The department is also responsible for issuing public notices at all stages of national environmental situations. Regarding coal ash pollution, the 
department is responsible for providing timely information so that measures 
can be adopted to control it.
•The Department of Pollution Prevention and Control
The Department of Pollution Prevention and Control’s main responsibilities are to draw up and organize legislation and regulations to prevent the pollution of water, air, soil, noise, light, odour, solid waste, chemicals and 
vehicular emissions; to enforce the registration of pollutant discharges; to 
monitor the environmental management mechanism that assesses water quality in cross-provincial border river areas; and organize and draw up related pollution prevention and control plans and monitor the situation. 
The department is responsible for the specific work connected with the 
prevention of pollution from industrial sources and from solid waste. Of all the MEP departments, this department is the most directly concerned with the prevention of coal ash pollution.

Chapter Four 
Current Problems
June 2010. Coal ash disposal site of the Togtoh Power Station, in Hohhot, Inner Mongolia. © Zhao Gang/Greenpeace

The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)
161. Growing hand-in-hand: coal-fired power 
plants and coal ash waste
Coal ash is the inevitable by-product of burning coal, and 
as the country expands its coal-fired power sector, the 
amount of coal ash waste is also increasing. The coal-
fired power industry’s explosive rise began in 2002, driven 
by the fast pace of economic development and market demands. At the end of 2002, China’s installed capacity 
of electricity generation was 357 GW
29. This year it is 
expected to exceed 900 GW30, of which more than 70% 
is coal-fired power. In other words, over the past eight 
years, the installed capacity of coal-fired plants has grown 
by an annual average of over 47.5 GW. That’s equivalent 
to building a new coal-fired power plant every week. Such a speed is unprecedented in the world. 
This expansion of power generation has created the 
foundation for the country’s economic rise, helping to 
reduce poverty and raise living standards. But at the same 
time, China’s heavy dependency on coal has created worrying environmental consequences. Over the last eight years, with the coal-fired power sector’s rapid expansion, the amount of coal ash produced has increased by over 
2.5 times. Coal ash is now the single biggest source of 
solid industrial waste in China, and it has become an enormous challenge for environmental management.
2. Exaggeration of coal ash utilization results 
in underestimation of coal ash pollution 
In the early stages of China’s industrial development, 
provisions on the handling of coal ash were quite 
extensive. After the 1980s, the comprehensive utilization of 
coal ash was aggressively developed, with the concept of “combined storage-use” gradually becoming the guiding principle behind coal ash management.  As China entered the 21st century, however, greater emphasis was placed 
on “scientific development” and environmental protection, 
and governments at all levels began focusing on coal ash utilization. This has resulted in the guiding principle behind coal-ash handling becoming, simply, “utilization”.
In 2005, the Chinese government put forward the “Eleventh 
Five Year Plan (2006-2010): Guiding Principles behind the Comprehensive Utilization of Resources.” It states that 
“by 2010, the rate of comprehensive utilization of solid 
industrial waste should reach 60%; within this, the rate of coal-ash comprehensive utilization should reach 75%.” In 2007, a “State Council Notice on Energy Conservation and Emissions Reduction Comprehensive Work Plan” 
also stipulated that “by 2010, the rate of comprehensive utilization of solid industrial waste should exceed 60%.” 
This included coal ash. After the announcement of these 
key goals at the central government level, many regional governments also included this 60% target into their own provincial or regional objectives. In addition to setting 
objectives, central and many local governments also 
introduced measures to advance coal ash utilization
31,  
such as establishing special funds, offering tax benefits 
and other preferential policies.
Because the government’s utilization target was set 
fairly high and included appropriate incentives, these preferential policies have helped to increase the country’s 
coal ash utilization capacity. Despite this, however, coal 
ash utilization has lagged far behind the growth in coal-ash 
production. Manufacturing building materials with recycled 
coal ash waste is more expensive than with conventional 
materials, and consequently, these additional costs 
have made it impossible to increase coal ash utilization 
as much as desired in such a short time. In reality, the utilization rate of coal ash is far below 60%. Based on interviews with companies and experts, research, and ground investigation, Greenpeace estimates that the real 
utilization rate of coal ash is only about 30%. This means 
that at least 262.5 million tons of coal ash needs to be stored in impoundments every year.
Unfortunately, this serious discrepancy between coal ash 
utilization objectives and reality has received little attention. 
The problem has arisen not only out of the difficulties of 
verifying data from the coal-fired plants, but also from loopholes in existing policies.
The power sector’s exaggeration of coal ash utilization 
rates is a prevailing problem. Under the existing policy framework, it is the users of coal that are responsible for 
improving the rate of coal ash utilization. This approach 
allows power plants to casually “adjust” their figures in order to fulfill the utilization target of 60% under the pressure of political demands.
The other problem is that although power companies must 
submit their data to the NRDC, the MEP and the Statistics 
Office every year, under current laws and regulations it is not clear who is in charge of verifying that data. Also, China has not assigned legal culpability to individuals or corporations who falsely report coal ash utilization data.
These problems have created a false impression that 
China is recycling most of its coal ash waste – and therefore coal ash causes limited environmental damage. 
This has led both the government and the public to 

17seriously overlook the scale and degree of coal ash 
pollution in China.
3. Flaws in Environmental Pollution 
Prevention and Control Policies
In China, coal ash falls under the management of solid 
industrial waste. The policy most closely related to 
the prevention of coal ash pollution is the “Law on the 
Prevention and Control of Environmental Pollution from 
Solid Waste,” (revised 2004). The MEP is responsible for 
its enforcement. Other existing relevant environmental 
laws are the “Environmental Protection Law,” “Air Pollution 
Prevention and Control Law” (revised 2000), “Water 
Pollution Prevention and Control Law” (revised 2008), 
“Marine Environment Protection Law” (revised 1999), 
“Environmental Impact Assessment Law,” “Law on the 
Prevention and Control of Radioactive Pollution,” and a variety of local and regional statutes What is noteworthy about this is that they are all part of the basic framework of laws on environmental protection and resource utilization. 
Nevertheless, as the content of these basic laws is fairly 
general, they are difficult to apply in practice.
Of those used, the “Standards for Pollution Control on 
the Storage and Disposal Sites for General Industrial Solid Waste” is the most relevant. These mandatory 
standards are primarily concerned with preventing the 
dispersal, leakage or run-off of pollutants. However, coal ash is different from other types of solid industrial waste. Because China’s power sector is overly reliant on coal, the amount of coal ash produced is enormous, resulting 
in a huge amount of toxic substances (such as heavy 
metals, etc) being released into the environment. As the coal power industry expanded over the last few decades, 
much of the resulting coal ash waste has been stored in impoundments, which creates a significant risk of pollutant 
dispersal, leakage or run-off. Consequently, it is crucial 
that pollution-prevention technology requirements for coal 
ash impoundments be even higher in order to minimize 
the health and environmental threats from coal ash.
In addition to the “Standards for Pollution Control on the 
Storage and Disposal Sites for General Industrial Solid Waste,” more than 20 national and industry standards are 
currently in use or are being drawn up. Only a minority of 
these is mandatory; the others are voluntary standards 
that industries are merely encouraged to adopt. Therefore, irrespective of the content of these standards, their 
effectiveness is too limited to serve as a strong control to 
the practices of coal-fired plants. This is one of the main 
reasons that it is very difficult for China to make any major 
headway on preventing coal ash pollution.
There is a clear need for China to further improve its 
pollution control legislation because existing laws and 
regulations on the prevention of coal ash pollution are difficult to apply in practice, and the implementation of standards is neither targeted nor compulsory.
4. Weakness in Environmental Law 
Enforcement
Flaws in pollution prevention and control policies seriously 
hamper the enforcement of legislation on coal ash. We 
have seen an evolution in China’s coal ash management, 
which has moved toward emphasizing utilization. The powerful economic ministries and their resource-utilization 
July 2010. The wet coal ash pond of the Fengcheng Number 1 Power Plant, in 
Jiangxi province, is right next to a residential area. © Simon Lim/GreenpeaceJune 2010. Bricks made from coal ash at the 
Yuanbaoshan Power Plant, Inner Mongolia. 
© Zhao Gang/Greenpeace

The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)
18policies have grown stronger, while the environmental 
ministries and their environmental protection legislation 
have been relatively weakened. The implementation space 
for environmental protection legislation has continuously 
shrunk. Comprehensive utilization work is given more and more attention and resources, whereas pollution control 
work has been marginalized. At the same time, there has 
been a lack of cooperation mechanisms between the 
bodies governing comprehensive utilization and pollution 
control.
Considering the severity of China’s coal ash problem, 
MEP law enforcement methods appear relatively weak. The most common method is to levy a pollution charge. 
The “National Standards and Management Practices for 
Sewage Fee Collection” stipulates that: “if either non-
specialized storage facilities or handling facilities, as well 
as specialized storage facilities or handling facilities, do not meet environmental protection standards on the discharge of industrial solid waste (that is, they are unable to prevent pollutant dispersal, leakage or run-off), a one-off solid waste emissions fee will be levied.” One ton of discharged 
coal ash carries a 30 yuan fee. Here, the standards used 
are those governing the construction of facilities to prevent the dispersal, leakage or run-off of pollutants.  Specifically, it refers to the “Standards on the pollution control of 
regular industrial solid waste storage and disposal sites.”
In practice, unless a coal-fired plant fails to build any 
kind of coal ash storage facility, or is discovered directly 
discharging coal ash waste into water sources or engaged in other very serious polluting behaviour, the chances of it being charged pollution fines are extremely low. Even if it is 
charged RMB 30 per ton, this is not an effective deterrent.  
But because of a lack of effective regulations, apart from levying fees, the MEP has no other recourse to force a 
coal-fired plant to improve its coal ash storage facilities. 
Moreover, when a coal-fired plant is selecting a site for 
its coal ash impoundment, the MEP-led environmental 
assessment is often just a formality. Sometimes 
construction of the coal-fired plant starts without even its environmental impact assessment being approved.  Greenpeace investigations in the field have also uncovered 
that some local environmental bureaus have ignored the 
environmental laws, creating a lack of enforcement in environmental monitoring.5. The absence of comprehensive utilization 
and environmental administration
Since the 1990s, there have been major developments 
in administrative laws and regulations aimed at 
encouraging the comprehensive utilization of coal ash. 
The most relevant of these are the “Eleventh Five-Year-
Plan on National Environmental Protection,” “Law to promote Circular Economy”, “National Policy Outline on 
Technology for Comprehensive Utilization of Resources” 
and the “Administrative Measures on the Comprehensive 
Utilization of Coal Ash” (revised in 1994).
In addition, many local governments, including Beijing, 
Shanghai, Chongqing, Hebei, Shandong, Hunan, 
Guizhou, Nanjing, Fushun, Guangzhou, Datong, Dalian, 
Harbin, Wuhai, and Tangshan, have drawn up their own 
regulations on coal ash comprehensive utilization.
Coal ash contains harmful substances, which remain in 
the coal ash after being recycled and continue to threaten public health and the environment.  However, according 
to China’s current policy, once coal ash (a solid waste 
product) has been recycled into other byproducts or finished products (for example concrete, bricks, subgrade, dam materials, etc), it no longer falls under the jurisdiction 
of environmental protection laws on solid waste. This 
has created a gap in environmental protection legislation and government monitoring on coal ash utilization. Unlike the European Union, which regulates recycled coal ash 
products as commercial chemical products, China lacks 
such a corresponding regulation. There is an urgent need for such new rules and codes of conduct to be introduced in China. 
At both the central and local government levels, existing 
legislation on the comprehensive utilization of coal ash 
pertains only to the utilization of resources, and fails 
to include plans for the supervision and management of harmful substances in coal ash when and after it’s  recycled. Of the 16 standards applied to coal ash utilization management, none has a comprehensive 
provision to deal with the levels of the toxic and radioactive 
elements present in coal ash waste. Although the ultimate purpose of comprehensive utilization is to protect the environment and to promote sustainable development, existing regulations fail to provide specific safeguards for 
the environment and human health.

Chapter Five 
Policy Recommendations
The following policy recommendations (split into two parts) have been drawn up 
by Greenpeace, with the aim of reducing the threat of coal ash pollution to public health and the environment. 
June 2010. A wet coal ash pond at the Fengzhen Power Plant, Inner Mongolia. © Zhao Gang/Greenpeace

The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)
201. Highlight and strengthen environmental law 
enforcement within the existing legal framework
1.The Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress 
should incorporate the “Law on the Prevention of Environmental 
Pollution by Solid Waste” into the law enforcement, supervision, and inspection plan. They should also supervise and urge all 
regions and government departments to actively perform their 
legal duties. The intervention of the highest organ of state can 
strongly highlight the importance of preventing coal ash pollution 
to all parts of society.
2.The State Council should conduct a nationwide specialized, 
targeted corrective campaign on coal ash environmental 
pollution. This campaign should include: to conduct a 
comprehensive audit on the coal-fired plants’ coal ash utilization rate to determine an accurate picture of the scale of coal ash 
waste; to focus on identifying deficiencies or weaknesses in 
environmental management facilities, as well as the potential 
causes of secondary geological disasters at coal ash disposal 
sites; and to set corrective deadlines for the above. 
3.China should incorporate environmental management of coal 
ash into local government official’s performance evaluation criteria; promote and implement administrative and local 
government accountability mechanisms; and strengthen the 
administrative authority of coal ash pollution management in a 
similar way to the handling of mine safety and accidents.
4.The MEP should strengthen enforcement of the “Law on 
the Prevention of Environmental Pollution by Solid Waste” as well as strengthen the monitoring and research of coal 
ash environmental pollution. They should provide the public with information on coal ash treatment that does not meet 
environmental protection standards through environmental information disclosure procedures; ensure proper investigation 
and punishment according to the law; and hold officials involved 
accountable.
2. Improve coal ash pollution management 
legislation
1.Based on the existing “Law on the Prevention of Environmental 
Pollution by Solid Waste,” the State Council or the MEP can 
take the lead on formulating an implementable “Coal Ash 
Environmental Pollution Prevention and Control Measures.”  
They should also operationalize the general provisions of the 
laws through administrative regulations or directive orders. The above proposed “Measures” should work in concert with the 
“Administrative Measures on the Comprehensive Utilization 
of Coal Ash” (revised in 1994) in order to promote the guiding 
principle of paying equal attention to the twin problems of 
utilizing coal ash and managing its environmental pollution.
China should learn from the experiences of the U.S., the 
E.U. and other developed countries in handling coal ash 
environmental pollution. This include: the careful selection 
of coal-fired plant and ash impoundment locations; the planning and setting of standards for environmental impact 
assessments, as well as  methods for public participation; 
the management of coal ash pollution that complies with the 
“three-simultaneous system”
32  requirement; impermeable layer 
design requirements; monitoring groundwater and soil pollution; standards on the environmental monitoring of comprehensive utilization; standards for the conditions and qualifications of 
recycled components; scope and legal responsibilities of the 
subject of duty in environmental protection; supportive financial 
and taxation policies; fines and standards on coal ash pollution 
discharges; law enforcement mechanisms and procedures; 
planning for regulatory adjustments during interim periods;  the relationship between old and new regulations; and more targeted and practical systems and standards. Based on 
the above proposed “Measures,” China should draw up a complete new set of corresponding environmental standards 
on pollution prevention, or make existing voluntary standards mandatory, and ensure that each key part of the provisions has clear operational specifications and requirements.
2.The relevant legislation should increase the number of specialized 
provisions on coal ash treatment in order to break down tasks on 
coal ash pollution prevention and control and incorporate it into law. 
The following relevant laws are currently in the legislative process: 
“Land Management Law” (revised), “Air Pollution Prevention and 
Control Law” (revised), “Energy Law,” “Law on Nature Reserves,” “Environmental Protection Law,” “Coal Law”(revised), and “Soil 
Pollution Prevention and Control Law,” etc. 
3.In the revision of the “Measures on the Comprehensive 
Utilization of Coal Ash,” the experiences of the EU and other 
developed countries should be used as a reference point to 
explore the ways in which China can improve its handling of pollution prevention in coal ash utilization, implement a wide-
ranging set of regulations to monitor the overall utilization 
production process, and fill the pollution and control legislative 
gap on coal ash utilization.
The MEP should be more actively involved in the revision of 
“Measures on the Comprehensive Utilization of Coal Ash” 
and other related legislation in order to ensure that pollution 
prevention and control objectives are reflected adequately in all 
policy legislation. At the same time, there is a need to establish 
a permanent information-sharing and communications mechanism between the NRDC and the MEP. Whenever it 
becomes difficult to automatically coordinate policy objectives 
between the two parties, they should immediately initiate an 
effective conflict-resolution mechanism. 
4.China should take the next step in improving the coal pricing 
system through introducing a carbon tax, a resource tax or other relevant policies as ways to internalize the external costs of coal. At 
the same time, China should make great efforts to improve energy 
efficiency and develop the renewable energy. The government should 
promote the optimization of the national energy mix, and gradually 
move away from its over-dependency on coal as a surefire means of controlling coal ash pollution at its source.

211 Please refer to document “Administrative Measures and Implementation Regulations on the Comprehensive Utilization of Coal Ash in the Coal 
Industry,” 1996, Item 3
2 By converting from the China Electricity Council 2008 figures on total coal consumption (1.46 billion tons) and coal ash production (390 million 
tons) in the electricity sector, for every four tons of coal burned will produce one ton of coal ash. 
3 Current China urban waste is roughly around 160 million tons per year. 
4 One ton of coal ash equals to 1.13 cubic metres of volume (m3). 
5 Volume of a standard swimming pool used in this report: Width 21m x length 50m x height 1.8m; volume of the Beijing Olympic Water Cubic 
Swimming Gym: Width 177m x length 177m x height 31m6 Please refer to document “Administrative Measures on the Comprehensive Utilization of Coal Ash,” 1994, Item 3
7 China Electric Power Press, Manual on Energy Efficiency for Coal-fired Plant, 2009, pp 679-681
8 Science and Technology Daily, http://www.stdaily.com/kjrb/content/2010-02/05/content_154315.htm
9 For more details, please refer to the news article: There is more dust in this year sandstorm http://news.sina.com.cn/c/2010-04-
05/234920011756.shtml
10 China Electric Power Press, Manual on Energy Efficiency for Coal-fired Plant, 2009, pp 680
11 China Environmental Science Press, Environmental Protection Department, National Pollution, Environment, Health Risk Directory— Chemicals Section, first edition, February 2009; http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp; http://www.lf.gov.cn/pub/htm/life/shuiwenxinxi/
shuihuanjing/2006-04-24-7849.htm
12 http://www.treehugger.com/files/2008/12/tennessee-coal-ash-slurry-spill-48-times-bigger-than-exxon-valdez-spill.php
13 Jiangyou City Government website: http://www.my.gov.cn/jiangyou/288798823663271936/20090814/436090.html
14 Guizhou Electric Power Technology, No. 9, 2006 
15 State Administration  of Work Safety: http://www.chinasafety.gov.cn/newpage/Contents/Channel_4272/2006/0719/12287/content_12287.
htm16  For details please refer to http://news.sohu.com/20050414/n225176321.shtml
17  Guizhou Electricity News: http://www.gz.csg.cn/qkshow.aspx?id=11344&cid=193
18 Figures from the 2009 Annual Development Report on China Electricity Sector: As of the end of 2009, the installed capacity for China’s coal-
fired power plants is 652.05 GW. 
19 Data on coal ash production is sourced from Greenpeace investigations. Greenpeace staff was not successful in securing the needed Reference
June 2010. Coal ash disposal site of the Togtoh Power Station, in Hohhot, Inner Mongolia. © Zhao Gang/Greenpeace

The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)
22primary information for Xuanwei, Panxian, and Pannan power plants. For these three sites, coal ash production was calculated from their 2009 
coal consumption data for electricity generation.
20  Details on the analysis of the samples will be provided in the science technical note by Greenpeace Research Laboratory.
21 Greenpeace conducted random samplings at the same site. Table 2.2 lists the types of metals and compounds found in the coal ash 
samples. Detailed sampling results are listed in appendix
22 This was done by correlating the quantities of heavy metals produced by the 14 power stations, which account for 4% of China’s total 
installed capacity of coal power generation. 
23 “Discussion of countermeasures on the underground water protection in the slag site of power plants,” Municipal Administration and Technology 2003,  Volume 5, Issue 3"”Study on lixiviation properties of fly ash,” Energy Environmental Protection 2005 Volume 19 Issue 
5"”Secondary pollution of chromium in powdery coal ash: an example of CR6+ in underground water around an ash site in a power station,” 
Carsologica Sinica 2001 Volume 20 Issue 3; ”Evaluation of Soil Pollution by Heavy Metals in Huainan Xinji Mining Area,”  Mining Safety and 
Environmental Protection 2008 Volume 35 Issue 1; “Distribution Characteristics of Soil Trace Elements in Shangyao Ash-field,” Journal of Anhui 
University of Science and Technology 2006 Volume 26 Issue 3.
24  “Environmental Quality Standards for Surface Water” GB3838-2002: this list uses Class V water quality as a benchmark.
25 “Standards for Irrigation Water Quality” GB5084-2005 26  “Standards for Irrigation Water Quality” divides crops into three grades: for boron-sensitive crops (such as potatoes, winter squash, leeks, 
onions, and tangerines) the maximum concentration is 1,000ug/L; for boron-tolerant crops (such as wheat, corn green peppers, bok choy 
(Chinese cabbage), and scallions) the maximum concentration is 2,000ug/L; for crops that are strongly boron-tolerant (such as rice, turnips, 
oilseed rape, and cabbage) the concentration is 3,000ug/L.
27 Although many other heavy metals were detected during the analysis, they are not listed in this table because China has not drawn up 
corresponding standards for their regulation.
28 “Sanitary Standards for Drinking Water” GB 5749-200629 For more details, please refer to http://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2009-08/16/content_1393574.htm
30 For more details, please refer to http://news.xinhuanet.com/fortune/2010-05/21/c_12127936.htm
31 According to the ”Administrative Measures on the Comprehensive Utilization of Coal Ash”,  Chapter 3
32 Also known as the “three-simultaneous steps”. This is an integral part of China’s environmental management system, which requires that all 
new construction projects and its required environmental protection facilities must be designed, built and put into operation at the same time.

23Appendix 1
Company 
NameDouhe Power PlantChifeng Thermal Power PlantFengzhen Power PlantYuanbaoshan Power 
PlantTogtoh Power PlantShentou Number 2 
Power PlantGuodian Electric Power Datong Number 2 Power Plant 
Qujing Power Plant Xuanwei Power Plant Panxian Power Plant Pannan Power PlantJiujiang 
Power PlantFengcheng Number 1 Power 
PlantFengcheng Number 2 Power Plant
Sampling locationLijiayu coal 
ash disposal 
siteDongjiao Badui coal ash disposal siteFengzhen coal ash 
disposal siteXinglongpo coal ash disposal siteTogtoh coal ash 
disposal siteShentou Number 2 Power Plant wet coal 
ash disposal siteTian village 
coal ash 
disposal siteDangliuzhuang coal 
ash disposal site
Qujing Power Plant coal ash disposal siteMiaohou coal ash disposal sitePanxian Power Plant #4 coal ash disposal siteZhaluji coal ash disposal siteWeijia coal ash disposal siteFengcheng Number 1 Power 
Plant coal ash disposal siteFengcheng Number 2 Power Plant 
coal ash disposal site
Type of sampleDry ash Dry ash Wet ash Wet ash Wet ash Wet ash Dry ashsulfur 
absorbed 
gypsumWet ash Wet ash Dry ash Dry ash
Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Wet ash Wet ash Dry ash Dry ash
Sample numberCC10001 CC10019 CC10015 CC10016 CC10020 CC10021 CC10007 CC10008 CC10013 CC10004a CC10005 CC10025
CC10026 CC10022 CC10023 CC10027 CC10028 CC10029 CC10030 CC10031 CC10035 CC10036 CC10039 CC10040
Metals (unit: mg/kg)
Aluminium - 31500 47000 55400 18400 17500 - - 11000 - - 14300 13900 16600 15000 21700 19900 20900 17500 14300 11300 11200 17100 17400
Antimony <5 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <5 <5 <10 <5 <5 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10
Arsenic <20 63.4 16.8 19.7 26.2 54.5 <20 <20 4.1 <20 <20 26.6 20.4 7.4 25.9 77.6 77.1 85.2 52.1 7.29 <1 <1 12.9 14.2
Barium 158 348 712 780 335 291 134 17 160 127 259 112 104 119 126 138 135 158 116 208 139 93.1 1110 1050
Beryllium - 2.89 5.75 6.23 2.65 2.25 - - 1.41 - - 4.14 4.3 3.77 3.25 5.2 4.59 4 3.48 1.35 1.11 1.24 1.59 1.49
Boron 43 118 571 671 109 98.9 83 122 72.6 39 64 13.2 9.43 4.82 9.87 9.56 10.3 36.3 24.4 18.6 16.6 17.3 92 100
Cadmium <1 1.58 0.841 0.982 1.05 1.22 <1 <1 0.343 <1 <1 1.06 0.843 0.611 1.09 1.94 2.02 2.2 1.49 0.513 1.17 1.15 0.574 0.61
Calcium - 115000 43800 49400 15600 12300 - - 29000 - - 17200 16800 22500 19700 46300 43500 30700 32700 12200 160000 152000 20700 21700
Chromium 11 26.4 37.9 42.6 25.7 25 6 19 4.25 8 7 19.4 18.5 23.1 25.4 30.7 29.9 39 31 14.9 47.8 52.7 17.6 17.6
Cobalt 9 7.34 14.2 16.6 11.6 10.5 4 <2 1.3 5 5 12.6 12.9 12.5 13.5 13 12.2 10.7 9.18 3.4 4.19 5.12 4.11 4.22
Copper 20 27.5 39.2 41 28.6 30.1 9 2 12.4 9 13 67.1 62.2 58.9 66.1 104 98.4 79.2 62.6 17.8 40.3 46 20.9 21
Hexavalent 
Chromium<0.4 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.8 <0.8 <0.400 - <0.8 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.800 <0.400 <0.800 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400
Iron - 15800 22900 24700 47800 31600 - - 15000 - - 37100 38200 23700 22400 51400 48200 45200 46100 20300 88000 98500 18100 17500
Lead 6 7.56 40.8 45.3 5.7 6.94 13 3 11 <5 22 5.38 5.3 5.26 7.52 14.4 14.1 21.2 12.8 4.64 9.2 8.1 7.24 6.7
Lithium - 9.5 91.6 85.1 7.94 7.08 - - 27.6 - - 16.4 15.8 8.53 8.18 19.6 19.3 25.2 20.5 23.3 19.2 20.8 28.6 28
Magnesium - 4420 9800 11500 4360 3980 - - 1950 - - 1760 1750 2370 1950 3050 2810 2460 2270 2940 4290 3580 2300 2260
Manganese 322 274 335 364 565 352 84 43 83 105 116 485 493 479 506 721 687 353 380 235 512 511 229 233
Mercury <0.2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <0.2 1 <2 <0.2 0.46 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2.00 <2 <2 <2
Molybdenum <2 3.33 2.04 <2 4.94 4.64 5 <2 <2 3 9 6.44 5.68 2.19 5.58 3.07 3.3 11.3 6.98 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2
Nickel 11 15.7 27.1 30.5 30.1 24.6 5 <3 5.59 7 6 26.9 27 27.4 28.6 34.1 32 30.4 26.4 14.4 32.8 34.5 13.7 13.7
Phosphorus - 277 661 807 510 512 - - 379 - - 371 350 1300 1360 467 440 827 536 455 237 201 933 790
Potassium - 3200 4400 4320 2330 2260 - - 228 - - 643 649 850 718 1600 1470 1330 1090 1680 1130 883 1290 1330
Selenium <20 4.35 5.68 5.07 5.6 1.43 <20 <20 9.43 <20 <20 6.15 6.04 6.83 11.9 8.19 8.86 14.1 8.77 3.45 16.7 14.5 6.54 7.67
Silver - <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 - - <10 - - <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10
Sodium - 2620 6960 8340 1370 1150 - - 127 - - 262 259 133 123 537 524 450 364 308 234 202 358 355
Strontium - 275 1160 1270 217 177 - - 255 - - 78.1 73.2 76.5 72.3 186 169 166 149 157 845 799 1730 1800
Thallium <20 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3 <20 <20 <3 <20 <20 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3.00 <3 <3 <3
Tin - <20 <20 <20 <20.0 <20 - - <20 - - <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20
Titanium - 1520 2020 2200 1170 1020 - - 632 - - 2190 2260 2060 1700 2830 2450 2090 1870 606 572 657 801 867
Vanadium 32 53.5 85.2 92.2 86.3 70.8 20 4 23.2 23 28 103 96.9 99.3 126 123 115 226 154 35.1 37 36.1 48.2 48.9
Zinc 21 33.5 56.5 65.8 40.8 52.2 24 6 15.1 11 20 39.7 39.9 29.5 46.7 55.1 52 64.7 42.9 17.7 17.4 22.1 21 22.1
Compounds (unit: mg/kg)
Sulphate 1410 - - - - - 3620 457000 21700 - 1380 3030 2570 2860 1390 5910 - 6170 4110 361 - 59800 2650 2580
Fluoride 58 274 100 101 31.8 31.9 45. 9 2600 112 - 39. 9 40.7 39.9 295 137 46.7 48.9 56.7 39.3 44.1 175 97.7 54.4 57.1
Chloride - 52 129 129 <20.0 - - - 147 - - <10.0 <10.0 70.7 74.8 <10.0 <10.0 <10.0 <10.0 <10.0 <20.0 39.9 <10.0 <10.0
Note: "-" indicated the  concentration is beyond the testing limits

The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)
24Company 
NameDouhe Power PlantChifeng Thermal Power PlantFengzhen Power PlantYuanbaoshan Power 
PlantTogtoh Power PlantShentou Number 2 
Power PlantGuodian Electric Power Datong Number 2 Power Plant Qujing Power Plant
Xuanwei Power Plant Panxian Power Plant Pannan Power PlantJiujiang 
Power PlantFengcheng Number 1 Power 
PlantFengcheng Number 2 Power Plant
Sampling locationLijiayu coal 
ash disposal 
siteDongjiao Badui coal ash disposal siteFengzhen coal ash 
disposal siteXinglongpo coal ash disposal siteTogtoh coal ash 
disposal siteShentou Number 2 Power Plant wet coal 
ash disposal siteTian village 
coal ash 
disposal siteDangliuzhuang coal 
ash disposal siteQujing Power Plant coal ash disposal site
Miaohou coal ash disposal sitePanxian Power Plant #4 coal ash disposal siteZhaluji coal ash disposal siteWeijia coal ash disposal siteFengcheng Number 1 Power 
Plant coal ash disposal siteFengcheng Number 2 Power Plant coal ash disposal site
Type of 
sampleDry ash Dry ash Wet ash Wet ash Wet ash Wet ash Dry ashsulfur 
absorbed 
gypsumWet ash Wet ash Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Dry ash Wet ash Wet ash Dry ash Dry ash
Sample 
numberCC10001 CC10019 CC10015 CC10016 CC10020 CC10021 CC10007 CC10008 CC10013 CC10004a CC10005 CC10025 CC10026 CC10022 CC10023 CC10027 CC10028 CC10029 CC10030 CC10031 CC10035 CC10036 CC10039 CC10040
Metals (unit: mg/kg)
Aluminium - 31500 47000 55400 18400 17500 - - 11000 - - 14300 13900 16600 15000 21700 19900 20900 17500 14300 11300 11200 17100 17400
Antimony <5 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <5 <5 <10 <5 <5 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10
Arsenic <20 63.4 16.8 19.7 26.2 54.5 <20 <20 4.1 <20 <20 26.6 20.4 7.4 25.9 77.6 77.1 85.2 52.1 7.29 <1 <1 12.9 14.2
Barium 158 348 712 780 335 291 134 17 160 127 259 112 104 119 126 138 135 158 116 208 139 93.1 1110 1050
Beryllium - 2.89 5.75 6.23 2.65 2.25 - - 1.41 - - 4.14 4.3 3.77 3.25 5.2 4.59 4 3.48 1.35 1.11 1.24 1.59 1.49
Boron 43 118 571 671 109 98.9 83 122 72.6 39 64 13.2 9.43 4.82 9.87 9.56 10.3 36.3 24.4 18.6 16.6 17.3 92 100
Cadmium <1 1.58 0.841 0.982 1.05 1.22 <1 <1 0.343 <1 <1 1.06 0.843 0.611 1.09 1.94 2.02 2.2 1.49 0.513 1.17 1.15 0.574 0.61
Calcium - 115000 43800 49400 15600 12300 - - 29000 - - 17200 16800 22500 19700 46300 43500 30700 32700 12200 160000 152000 20700 21700
Chromium 11 26.4 37.9 42.6 25.7 25 6 19 4.25 8 7 19.4 18.5 23.1 25.4 30.7 29.9 39 31 14.9 47.8 52.7 17.6 17.6
Cobalt 9 7.34 14.2 16.6 11.6 10.5 4 <2 1.3 5 5 12.6 12.9 12.5 13.5 13 12.2 10.7 9.18 3.4 4.19 5.12 4.11 4.22
Copper 20 27.5 39.2 41 28.6 30.1 9 2 12.4 9 13 67.1 62.2 58.9 66.1 104 98.4 79.2 62.6 17.8 40.3 46 20.9 21
Hexavalent Chromium<0.4 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.8 <0.8 <0.400 - <0.8 <0.400
<0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400 <0.800 <0.400 <0.800 <0.400 <0.400 <0.400
Iron - 15800 22900 24700 47800 31600 - - 15000 - - 37100 38200 23700 22400 51400 48200 45200 46100 20300 88000 98500 18100 17500
Lead 6 7.56 40.8 45.3 5.7 6.94 13 3 11 <5 22 5.38 5.3 5.26 7.52 14.4 14.1 21.2 12.8 4.64 9.2 8.1 7.24 6.7
Lithium - 9.5 91.6 85.1 7.94 7.08 - - 27.6 - - 16.4 15.8 8.53 8.18 19.6 19.3 25.2 20.5 23.3 19.2 20.8 28.6 28
Magnesium - 4420 9800 11500 4360 3980 - - 1950 - - 1760 1750 2370 1950 3050 2810 2460 2270 2940 4290 3580 2300 2260
Manganese 322 274 335 364 565 352 84 43 83 105 116 485 493 479 506 721 687 353 380 235 512 511 229 233
Mercury <0.2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <0.2 1 <2 <0.2 0.46 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2.00 <2 <2 <2
Molybdenum <2 3.33 2.04 <2 4.94 4.64 5 <2 <2 3 9 6.44 5.68 2.19 5.58 3.07 3.3 11.3 6.98 <2 <2 <2 <2 <2
Nickel 11 15.7 27.1 30.5 30.1 24.6 5 <3 5.59 7 6 26.9 27 27.4 28.6 34.1 32 30.4 26.4 14.4 32.8 34.5 13.7 13.7
Phosphorus - 277 661 807 510 512 - - 379 - - 371 350 1300 1360 467 440 827 536 455 237 201 933 790
Potassium - 3200 4400 4320 2330 2260 - - 228 - - 643 649 850 718 1600 1470 1330 1090 1680 1130 883 1290 1330
Selenium <20 4.35 5.68 5.07 5.6 1.43 <20 <20 9.43 <20 <20 6.15 6.04 6.83 11.9 8.19 8.86 14.1 8.77 3.45 16.7 14.5 6.54 7.67
Silver - <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 - - <10 - - <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10 <10
Sodium - 2620 6960 8340 1370 1150 - - 127 - - 262 259 133 123 537 524 450 364 308 234 202 358 355
Strontium - 275 1160 1270 217 177 - - 255 - - 78.1 73.2 76.5 72.3 186 169 166 149 157 845 799 1730 1800
Thallium <20 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3 <20 <20 <3 <20 <20 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3 <3.00 <3 <3 <3
Tin - <20 <20 <20 <20.0 <20 - - <20 - - <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20 <20
Titanium - 1520 2020 2200 1170 1020 - - 632 - - 2190 2260 2060 1700 2830 2450 2090 1870 606 572 657 801 867
Vanadium 32 53.5 85.2 92.2 86.3 70.8 20 4 23.2 23 28 103 96.9 99.3 126 123 115 226 154 35.1 37 36.1 48.2 48.9
Zinc 21 33.5 56.5 65.8 40.8 52.2 24 6 15.1 11 20 39.7 39.9 29.5 46.7 55.1 52 64.7 42.9 17.7 17.4 22.1 21 22.1
Compounds (unit: mg/kg)
Sulphate 1410 - - - - - 3620 457000 21700 - 1380 3030 2570 2860 1390 5910 - 6170 4110 361 - 59800 2650 2580
Fluoride 58 274 100 101 31.8 31.9 45. 9 2600 112 - 39. 9 40.7 39.9 295 137 46.7 48.9 56.7 39.3 44.1 175 97.7 54.4 57.1
Chloride - 52 129 129 <20.0 - - - 147 - - <10.0 <10.0 70.7 74.8 <10.0 <10.0 <10.0 <10.0 <10.0 <20.0 39.9 <10.0 <10.0

25Company NameDouhe 
Power PlantChifeng Thermal Power PlantFengzhen Power PlantDatong Number 2 Power PlantJiujiang Power PlantFengcheng 
Number 1 Power 
PlantEnvironmental Quality Standards for Surface Water 
(GB3838-
2002) category VStandards for Irrigation 
Water Quality 
(GB5084-2005)Sampling locationLijiayu 
coal ash 
disposal siteDongjiao Badui coal ash disposal siteFengzhen Power Plant coal ash disposal siteTian village coal 
ash disposal 
siteDangliuzhuang coal ash disposal siteWeijia coal ash disposal siteFengcheng Number 1 Power 
Plant coal ash 
disposal site
Type of sampleSurface 
waterWet ashSurface 
waterSurface waterSurface water Surface waterSurface waterSurface water
Sample number CC1002 CC1009a CC10010 CC10017 CC1004a CC10018 CC10034 CC10037
Metals (unit: mg/kg)         
Aluminium - - - 1360 - 300 338 69.30
Antimony <20 <20 <20 - <20 - - -
Arsenic <50 131 <50 - 61 - - - 100 100
Barium 120 54 16 373 162 237 119 49.10
Boron 2120 2650 3870 15000 5360 3510 104 874 3000 
Cadmium <5 <5 <5 0.282 <5 1.58 <0.100 0.302 
Calcium - - - 181 - 472 25.3 54.5
Chromium <20 <20 <20 367 26 12.70 1.25 9.40
Chromium (VI); 
hexavalent chromium<50 <50 <50 - <50 - - -
Cobalt <20 <20 <20 - <20 - - -
Copper <20 <20 <20 1.92 <20 1.13 2.46 2.15
Iron 49 51 <40 217 62 <30.0 305 36.10
Lead <50 <50 <50 <2.00 <50 <2.00 <2.00 <2.00
Lithium - - - 647 - 2650 <100 261 
Magnesium - - - 16 - 8 4 2.10
Manganese <10 29 39 <10.0 <10 <10.0 59.4 <10.0
Mercury <2 <2 <2 <0.01 <2 <0.01 <0.02 <0.04
Molybdenum 98 290 365 - 502 - - -
Nickel <20 <20 <20 1.02 <20 2.22 1.71 6.20
Potassium - - - 7.87 32.80 2.04 4.46
Selenium <200 <200 <200 - <200 - - -
Sodium - - - 145 - 253 5.60 6.20
Strontium - - - 6270 6440 192 751 
Thallium <200 <200 <200 - <200 - - -
Vanadium 43 27 <20 - 187 - - -
Zinc 18 <10 11 <5.00 17.30 8.66 28.30 5.80
pH 7.50 7.50 7.50 - 8.00 - - -
Compounds (unit: mg/kg)         
Nitrate 15.42 46.31 8.41 - 105.90 - - -
Chloride 134.9 42.0 40.0 - 313.9 - - - 250
Fluoride 5.0 3.1 4.3 - 6.2 - - - 1.5 3
sulphide <0.01 <0.01 <0.01 - <0.01 - - -
sulphate - - - 514 - 1290 46 92 
Note: "-" indicated the  concentration is beyond the testing limits
     Appendix 2

The True Cost of Coal
–– An Investigation into Coal Ash in China (2010)
26Company 
NameDouhe Power PlantChifeng Thermal Power Plant Yuanbaoshan Power Plant Xuanwei Power PlantFengcheng Number 1 Power Plant
Sanitary Standards for Drinking Water (GB5749 2006)Sampling 
locationGanyugou village Dongjiao Badui Jiuquan villageXinglongpo villageShuimotou village Miaohou village Yujiahe CountyHoutanggang 
village
Type of sampleUnderground well waterUnderground well waterUnderground 
well waterUnderground well waterUnderground well 
waterUnderground well waterUnderground well waterUnderground well water
Sample 
numberCC1003 CC10011 CC10032 CC10012 CC10014 CC10024 CC10033 CC10038
Metals (unit: mg/kg)          
Aluminium - - 19.8 - <10.0 <10.0 46.8 69.4
Antimony <20 <20 - <20 - - - -
Arsenic <50 <50 - <50 - - - -
Barium 31 43 86.9 44 44.2 143 76 366
Boron 54 898 116 1850 <100 <100 <100 <100 500
Cadmium <5 <5 <0.100 <5 <0.100 <0.100 <0.100 <0.100
Calcium - - 63.8 - 58.2 29.8 64.3 32.8
Chromium <20 <20 2.03 <20 2.33 <0.500 1.19 <0.500
Chromium (VI); hexavalent chromium<50 <50 - <50 - - - -
Cobalt <20 <20 - <20 - - - -
Copper <20 <20 <1.00 <20 19.9 <1.00 1.57 <1.00
Iron <40 <40 38.3 <40 <30.0 <30.0 47.2 <30.0
Lead <50 <50 <2.00 <50 <2.00 <2.00 <2.00 <2.00
Lithium - - <100 - <100 <100 <100 <100
Magnesium - - 37 - 24.8 13.1 14.4 4.76
Manganese <10 <10 <10.0 <10 <10.0 <10.0 <10.0 47.7
Mercury <2 <2 <0.01 <2 <0.02 <0.02 <0.02 <0.02
Molybdenum <20 34 - 142 - - - - 70
Nickel <20 <20 <1.00 <20 <1.00 <1.00 <1.00 3.99
Potassium - - 0.331 - 1.43 8.12 5.57 5.59
Selenium <200 <200 - <200 - - - -
Sodium - - 47.3 - 17.7 18.2 15.4 14.8
Strontium - - 756 - 1230 337 326 163
Thallium <200 <200 - <200 - - - -
Vanadium <20 <20 - <20 - - - -
Zinc 58 17 16.8 14 6.64 <5.00 5.88 <5.00
pH 8.0 7.5 - 7.0 - - - -
Compounds (unit: mg/kg)
Nitrate 27.12 16.71 - 34.72 - - - - 20
Chloride 17.28 25.77 - 35.22 - - - -
Fluoride 0.2 0.7 - 2.8 - - - - 1
sulphide <0.01 <0.01 - <0.01 - - - -
sulphate - - 43.9 - 46.3 32.8 72.5 24.2
Note: "-" indicated the  concentration is beyond the testing limitsAppendix 3

32