# Archivo original: eating-up-the-amazon.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:20 -03 2025

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON1
EATING UP 
THE AMAZON

2


EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON3
CONTENTS
DESTRUCTION BY NUMBERS – THE KEY FACTS  5
INTRODUCTION: THE TRUTH BEHIND THE BEAN  8
HOW SOYA IS DRIVING THE AGRICULTURE FRONTIER INTO THE RAINFOREST  13
WHO PROFITS FROM AMAZON DESTRUCTION?  17
THE ENVIRONMENTAL COSTS OF AMAZON DESTRUCTION AND SOYA MONOCULTURE  21
BEYOND THE LAW: CRIMES LINKED TO SOYA EXPANSION IN THE AMAZON  27
CARGILL IN SANTAR ÉM: MOST CULPABLE OF THE SOYA GIANTS  37
EUROPEAN CORPORATE COMPLICITY IN AMAZON DESTRUCTION  41
STRATEGIES TO PROTECT THE AMAZON AND THE GLOBAL CLIMATE  48
DEMANDS  51
ANNEX ONE – GUIDANCE ON TRACEABILTY  52
ANNEX TWO – A SHORT HISTORY OF GM SOYA, BRAZIL AND THE EUROPEAN MARKET  55REFERENCES  56
ENDNOTES  60

4
The Government decision to make it illegal 
to cut down Brazil nut trees has failed to 
protect the species from the expanding 
agricultural frontier. When farmers clear the land to plant soya, they leave Brazil nut trees standing in isolation in the middle of 
soya monocultures. Fire used to clear the 
land usually kills the trees.

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON5
THE SCENE: 
The Amazon rainforest is 
one of the most biodiverse regions on earth. It is home 
to nearly 10% of the world’s 
mammals
1 and a staggering 
15% of the world’s known land-based plant species, 
with as many as 300 species 
of tree in a single hectare.
2 
The region is also home to 
about 220,000 people from 
180 different indigenous nations
3 who live deep in the 
rainforest, along with many more traditional forest-
dependent communities. 
 
The rainforest provides 
these people with 
everything from food 
and shelter to tools and medicines, and plays a crucial role in the spiritual 
life of indigenous peoples. 
All this is threatened by 
deforestation and related crimes, committed for the 
sake of the profits to be 
made from agricultural commodities such as soya.THE CRIME:  
Since Brazil’s President Lula da Silva came to power in January 2003, nearly 70,000 km
2  of 
the Amazon rainforest has been destroyed.
4
Between August 2003 and August 2004, 27,200km
2 – 
an area the size of Belgium – was lost. Three-quarters 
of this destruction was 
illegal.
5 That’s an area 10km 
long by 7.5km wide lost every day. More than 3km
2 
every hour. A football pitch every eight seconds.
6 
In 2004–05 around 1.2 
million hectares of soya 
(5% of the national total) was planted in the Brazilian Amazon rainforest.
7 
It is well documented that 
slave labour is used to clear 
forest for agriculture. Mato Grosso and Par
á – the two 
Amazon states at the leading edge of the soya frontier 
– are responsible for more 
than half of all the slaves reported in Brazil.
8 Between 
2003 and 2004, the Brazilian Government reported nearly 
8,700 slaves in the two states. 
Up to 75% of Brazil’s 
greenhouse gas emissions 
result from deforestation 
– with the majority coming from the clearing and burning of the Amazon rainforest.
9 
Amazingly, relative to its industrialised size, Brazil is the world’s fourth largest 
climate polluter.THE CRIMINALS: 
Three US-based agricultural 
commodities giants – Archer Daniels Midland (ADM), 
Bunge and Cargill – are 
responsible for about 60% of the total financing of soya production in Brazil. 
Together, these three 
companies also control more than three-quarters of the soya crushing capacity in Europe that supplies soya 
meal and oil to the animal 
feed market.
10
With an estimated 13 silos and an illegal port facility already built into the Amazon 
rainforest, Cargill is leading 
soya’s invasion of the region – spurring the incursion of illegal farms and building 
infrastructure to deliver 
Amazon soya to global markets. Bunge and ADM are following Cargill’s lead, with an estimated six and four silos 
respectively in the Amazon.
11PARTNERS IN CRIME: 
80% of the world’s soya 
production is fed to the 
livestock industry.12
Spiralling demand for soya animal feed from European agribusiness is 
driving the expansion of 
the agricultural frontier into the Amazon rainforest. Europe buys half the soya 
exported from the Amazon 
state of Mato Grosso, where 90% of rainforest soya is grown. Meat reared on rainforest soya finds 
its way onto supermarket 
shelves and fast food counters across Europe.DESTRUCTION BY NUMBERS  
– THE KEY FACTS

6


EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON7
Since 1998, Greenpeace has 
been working alongside Amazon 
communities to investigate and 
expose the threats to the Amazon, and to confront the major actors driving the criminal destruction of this 
globally critical rainforest. In order to 
improve our effectiveness, we set up a satellite mapping team in the Amazon 
to track and identify those responsible 
for opening up illegal roads and driving deforestation. This work is coupled with on-the-ground investigations 
and aerial surveillance. 

8
SOYA’S INVASION OF THE AMAZON
In early 2003, the Brazilian Government launched a plan to 
combat deforestation in the Amazon. By 2004–05, the rate of deforestation – which had leapt to a ten-year high – had 
returned to its 25-year average of about 18,000km
2 a year.13
In 2004, however, Greenpeace started to document a powerful 
newcomer beginning to operate at the frontier of Amazon destruction: the soya industry. Through field investigations, 
aerial surveillance, interviews with affected communities, 
industry and political actors, analysis of Brazilian Government satellite and export data, tracking of shipments to the international market and a host of other research techniques, 
Greenpeace has built up a preliminary picture of this devastating 
new industry. This report represents our initial findings.
At the heart of Amazon destruction, Greenpeace has identified 
three US-based agricultural commodities giants – Archer Daniels 
Midland (ADM), Bunge and Cargill. These same three companies 
have a virtual monopoly of soya crushing capacity (for meal and oil) in Europe, supplying the lucrative animal feed industry with this cheap, high-protein ingredient – so fuelling Europe’s 
intensive meat and dairy production, and feeding its ever-
growing demand for cheap meat.
These companies also control other aspects of the food supply 
chain such as – in the case of Cargill – large-scale livestock farming 
and meat processing, making them not only buyers, suppliers 
and processors but consumers of soya. They are building up their presence in the Amazon by constructing storage and processing facilities and encouraging the development and expansion of illegal 
farms hacked out of the rainforest, whose operations are made 
viable by the infrastructure the companies have put in place.
WHY IS SOYA IN THE AMAZON?
Giants such as ADM, Bunge and Cargill have established themselves in the Amazon because they know they can make easy money out of the destruction of the rainforest. By providing everything from 
seeds and agrochemicals to the transport and storage infrastructure 
needed to access global markets, ADM, Bunge and Cargill act as a magnet drawing farmers into the Amazon rainforest. 
While soya is being planted in areas previously deforested for cattle 
ranching, in large areas of Mato Grosso and Pará, the Amazon rainforest is also being converted directly to soya monocultures. Soya farmers deforest the land, usually planting rice for the first year to prepare the soil, and then grow soya. It is common practice 
for farmers to illegally grab public land, and deforest it using cheap, 
sometimes slave labour – the rainforest is largely beyond the law so the risks are low. Such criminal activities in effect constitute perverse financial subsidies for Europe’s cheap meat.Europe is a key market for Amazon soya. Nearly 18 million tonnes of soya beans and meal are imported into Europe from Brazil annually.
14 
Almost all the soya exported in 2005 from the Amazon port of Santarém, built illegally by Cargill, was destined for Europe.
GREENPEACE’S INVESTIGATION
Since 1998, Greenpeace has been working alongside Amazon communities to investigate and expose the threats to the Amazon, and to confront the major actors driving the criminal 
destruction of this globally critical rainforest. Together, we 
are pushing for environmentally responsible and socially just solutions for the people of the Amazon.
In order to improve our effectiveness, we set up a satellite 
mapping team in the Amazon to track and identify those responsible for opening up illegal roads and driving deforestation. This work is coupled with on-the-ground investigations and aerial surveillance. Our evidence has been presented to the Brazilian 
authorities to compel them to act, and also has been shared with 
local communities and other NGOs.
The results speak for themselves. Our campaigns in Brazil, in global 
political forums, and critical market areas such as Europe and the 
USA, have persuaded the Brazilian Government to act on a number of fronts – closing illegal logging operations, ending the illegal mahogany trade, marking the legal boundaries of indigenous lands, creating new protected areas as a buffer against deforestation, 
and creating community reserves – all of which allow traditional 
forest people to regain control of their land for genuinely sustainable development. But much remains to be done if the Amazon, its peoples and its wildlife are to be safeguarded in the long term.
In this report we illustrate the soya crisis through the example of 
two key global players: Cargill (possibly the largest private company in the world) in the Amazon and McDonald’s (the largest fast food company in the world) in Europe. We document the path taken by 
soya from illegally cleared farms, sometimes with the use of slave 
labour, to Cargill and its competitors, through the ports, processors and meat producers of Europe, and finally into the Chicken McNuggets sold under the golden arches across the continent.
While we focus on McDonald’s, our investigations have also shown 
that the same crimes are likely to be on the menu of the majority of European fast food retailers and supermarkets. If we can track soya beans more than 7,000km from farms in the Amazon to 
chicken products in Europe, there is no excuse for the whole of the 
food industry not to do the same and to demand the exclusion of Amazon soya from their supply chain. However, not one of the major food processors, fast food chains or supermarkets contacted by 
Greenpeace was able to provide evidence that it was not using soya 
from the Amazon rainforest.INTRODUCTION:  
THE TRUTH BEHIND THE BEAN

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON9
THE NEED FOR ACTION
Deforestation for cash crops such as soya does not 
translate into meaningful development for the peoples of Brazil’s Amazon. It leads to displaced communities, 
illegal privatisation of public lands, the suffering of 
enslaved workers, and barren or contaminated lands and river systems. The devastation to biodiversity is irreversible, and a sustainable resource of unimaginable 
richness is lost forever. Nor do the impacts of 
deforestation end at the edge of the Amazon. By releasing centuries’ worth of stored carbon into the atmosphere, the destruction of the Amazon rainforest makes a significant contribution to global warming, 
putting the whole world at risk.
Brazil’s President Lula da Silva is failing to stop this invasion 
of the Amazon. Since he came to power in January 2003 
nearly 70,000km
2 of rainforest has been cleared.15 And 
an area of similar size16 will have been degraded through 
logging, making the Amazon more vulnerable to fires and 
incursion by farmers.
But there are a number of factors that give cause for hope:
· The scale of Amazon soya cultivation is still relatively 
contained.  In the 2004–05 planting season, only 5% 
of the total area in Brazil planted with soya was in the 
Amazon biome17 – the proper biogeographical term for 
the area recognised as forming the Amazon rainforest 
ecosystem.18 Over 90% of this Amazon soya was grown 
in the state of Mato Grosso.19
· Existing and potential drivers of its illegal expansion 
are easily identifiable.  With proper environmental 
planning and strict governance, infrastructure projects such as soya drying and storage facilities or 
port terminals, which encourage the already rampant 
process of illegal land grabbing and deforestation in the rainforest, could be stopped.
· Proper enforcement measures can be a barrier to 
destruction.  In 2005, the rate of illegal deforestation 
fell for the first time in nearly ten years,20 due largely to 
the Brazilian Government’s efforts to clamp down on corruption and illegal logging, and the creation in key 
regions of further protected areas situated so as to act 
as barriers to destruction.
· The market has power.  As we have seen with European 
consumer rejection of genetically modified (GM) soya, supermarkets, food companies and fast food retailers 
have the power to transform the market. Key players
 in the expansion of soya  in the Amazon, and 
who have it in their power to turn back the tide, include:
· Global commodity traders:  the market and production 
strategies of the mainly US-owned agricultural giants, 
such as ADM, Bunge and Cargill, finance and facilitate 
forest destruction.
· The European food industry:  the growing market for 
soya for animal feed, especially to meet demand for 
meat products on the part of European food producers, 
fast food chains and supermarkets, is driving the 
advance of the agricultural frontier in Brazil.
· The Brazilian Government:  lack of governance, a 
weak system of land titling, and a failure fully to protect public land in the Amazon make illegal land 
grabbing and deforestation easy, low-risk and cheap.
 
Solutions are obvious.  With proper governance and 
industry action, there is still a chance that Brazil’s soya 
industry can be excluded from the Amazon biome. An alternative, more environmentally responsible and socially just model of development for the world’s most important 
rainforest is needed. But this will only happen with the 
support of businesses and institutions in the developed world.
The market needs to change.
 Companies involved in the 
food and feed industries must ensure that they are not 
using soya from the Amazon or GM soya, and they must 
urgently develop legal, environmentally responsible and 
socially just sourcing policies. This includes putting in place traceability systems to verify where a product’s ingredients are sourced from, the conditions in which they 
are produced, and the overall impact of their production.
Governments and banks need to act . Governments 
and international financial institutions have increasingly 
promoted production of global agricultural commodities 
such as soya as a vehicle for development, even though 
they offer little in the way of value-added local industry. Yet this investment in soya and related infrastructure such as roads is harming both people and the environment, 
undermining economic and environmental sustainability.
Governments must urgently establish a global 
network of protected areas in the world’s last ancient forests, including the Amazon rainforest. Until these 
networks are in place, governments must establish a 
moratoria on all new industrial developments in areas of intact forest landscapes.EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON9

10


EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON11
‘A smoky haze blurs the frontier between the world’s 
mightiest forest and its biggest threat: the humble soya 
bean. The four-month burning season in the Amazon is 
when the giant trees felled to make space for crops are reduced to ashes. Even after being slashed and burned, the trunks of the tauari and ma
çaranduba are so huge that their 
embers glow for more than two years… Brazil’s boom crop 
and [the world’s] growing appetite are clearing more forest 
than logging, cattle farming and mining… Brazil is rapidly becoming the takeaway for the workforce of the world.’
The Guardian ‘A hunger eating up the world’, 18 January 200 521

12
‘You could look all the way to the horizon. 
It was an ocean of soybeans as far as you 
could see. Hour after hour passed as we 
travelled along an asphalt road called BR163. We were all in shock. All this land has been cleared in the past 10 years? ... When I saw 
with my own eyes how TWO D-7 caterpillars 
could flatten 80 acres of trees per day, I was completely amazed. I had learned that 
hundreds of caterpillars were working in the 
forest at any given moment.’
US soya expert Kory Melby’s January 2001 account  
of how he came to be a farming consultant in Brazil33

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON13
The dramatic expansion of soya production in the Brazilian 
Amazon reflects an ongoing, equally dramatic and equally predatory shift in global commodities markets as a whole. 
Until the early 1980s, the USA accounted for more than 90% 
of world soya exports. By the end of that decade, however, US dominance had begun to slip as soya expansion in Latin America 
began to take off, led by US-based multinationals such as ADM 
and Cargill. In 2003, the combined soya exports from Argentina and Brazil surpassed US exports for the first time.
22 The rapid 
growth of Latin American soya production has driven down global prices, making soya less profitable and less economically 
viable in the USA (even with government subsidies) and leading 
many farmers to abandon it for other crops.
23
While China emerges as the world’s manufacturing workshop and India as the service industry’s back room, Brazil – in the words of former US Secretary of State Colin 
Powell – is becoming an ‘agricultural superpower.’ In the last 
few years Brazil has become the world’s largest exporter of beef, chicken, sugar, coffee and orange juice.
 24
In 2005, Brazil added the soya bean to the list of export commodities in which it leads the world.
25 In 2004–05, Brazil 
produced over 50 million tonnes of soya across nearly 23 million hectares,
26 an area of land about the size of Great Britain.27 
Within Brazil, the world’s largest commodities traders (ADM, 
Bunge and Cargill) along with big Brazilian players like the 
Governor of Mato Grosso, Blairo Maggi, have all driven the soya invasion northwards, initially into the cerrados (savannahs on 
the edge of the rainforest),
28 through the provision of inputs 
such as seeds and agrochemicals and the construction of soya export infrastructure. With limited room left for expansion in the 
cerrados and increasing land prices there, soya is now leading the 
advance of the agricultural frontier into the Amazon rainforest, facilitated by both legal state roads and illegal access roads.
This is a new and ominous threat to the rainforest – the leading 
cause of deforestation today. To understand why, we need to look at the complex and chaotic issues surrounding land ownership in Brazil.
Public and indigenous lands account for nearly three quarters 
of the area of the Legal Amazon states.
29 While some public 
land falls within protected areas, most of it is classed as 
‘empty lands.’ These unprotected and vulnerable lands include 
proposed protected areas, indigenous lands not officially 
recognised by the government, and other areas where the government currently has little legal control.
30 Soya farmers target these lands. The land seizure is 
often on a large scale – thousands of hectares of land, 
not mere smallholdings. The farmers use loggers, bulldozers, and even slave labour to clear and then burn the forest in readiness for the crop. 
What makes the soya industry’s assault upon the 
Amazon even more damaging than previous incursions by other actors such as cattle ranchers and illegal loggers is that, unlike the ranchers and loggers, farmers 
planning to grow soya have access via international 
banks or global companies such as Cargill to cheap credit and other inputs, along with a guaranteed market for their harvests.
31 So soya farmers have the incentives 
and resources to buy large areas of cleared land or to pay for occupied land to be cleared.
In the absence of barriers to the illegal encroachment of 
the agricultural frontier in the Amazon, infrastructure projects such as roads which facilitate soya exports 
give speculators easy access to the rainforest, making it 
vulnerable to new incursions. This process threatens to fragment the existing core area of the Amazon, destroying the integrity of its ecosystems and indigenous lands.
32 
MATO GROSSO  
– THE FRONT LINE OF DESTRUCTION
Mato Grosso – the name literally means ‘thick jungle.’  
Over half of Mato Grosso is in the Amazon biome. But Mato Grosso is a thick jungle no more; instead it is rapidly being 
transformed into a soya desert. One-third of the rainforest 
has now been cleared,
34 mainly by illegal deforestation, to 
make way for the advancing agricultural frontier.35 
Within the space of a few years, Mato Grosso state has 
become the largest soya producing state in Brazil, accounting 
for almost a third of Brazil’s total 2003–04 harvest.36 Farms 
here are larger, more mechanised, and use more chemical inputs than those in the south of Brazil.
37
The area planted with soya in Mato Grosso is twice the size it was in 1996,
38 and this expansion is driving the agricultural 
frontier into the Amazon.39 Mato Grosso heads Brazil’s 
statistics for deforestation and fires, 40 accounting for nearly 
half of the deforestation in the Amazon in 2003–04.41 
According to the Mato Grosso state environment agency,42 
two-thirds of this deforestation – the majority of it carried out to clear land for agriculture – is illegal.
43 HOW SOYA IS DRIVING THE 
AGRICULTURE FRONTIER INTO 
THE RAINFOREST

14


EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON15
Described as a ‘compulsive environmental criminal’ by a 
Federal Prosecutor, land grabber Jos é Donizetti Pires de 
Oliveira is accused of illegal deforesting 1,645 hectares in an 
area east of Santar ém – rapidly becoming a frontier for the 
expansion of soya. Oliveira was arrested on 17 March 2006 
at the office of the Agricultural Producers Association in 
Santar ém (APAS), of which he is the president.

16
‘The new owners of Brazil’s soy industry 
are the same companies that dominate 
the seeds, fertilizers, growing, shipping and 
sales of US soybeans. Cargill, Archer Daniels Midland and Bunge alone control more 
 
than 60% of Brazil’s soy exports.’
Glen Switkes, ‘Feedstuffs’ – a US Farm  
Bureau publication, 30 April 200144‘As radical as it sounds, the prediction that 170 million hectares of new farmland 
could potentially be brought under crop 
production in Brazil might still be considered a conservative estimate [as it] ignores the actual scope of deforestation that is 
occurring and is likely to continue to occur 
in the Amazon Basin … Large-scale farmers are currently responsible for the lion’s share 
of Amazon deforestation, and their access to 
new land parcels will be accentuated by new road development.’ 
USDA, ‘Brazil: future agricultural expansion  
potential underrated’ 21 January 200345


EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON17
To profit from soya production as a global cash crop, farming 
must be done on a large scale. The soya industry in Brazil employs fewer people per hectare than any other crop grown 
across the country. Soya farms reach up to 10,000 hectares 
in size but employ only one worker per 170–200 hectares.
46 
So it is not local communities who are benefiting from the soya industry. Instead, ‘a critical mass of professional farmers 
and multinational agribusiness companies’ are benefiting 
from transforming the Amazon ‘into a tropical agricultural powerhouse… government officials, agribusiness executives, and producers alike recognize this, and are collectively working 
to ensure this happens.’
47
World trade in and processing of soya is concentrated in the 
hands of a small number of global commodity traders who also often control other aspects of the food chain: ADM, Bunge 
and Cargill. In Brazil, this cartel assumes the role of the banks in 
providing resources to farmers. Instead of offering loans they provide farmers with seed, fertiliser and chemicals in return for soya at harvest: Bunge alone provided the equivalent of nearly 
US$1 billion worth of inputs to Brazilian farmers in 2004.
48 This 
gives the companies indirect control over huge swathes of land. 
Together, these three giants are responsible for about 60% of the 
total financing of soya production in Brazil49 and control almost 
80% of the EU’s soya crushing capacity for meal and oil.50 Such 
integrated production – the ownership of many parts of the 
supply chain – means that they have a virtual monopoly on supply. 
The link between crime in the forest and the global market is 
most clearly illustrated by the case of Cargill, which not only controls a huge percentage of the world’s soya trade, but also 
has important interests in global meat production and food 
processing. The company has ambitions to dominate ‘the global chicken value chain’
51 – ie to control cheap chicken for fast 
food, catering, ready meals and ‘value packs.’ As Greenpeace investigations show, Cargill is both driving illegal forest 
destruction and feeding the products of this destruction to the 
world through fast food retailers and supermarkets.SPEARHEADING DESTRUCTION:  
GRUPO ANDRÉ MAGGI  
AND THE SOYA KING
‘As governor, my key goal is to...  
triple agricultural production in Mato  
Grosso within 10 years.’
Blairo Maggi, Mato Grosso governor and soya producer. Interview with Soybean Digest 1 March 2003
Along with the world’s largest commodities traders ADM, Bunge and Cargill, big Brazilian players like Blairo Maggi have all driven the soya invasion into the Amazon.
Blairo Maggi is not only the governor of Mato Grosso, 
he is also the head of Grupo André Maggi, the largest individual soya producer in the world.
52 Maggi is a major 
international trader, exporting over two million tonnes of soya annually.
53 He is known in Brazil as ‘O rei da soja’ 
– the soya king. 
Grupo André Maggi bears a huge amount of 
responsibility for ‘reshaping’ the Amazon – initiating soya cultivation in Mato Grosso and driving its expansion into the Amazon. Indeed, the company 
boasts its prominent role in opening up the area for 
agriculture in the name of progress and economic development.
54 To date, Greenpeace estimates that 
Grupo André Maggi has established 13 soya silos in the Amazon.
55
In 2002, when Blairo Maggi was elected as governor, he added political influence to his economic power, and called for a tripling of the area planted with 
soya in Mato Grosso over the following decade.
56 In 
Maggi’s first year in office as governor, the annual 
deforestation rate in Mato Grosso increased by 
around 30%.57 When questioned about this high level 
of deforestation in an interview with the New York 
Times , Maggi responded: ‘ I don’t feel the slightest 
guilt over what we are doing here … it’s no secret 
that I want to build roads and expand agricultural production.’
58
Maggi’s power allows him to add funding from the Brazilian and Mato Grosso state governments to money from private companies (including his 
own), and to access international lenders such as 
the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the private lending arm of the World Bank. The funds go towards transport infrastructure projects that 
invite deforestation of the Amazon: new roads, port 
facilities and navigable waterways cutting through the heart of the rainforest.WHO PROFITS FROM  
AMAZON DESTRUCTION?
19
76/7
719
78/7
919
80/8
119
82/8
319
84/8
519
86/8
719
88/8
919
90/9
119
92/9
319
94/9
519
96/9
719
98/9
920
00/0
120
02/0
320
04/0
57,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000AREA OF SOYA PRODUCTION IN MATO GROSSO
Source: CONAB - Levantamento: Jan/2006(million of hectares)

18
THE BANKS BEHIND THE MAGGI BULLDOZER
‘The fact that problems exist within a  
sector does not mean that a single actor  
who behaves in a responsible way should  
not be supported.’
IFC/World Bank Brazil Country Manager Wolfgang 
Bertelsmeier justifying a US$30 million loan to Grupo André Maggi, 23 July 2003
59
International lenders are playing an important role in the expansion of large-scale soya cultivation, providing capital for infrastructure development, agrochemical inputs and 
prefinancing of farmers.
60 The case of Grupo André Maggi 
demonstrates how multiple public and international loans  
for soya production, processing facilities and transport 
infrastructure are pushing the conversion of the Amazon 
rainforest into a vast monoculture. 
Grupo André Maggi has had easy access to financing from 
public and private banks in Europe and Japan, and from the 
IFC, totalling more than US$660 million.61 These loans have 
helped the company finance advance payments to suppliers 
and infrastructural development for the storage and 
transport of soya.
In 2002, Grupo André Maggi landed the first of two US$30 
million loans from the IFC in order to enlarge the company’s 
storage capacity and to finance soya production by its 
contract farmers. The IFC justified this by saying that even if the soya sector as a whole was under criticism, individual companies with a ‘good performance’ could surely still be financed.
62 The IFC is bound to the World Bank’s 
development mandate, and aims to ‘promote sustainable 
private sector investment in developing countries, helping to reduce poverty and improve people’s lives
.’63 It has 
specific guidelines stipulating that projects be screened and classified according to the environmental and social impacts 
that could result from project funding.
64 
In 2004, only 15% of the Grupo André Maggi’s total output came from its own farms. The remaining production came 
from some 2,000 third-party farmers, of which 45% were prefinanced through the ‘Amaggi Expansion Project.’
65 In 2004, the then World Bank President James Wolfensohn called for an audit of the IFC’s loan to Grupo André Maggi.
66 The audit found that the IFC had not 
undertaken a sufficiently rigorous assessment of the company, and that therefore its assessment of the loan 
as low-risk could not be justified.
67 For instance, under 
the Forest Code of the Unified Environmental Law in 
Brazil, property owners are required to retain a specified 
percentage of native vegetation (80% for forest 
areas, 50% for cerrado). The review found that these requirements were not met on farms covering two-thirds (55,000 hectares) of Maggi-owned land
68 – in other 
words, the farms had broken the law. 
Furthermore, the review did not even investigate compliance 
with the forest code by the third-party farms, even though almost 90% of the overall budget for the IFC Amaggi Expansion Project was to support the prefinancing of these 
farmers.
69 The fact that this legislation is so frequently 
violated leads one to conclude that the environmental 
cost of financing Grupo André Maggi extend beyond the 
company itself.
However, the fact that the IFC had classified Grupo André 
Maggi projects as ‘category B’ – ie of low environmental 
risk – and approved loans for these projects meant that 
private banks considered it unnecessary to evaluate and monitor the company according to their own environmental and social policies, including prohibitions on conversion of rainforest and monocultural methods.
70 
For instance, Rabobank, the Netherlands’ biggest agricultural bank, has led the provision of two loans 
together worth US$330 million: an IFC audit report found 
that ‘Rabobank’s reasoning [for giving Maggi the loan] was that if IFC approves this project and they classify it only as a class B, low-risk project, we can safely invest 
$230 million [the value of the second loan], eight times 
more than what IFC is investing, in this corporation.’
71 
Some private banks, such as HSBC, that have previously 
financed Grupo André Maggi72 are beginning to grapple 
with the problem of withdrawing finance from rainforest 
destruction. In May 2004, HSBC introduced a policy 
that states that it will no longer finance projects ‘located 
in and which significantly degrade or convert Critical Natural Habitats.’
73

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON19
I don’t feel the slightest 
guilt over what we 
are doing here… it’s no 
secret that I want to build roads and expand agricultural production.’
Blairo Maggi (left)EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON19

20
This plane is s praying 
herbicide inside the 
Amazon biome. Large-scale 
planting of monocultures encourages the aerial application of herbicides, 
and much of what is 
sprayed is wasted through drift and leaching.

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON21
GLOBAL CLIMATE IMPACTS
The destruction of the Amazon has implications beyond 
domestic politics and international markets, and brings environmental impacts beyond those felt in the vicinity. 
The long-term environmental services provided to Brazil, 
its people and the world by the rainforest – and jeopardised by its destruction – are far more valuable than short-term commodities trade, be it in soya for chicken feed or illegal 
logs for plywood.
What is being destroyed by global demand for cheap soya is 
more than just one of the most species-rich habitats on earth. Scientists describe the world’s largest tropical rainforest as the 
earth’s air conditioner: the region’s humidity is vital to climate 
regulation and cooling patterns in South America – and globally.
74 
The Amazon pumps about seven trillion tonnes of water a year into the atmosphere, providing the vapour that keeps the 
regional climate humid and rainy. The conversion of water to 
vapour also cools the air.
75 
Just as the rainforest helps keep our threatened global climate 
stable, so deforestation of the Amazon exacerbates global climate 
instability. In addition to the loss of the water cycling function, deforestation compromises the region’s role as a vast carbon sink. Far from simply soaking up and storing excess CO
2 from the 
atmosphere, the Amazon has now become a substantial source of CO
2 pollution as burning trees and decaying vegetation release their 
stored carbon into the air. 
In 2000, Brazil was the world’s fourth-largest emitter of climate-
changing greenhouse gases, ahead of industrialised nations such as Germany or the UK.
76 This high-ranking was not caused by 
pollution from manufacturing industries but by the deforestation that is driven by Brazil’s eagerness to supply the world with cheap 
agricultural commodities such as soya. In fact, according to Brazil’s 
Ministry of Science and Technology, deforestation has been responsible for up to 75% of Brazil’s emissions, with 59% coming from Amazon deforestation.
77
THE SLOW DEATH OF THE AMAZON
 Deforestation aside, planting large-scale soya monocultures – particularly in such a vulnerable ecosystem as the Amazon –
 
 has other wide-ranging environmental impacts. The link between monocultural expansion, loss of biodiversity and increased 
vulnerability to pest outbreaks and crop disease epidemics is well 
established.
78 In addition, the increasing use of GM soya intensifies 
all the worst aspects of industrial agriculture and threatens the integrity of non GM supplies of Brazilian soya crop and the 
biodiversity of the Amazon rainforest.
Like many monocultures, soya monoculture leads to soil 
erosion, especially in areas where the crop is grown intensively. 
New ‘no-till’ systems of planting (linked with the use of 
herbicide-resistant GM seeds and heavy chemical use) have encouraged farmers to cultivate lands vulnerable to high levels of erosion.
79 Moreover, soya monocultures require massive 
agrochemical inputs (fertiliser and pesticides) to boost harvests in poor soil and to kill pests and pathogens against which 
intensively grown high-yield varieties have little resistance. 
Large-scale soya monocultures without crop rotations quickly 
impoverish soils. In areas of poor soils fertilisers and lime may have 
to be applied soon after the land is occupied to get any kind of 
soya harvest – though even this only offers a temporary solution. As the soil becomes exhausted, farmers abandon the land which was so recently cleared and move to other areas where they again clear the rainforest, plant soya and repeat the vicious cycle of soil 
degradation and chemical pollution.
80 
Soya-related fertiliser usage has been linked to increased levels of nitrogen and phosphorus in several river basins of South America.
81 
Such nutrient enrichment can be devastating to aquatic biodiversity. 
Pesticides also cause major problems of soil and water pollution, 
destruction of natural biodiversity and human poisoning.82
Brazil is one of the world’s largest users of pesticides, and safety 
standards are lax. In 1996, the World Health Organisation classified nearly half of the pesticides registered with the 
Brazilian Ministry of Health as extremely hazardous or highly 
hazardous.
83 In 1997, the International Centre for Pesticides and 
Health Risk Prevention estimated that 10% of Brazil’s population – the 15 million people working on the country’s three million 
farms – was exposed to pesticides.
84 Since that time, pesticide 
sales have increased threefold nationwide, implying an increase 
in potential exposures. In 2002, an estimated 150,000 to 
200,000 people a year suffered pesticide poisoning in rural 
environments, including about 4,000 deaths.85 A quarter of all 
pesticides applied in Brazil are used on soya.86
While the localised environmental and health impacts of intensive chemical usage are a cause for concern, the larger environmental issue is contamination of the rainforest and its river systems through 
run-off and the wider impacts of pollution. Rain and flooding wash 
agrochemicals off fields into rivers, killing fish and other life. These effects are often cumulative and irreversible.
In soya monocultures in Brazil, the herbicide paraquat is often 
used to kill weeds and other plants that try to recolonise the land. Paraquat is banned in many countries due to its toxicity, and is classified as a Restricted Use Pesticide in the USA, requiring special license to purchase and apply the chemical.
87 Roundup, the 
glyphosate-based herbicide manufactured by Monsanto is also widely used – particularly with the advance of GM soya into the 
Amazon. The widespread use of Roundup may have serious impacts 
on the life of the rainforest. There are new concerns regarding its toxicity to amphibians and to humans.
88 
Broad-spectrum herbicides such as Roundup kill all plants 
indiscriminately, leaving just the GM herbicide-tolerant crops THE ENVIRONMENTAL COSTS 
OF AMAZON DESTRUCTION 
AND SOYA MONOCULTURE

22
intact. The effect is not confined to the crop fields – spray 
drift can carry it far into neighbouring wild vegetation particularly when crop-spraying aeroplanes are used. This 
unnecessary destruction may lead to decreases in wild plant 
diversity with damaging consequences for insects, birds and mammals that are dependent on the plants affected. Where GM soya is grown, the number of herbicide applications and 
total quantities applied increase. Herbicide use is expected 
to rise further as weeds develop Roundup tolerance, as has happened in Argentina and in the USA.
89
Moreover, Roundup is directly toxic to the naturally occurring soil bacteria that help make nitrogen available to plants, meaning that the GM soya beans designed to be grown with 
Roundup are dependent on chemical fertilisers for nitrogen, 
further increasing agrochemical use.
90
Research in the cerrado  of Mato Grosso shows that pesticide 
use has greatly intensified with the introduction of soya, and that subsoil and surface waters are seriously affected by soya 
production, primarily through the application of agrochemicals, 
whose impacts can be felt far from where they are applied.
91 CHEMICALS AND RIVER  
BASINS DON’T MIX:  
XINGU INDIGENOUS PARK,  
MATO GROSSO (AMAZON BIOME)
‘The greatest threat to traditional 
life comes from soya bean farming. 
Pesticides and insecticides have begun  
to pollute the water … killing the fish.’
The Guardian, February 200693
Intensified use of agrochemicals and an increase in soil erosion 
resulting from the clearing of large tracts of land have had a profound impact on the river systems that provide drinking water 
to forest communities as well as habitats for innumerable species of 
plants and animals, many of them central to indigenous livelihoods.
94
The Río Xingu Basin, covering nearly 180,000km2, is being 
turned into the regional waste drain as the soya industry encroaches upon it from all sides. At the heart of the catchment 
is a near-pristine area of rainforest – the Xingu Indigenous Park 
– which is home to 14 indigenous tribes.
95 Today, the Xingu 
Indigenous Park is rapidly becoming an increasingly vulnerable oasis in the middle of a scene of devastation. 
Expansion of cattle ranching and soya is leading the destruction at 
the headwaters of the Río Xingu,
96 an important breeding ground 
for fish. Satellite photos reveal that almost 30% of the Río Xingu catchment has been deforested; nearly a third of that loss took place 
between 2003 and 2005.
97 Today, the southern half of the Xingu 
Indigenous Park is almost completely surrounded by agriculture. 
Indians within the Xingu Indigenous Park have witnessed decline 
in fish numbers due to agrochemical runoff as well as changes in the courses of waterways as a result of silt deposition from farming-related erosion.
98 Their fears about the impacts of 
crop pesticides have led them to fight for restrictions on soya production in the headwater area.
99
According to Ionaluka, a director of the Xingu Indigenous Land Association, ‘The soya is arriving very fast. Every time I leave the reservation I don’t recognise anything anymore 
because the forest keeps disappearing.’
100 For example, 
the illegal ‘soya highway’ (see below ‘Road infrastructure Xingu Basin  
– the waste drain  
for  the soya industry
 
 Rivers
 Amazon biome
  Xingu park boundaries

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON23
– making inroads’) has opened up land to soya plantations 
alongside a feeder stream of one of the main tributaries of the Río Xingu. Intensive agrochemical use along the 
soya highway – and elsewhere in the Río Xingu catchment 
– means that protection of indigenous lands and critical habitats is currently inadequate to protect biodiversity from the impacts of the soya industry.
THE SEEDS OF RUIN  
– GM CONTAMINATION OF THE AMAZON 
In February 2003 the global agrochemical and GM seed giant Monsanto opened a seed research facility in the municipality of Sorriso – the largest soya producing area 
in Brazil (about 600,000 tonnes) some 400km north 
of Cuiabá, the state capital of Mato Grosso. Sorriso falls partly within the rainforest and is at the cutting edge of the soya frontier that is marching into the Amazon biome. 
ADM, Bunge, Cargill and Grupo André Maggi all have large 
silos in the municipality.
According to Gateway Brazil, an English website for those 
interested in investing in Brazil’s agriculture: 
‘The population 
has doubled in the past seven years [as] families from southern Brazil have migrated north in search of cheap land 
and new business opportunities. Sorriso is at the epicenter 
of the largest productive flat spot on the planet… Sorriso is home to Bunge’s 8 million bushel elevator, Brazil’s largest inland receiving station
.’101
Nearly 550,000 hectares of land was under soya cultivation in Sorriso in 2004. Greenpeace‘s analysis shows that one quarter was within the Amazon biome,
102 of which some was 
planted with GM soya.
Monsanto is not alone in championing GM soya. The 
Brazilian Government has an agreement with the company to develop Roundup Ready GM soya varieties specifically for the Amazon climate and soil conditions. 
These GM seeds are currently being tested in Rondônia 
inside the Amazon biome.
103 Monsanto gets a fee for the 
use of its patented Roundup Ready GM technology and the government research centre also charges the farmer 
for using these GM seeds that they have further adapted 
for use in different regions.
104 
Brazilian law prohibits the planting of GM seeds in existing protected areas, proposed protected areas and their buffer zones, indigenous lands, and important 
catchment areas of public use. The environment 
ministry has yet to officially identify these areas (and as with the mapping of indigenous territories, this could take many years).
105 Meanwhile, the agriculture ministry 
is giving licenses to soya farmers in Mato Grosso to plant GM seeds in the Amazon.
Countries that grow GM crops are already experiencing 
environmental and agronomic problems.
106 As the case 
of Argentina shows, unchecked GM soya production with its heavy agrochemical use can result in the 
destruction of the soil’s natural microorganisms 
(rendering the land inert) and the emergence of herbicide-tolerant weeds.
107 Studies in Argentina108 and 
several US states109 show that, after a few years of GM 
planting, diverse strains of Roundup-tolerant weeds are now growing in Roundup Ready GM crop fields, having 
built up resistance as a result of heavy herbicide usage.
110 
The impact on wild vegetation can also be considerable. 
As a scientist at the University of Mato Grosso has 
observed, spraying herbicides from aeroplanes – as 
is common practice across the region – spreads the chemicals over a much wider area than intended.
111 
Wind and other weather conditions influence the area contaminated by chemical applications.
In addition to the impacts of deforestation, habitat 
fragmentation and pesticide use – all directly linked to the expansion of soya into the Amazon biome – there is the 
threat from GM soya to contaminate Brazil’s soya crop 
currently grown legally outside the Amazon.
GM soya has been planted in the state of Mato 
Grosso for the last four years. In the 2003–04 crop 
season, 1,800 hectares of GM soya was planted in 
19 municipalities of Mato Grosso, of which nine were within or partly within the Amazon biome, (see GM soya map).
112 In the 2005–06 crop season, GM soya has 
increased dramatically to more than 500,000 hectares, accounting for at least 10% of land planted with soya in 
Mato Grosso.
113 
Greenpeace has documentary evidence that ADM, Bunge, Cargill and Grupo André Maggi have all bought from 
farmers growing GM soya within the Amazon biome.BR-163
BR-364BR-163BR-36
4#ADM
"Amaggi
G
!Cargill
GM soya in 
Amazon biome
 
 State boundaries
 Amazon biome
  Amazon biome 
boundar y
  Municipalities with  
GM soya (2003/4)
 Road
 Unpaved road
BoliviaMato Grosso
Cuiabá

24
‘Our Xingu is not just what’s here.  
It’s a very long thread, and when it 
rains the soya brings venom down the 
same river that passes by our door.’
Jywapan Kayabi, chief of the Capivara Indian village92

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON25


26
‘Lack of an adequate transportation 
system has been one of the major 
reasons that cropland expansion in 
Brazil hasn’t progressed at an even faster pace. That is changing quickly, and it’s changing because private money 
is being spent… They aren’t waiting 
for governmental bureaucracies or environmental studies.They’re moving 
dirt and pouring concrete.’
Mike Krueger, Ag Perspectives 25 March 2002115
‘Just the hint of new asphalt ignites  
a flurry of Brazilian speculators.’
AgWeb (2004)116

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON27
‘Very low land prices in the Amazon help 
to make ranching profitable. These prices 
remain very low in part because farmers 
find it easy to illegally occupy government land without being prosecuted.’
Kaimowitz (2004) ‘Hamburger  
connection fuels Amazon destruction’114
The Amazon is a frontier beyond the reach of the law. Greenpeace 
investigations have shown how the demand for soya is directly driving the clearance of the Amazon rainforest – often by way 
of illegal activities such as land grabbing and slavery. By failing to 
insist on a clear and independently monitored chain of custody for commodities such as soya, European markets are complicit in this criminal and often brutal plunder.
ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE  
– MAKING INROADS 
The profitability of soya has led to the construction or expansion of eight industrial waterways, three railway lines and an extensive network of roads to bring in farm equipment and chemicals and 
transport harvests to export markets.
117 Without this infrastructural 
expansion in the Amazon – funded in large part by private 
companies such as Cargill – there would be minimal incentive for 
the soya industry to have a presence there. The development of 
infrastructure – in particular roads – through unprotected public lands is an open invitation to landgrabbers and farmers to deforest land in the vicinity, driving the expansion of the agricultural frontier 
far into the Amazon.
118 85% of all deforestation occurs within 50km 
either side of roads.119 As well as stimulating illegal deforestation, 
many of the roads are themselves illegally constructed.
THE BR163 AND THE PROPOSED  
PROTECTED AREA, SORRISO,  
MATO GROSSO (AMAZON BIOME)
‘Unless the Brazilian Government 
radically expands the number and size 
of federal forest preserves and severely 
restricts further penetration of the Amazon region… deforestation rates will remain high, pasture acreage will 
continue to grow, and the opportunity 
for expanded soybean cultivation in the region will increase.’
USDA Foreign Agricultural Service, 2004120'The initiative of creating the Parque Estadual das Castanheiras is praiseworthy 
and long overdue. The region where these 
two biomes (forest and savanna) meet is still unknown. But its fate is more subject to economical issues, like the price of the 
dollar or the price of soya, than to the real 
conservation of the tropical ecosystems.’
Marília Kerr do Amaral, field biologist who discovered  
the ‘new’ species of monkey, February 2006121
The threat posed by road development without proper land use 
management and forest protection is shown by what has happened in the Amazon biome around the Santarém - Cuiabá Highway 
(BR163) in Sorriso, Mato Grosso. 
Mato Grosso continues to witness some of the highest rates of 
deforestation in the Amazon. Only 2.5% of the Amazon biome 
in the state is protected,
122 and over 30% of the Amazon biome 
that lies within the state has been cleared.123 Soya producers 
are the main agents for deforestation along the BR163 and its 
vicinity.124 An increase in deforestation in the last few years has 
been mainly due to soya expansion along the paved section of the BR163.
125 Large-scale deforestation stops roughly where 
the paved section of the road ends, just south of the state border with Pará.
Nevertheless, here is major land appropriation along the existing 
unpaved BR163 as farmers seek to control land along the road.
126 
One small town has seen its population double in just two years to 25,000 and land prices increase tenfold.
127 Local smallholders 
speak of increased tensions, armed conflict and killings in the area, all related to land disputes.
128 Several ongoing investigations 
have concluded that land grabbing is rampant in the municipalities surrounding Santarém along the BR163.
129 Land grabbing is not new 
to the area, but local settlers unanimously testify that the pressures connected to it have increased.’
130
The paving of the remaining section of the road has been delayed for many years, to the frustration of the soya industry. Hoping to break the deadlock, Mato Grosso Governor Blairo Maggi has assembled 
a consortium of 30 companies – including ADM, Bunge and Cargill 
– to provide complete finance for the US$175 million project.
131
Soya farmers have been targeting unprotected public lands along the road, rich in wildlife and important for forest communities who live alongside the road. This expansion is destroying environmentally 
and socially critical areas of the Amazon. 
The BR163 runs next to the Parque Estadual das Castanheiras, first 
proposed as an Amazon Brazil nut tree reserve in August 2004. The 
reserve would cover 383,000 hectares of the Amazon biome.
132 BEYOND THE LAW:  
CRIMES LINKED TO SOYA 
EXPANSION IN THE AMAZON

28
Soya invasion around Xing u Indigenous 
Park and the proposed Parque Estadual 
das Castanheiras
 Park/reserve boundaries
 Soya plantations
  Farms with soya
  Roads
 Deforestation to 2002
 Deforestation 2002 – 2005
 Company storage silos
 ADM
 Amaggi
 Bunge
 Cargill

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON29
In April 1997, biologists funded by the World Bank identified what 
is believed to be a new species of primate, known only as ‘white monkey’ 
(Callicebus sp.),133 about 30km east of the BR163.134 
Other important species found in the area include four other monkeys, an alligator, two snakes, a lizard, a number of bats, 
marsupial, anteater, puma, deer and bushdog.
135 
According to Megaron Txucarramãe, one of the tribal 
chiefs of the Caiapó Indians, the Caiapós use the area of the proposed reserve to harvest medicinal plants, as it is the only 
forest remnant where they can be found.
136 The native Brazil 
nut tree is important to forest-dwelling communities, being 
both a subsistence crop and a sustainable way of generating 
cash. Traders of Brazil nuts along the BR163 estimate that 
30–40% of the money that circulates in Itaúba is related to the Brazil nut trade.
137 
In 1994, the Brazil nut tree was added to the government’s 
list of species threatened with extinction138 as a result of a 
decade of massive deforestation in areas where it is found.139 
However, the government decision to make it illegal to cut 
down Brazil nut trees has failed to protect the species from 
the expanding agricultural frontier.140 When farmers clear 
the land to plant soya, they leave Brazil nut trees standing in 
isolation in the middle of soya monocultures. Fire used to clear 
the land usually kills the trees. 
Intensive invasion by soya farmers inside the proposed Parque 
Estadual das Castanheiras has now destroyed over 20% of the 
original proposed reserve. Local politicians are trying to halve 
the size of the proposed reserve;141 meanwhile, Bunge and 
Cargill have both installed silos nearby.142 
Such is the magnetic effect of infrastructures such as roads 
that, without proper protection of public lands in key areas, the 
advancing invasion of soya in the Amazon is set to destroy an area of the highest value for biodiversity, indigenous peoples and sustainable forest harvesting.
THE SOYA HIGHWAY,  
MATO GROSSO (AMAZON BIOME)
The rodovia da soja – the soya highway – extends from the 
town of Felíz Natal toward the western boundary of the Xingu Indigenous Park (the last major protected area in the Xingu Basin 
– see case study above). In the summer of 2004, the municipality 
illegally built this 120km road to nowhere, without a state licence which requires an environmental impact assessment, in order to fuel soya development in the region. When the municipality ran 
out of funds, it washed its hands of responsibility for the road. At a 
council meeting in April 2005, a spokesman for the mayor declared that the municipality was not responsible for ensuring the road was legal as it was now a state project.
143 The state government 
is now planning to pave the road, but still without a proper licence and environmental impact assessment.Greenpeace has documented at least 38 farmers clearing forest in the area near the road.
144 There are 14 soya producers 
directly bordering the road, eight of whom have cleared forest in the last two years. There are at least 100,000 hectares of 
land along the road being offered for sale on the internet for 
as little as RS$50 (US$24) per hectare. The land can even be paid for in soya harvested once the land is cleared. One seller describes a 10,000 hectare parcel of rainforest as ‘excellent 
for soya’ and promises to clear it and stack the trees for 
burning as part of the sale price.
145
Since 2002, soya production has jumped from 2,500 to almost 45,000 hectares in the area of the road.
146 Bunge and Cargill have 
already installed themselves in the area. Both companies have built 60-tonne silos
147 and are offering credit and financial support to the 
farmers. They guarantee to purchase all soya produced, creating the basis for the region to become a soya production centre.
148
Greenpeace analysis based on Brazilian satellite information shows that the soya highway is set to have an impact on one million hectares of rainforest in the region.
149 This figure is only based on 
the direct impact of deforestation. Of course, soya production has much wider environmental impacts (see pages 21–23).
Greenpeace has documentary evidence showing that both Bunge 
and Cargill have bought soya from farms in the area of the road.
150
LAND GRABBING:  
THE QUEST FOR NEW FRONTIERS
The search for new land in Mato Grosso, driven by the expansion of soya, has stimulated land grabbing 
(grilagem )152 and irregular 
land transfer practices by private estate agencies. According to the national land reform institute, INCRA, millions of hectares of public 
land have been fraudulently transferred to private individuals in 
Mato Grosso, and are being exploited by big farms.
153 
Some of the chief victims of land grabbing and other 
abuses linked to the expansion of soya into the Amazon 
  Site where monkey  
was found
  Castanheiras Reserve
 Deforestat ion to 1998
 Deforestat ion 20 00
 Deforestat ion 2005New species of monkey  
under threat from soya

30
rainforest are Brazil’s indigenous peoples. The Amazon 
is home to about 220,000 people from 180 different indigenous nations,
154 most of them still living their 
traditional lifestyles deep in the rainforest, along with many more smallholders or traditional forest dwellers. 
The rainforest provides these people with everything 
from food and shelter to tools and medicines, and plays a crucial role in the spiritual life of indigenous peoples.
Land speculators and soya farmers make full use of 
the lack of coordination between state and federal land registration agencies. The lack of governance goes hand in hand with the use of violence to expel landless settlers and invade the land of the indigenous 
communities who have legitimate rights.
155 Land 
grabbing is such big business that public lands are 
even offered for sale on the internet. Greenpeace 
investigations in 2004 uncovered at least 11 million 
hectares of forested land for sale in the states of Pará, Amazonas, Rondônia and Roraima.
156
MEMBECA FARM, TREZE DE MAIO, MATO 
GROSSO (AMAZON BIOME)
Membeca Farm on the river Talunakãnali in Mato Grosso, 
owned by Sedeni Lucas Locks, is just one of the farms that have been illegally invading the traditional lands of the 
indigenous Manoki people. 
Once their 206,000 hectare territory is recognised, they are 
supposed to be legally protected from such activities by the 
Brazilian Constitution.
157 However, the administrative process 
set up to ‘demarcate them, to protect and enforce respect for 
all their assets’158 has failed the Manoki in each regard. Like 
many other indigenous peoples in Brazil, the Manoki are left exposed to land grabbing. 
According to Rinaldo Sérgio Vieira Arruda, the anthropologist 
who submitted the original report to the government in 2003 identifying the Manoki area, ‘Since this time, everything has 
been done [by the government] to create difficulties in the 
demarcation process. In the meantime, soya has spread into the Manoki territory and the prospect of a fair solution for them seems more and more distant.’
159
Since 2003, the 8,000 hectare Membeca Farm has increased its soya plantations by at least 20%, and the farm has been illegally clearing more rainforest inside Manoki 
land to make way for further soya production.
160
Membeca Farm is located in the municipality of 
Brasnorte: another new soya frontier opening up in the west of Mato Grosso, along the MT170 highway. 
Bunge, Cargill and Grupo André Maggi have all installed 
silos in the municipality. From here, the soya is trucked to Porto Velho where both Cargill and Grupo André Maggi ship the soya up the Río Madeira to their export 
facilities in Santarém (Cargill) and Itacoatiara (Grupo 
André Maggi). From here, soya is exported to the EU and other world markets. 
Greenpeace has documentary evidence showing that both 
Bunge and Cargill have bought soya from Membeca Farm.
‘Brazil has never faced up to the reality 
of life here for people. It’s ugly. I know 
holes here that have two, three skeletons 
in them. I know road verges that cover people killed by ranchers.’
Former logger, Castelo dos Sonhos (the Castle of Dreams)151
Soya invasion of Manoki 
indigenous territory
  Membeca farm
  Manoki territory
 Deforestation to 2002
 Deforestation 2003 – 2005

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON31
SLAVERY:  
THE SORDID COST OF CHEAP SOYA
‘What we know about is the tip of the 
iceberg. The official estimate of the 
number of slaves is way off the mark. The real figure could be 250,000.’
Father Ricardo Rezende, anti-slavery campaigner161
‘Today’s slave is not a concern to the landowner. He uses them as an absolutely 
temporary item, like a disposable razor.’
Marcelo Campos, Brazil’s Ministry of Labour162
Hand in hand with illegal forest destruction and the expulsions 
linked to land grabbing comes slavery.163 In fact, slaves provide a 
noteworthy portion of the manpower for forest clearance. Slavery exists principally in states with ‘the strongest agricultural expansion 
upon native forest.’
164 The Amazon states of Pará and Mato Grosso 
are the champions.
Landowners do not own Brazil’s current day slaves. Commonly, poor 
people in villages or cities are duped with promises of well-paid work and when they arrive at these remote farms, their documents are taken. The labourers often work at gunpoint, toiling without 
pay, hidden in the vast Amazon jungle beyond the reach of the law.
 
Because slaves are no longer legal property, there is no financial 
incentive to look after them. The cost is almost zero. If the worker 
gets ill, he is dropped beside the closest dirt road and another one is 
taken to replace him.165 
Greenpeace research shows that the people who use slaves in Brazil 
are not small farmers. They are often the big state-of-the-art farms 
– some with private airports – that sell to the international trade. 
Greenpeace has documentary evidence linking slavery with global 
traders: in particular, soya from farms relying on slavery has been 
traced to Cargill, Bunge and Grupo André Maggi.In 2004, the Brazilian Government intervened in 236 cases of slavery involving 6,075 labourers
166 including 127 child slaves. 
While Pará accounted for the lion’s share – 2,475 slaves – 1,012 were found on farms in Mato Grosso.
167 Shocking as these figures 
are, it should be borne in mind that due to a shortage of staff in the Ministry of Labour’s Mobile Inspection Group, only a fraction of 
the cases of slavery are ever reported or investigated and fewer 
come to court. Even when fines are issued to those successfully prosecuted, using slave labour is still a profitable business – the fines are seen as at worst a small business expense – and no one has ever 
been imprisoned for it.
168
In November 2003, the government published its first official ‘Dirty 
List’ of farms successfully prosecuted for holding slave workers.169 
The list, which has been regularly updated since, publishes information that supposedly ‘permits social control, for instance, 
requesting legal procedures or even boycotting a product that at 
some point of its production used slave labour.’
170 
It is not that easy to get on to the Dirty List – not only does the 
government’s Mobile Inspection Group have to discover slaves, but 
the individual case must have been successfully prosecuted through the Brazil’s notoriously cumbersome legal process. Getting off the list, however, is easy. A farm merely has to pay their fines within 
a period of two years, fully compensate the slave worker for the 
wages and social benefits they should have received, and not repeat the crime.
So, as its own ability to enforce the law is so limited, the Brazilian 
Government is appealing to the market to act. As Greenpeace 
research shows, the market is a poor policeman.
In December 2005, the president of Grupo André Maggi signed 
the National Pact on the Eradication of Slave Labour, committing 
the company to severing relations with farms and employers on the Dirty List. Cargill and Bunge have not signed. Grupo André Maggi claims it has long had a policy not to fund producers involved with any kind of slave labour, indigenous conflict, socio-environmental 
problems or illegal deforestation.
171 However, as recently as June 
2005, 172 Grupo André Maggi  had been forced to admit that it 
was buying soya from farms where a total 15 slaves were freed by 
federal agents in 2002, including the Vó Gercy Farm (see below).173


32
RONCADOR FARM,  
MATO GROSSO (AMAZON BIOME)
Nowhere is soya’s advance upon the Amazon more apparent 
than in Mato Grosso’s dusty boom town of Querência, 900km NE from the state capital Cuiabá, at the frontier of 
soya expansion on the southern edge of the Amazon.
174 All 
day lorries kick up dust hauling fertiliser in and soya out. 
In 2003 and 2004, the municipality of Querência had 
one of the highest levels of deforestation in Mato Grosso.
175 Farmers are rushing into the jungle to take 
advantage of cheap land.
Research into activities in Querência led Greenpeace to 
document Roncador Farm, one of the most state-of-the-art farms in Brazil. Up for sale at US$190 million on the internet, Roncador Farm is owned by Brazilian entrepreneur 
Pelerson Penido.
 The farm covers 150,000 hectares and has 
106,000 head of cattle and 4,000 hectares under soya. It 
has its own airport able to receive jets and 697km of paved 
road.176 More than 50%177 of the forest cover on the farm 
has been cleared. As 20% is the maximum permitted by the 
Brazilian Forest Code this is clearly illegal.
From August 1998 to August 2004, when 215 labourers 
were liberated by the government’s Mobile Inspection Group, Roncador Farm used slave labour. Working 16 hours 
a day, seven days a week, the labourers were forced in live 
in plastic shanties with no beds or sanitary provision. Water for washing, cooking and drinking came from a cattle watering hole and was stored in barrels previously used for diesel oil and lubricants. There was no opportunity to leave 
the farm. Goods had to be bought from the farm shop at 
extortionate prices, putting labourers into ever-increasing debt, which they would never be able to pay off
178 – a form 
of slavery known as debt bondage.
Although Penido and others have been charged with 
setting up an organised gang and infringement of workers’ rights, more than 18 months later the case is still languishing in Brazil’s judicial system and, as Greenpeace 
documented in February 2006, the farm continues to 
grow soya for the market.
179 
The expansion of soya in Querência has tempted Bunge, 
Cargill and Grupo André Maggi into the municipality.180 Grupo André Maggi has 72,600 hectares of farmland 
around the town,181 and in 2005 opened a new 60,000 
tonne storage silo there with capacity to receive 400 tonnes an hour. Maggi aimed ‘to win 100 new suppliers 
in its first year.’
182 Also in 2005, Bunge was recorded as 
exporting soya from Querência to the UK (via Itacoatiara) 
and Italy (via Paranagua).183 
VÓ GERCY FARM, MATO GROSSO (CERRADO)
In June 2002, the Mobile Inspection Group raided Vó Gercy Farm belonging to José Francisco de Morais.
184 They found 
that slave labour had been used to clear 120 hectares of land to expand the existing 2,750 hectares of soya.
185 15 
labourers were freed186 and the employer was fined R$8,039 
(US$2,960).187
Greenpeace has documentary evidence that Cargill and Grupo André Maggi bought soya from José Francisco de Morais at the time the farm was raided. Bunge and Cargill can be 
shown to have bought soya from Morais in March 2003–nine 
months after the farm was raided.
The farm was included on the updated Dirty List in June 
2004
188  and remains on the latest version published on 6 
February 2006.189
TUPY BARÃO FARM,  
MATO GROSSO (AMAZON BIOME)
In September 2001, the Mobile Inspection Group liberated 69 
labourers whose fundamental rights were being violated at the Tupy Barão Farm, owned by Agropecuária Tupy.
190 
Amongst other illegal acts, the labourers were subject to fraudulent 
retention of wages and were forced into an ever-increasing debt 
to buy goods. They were held on the farm against their will and received punishment beatings. Shelter consisted of shanties made of thin bamboo poles and covered with nylon fertiliser bags or 
canvas. Some were open to the weather.
191
In June 2004, Tupy Barão Farm was finally included on the 
government’s Dirty List and remains on the latest version of the list as of 6 February 2006.
192 
In February 2003, 16 months after the inspection, Bunge and Grupo 
André Maggi bought soya from Tupy Barão Farm.193 
Fazenda Roncador  
– state of the art soya 
farm using slave labour
  Roncador Farm
 Deforestation to 2002
 Deforestation 2003 – 2005

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON33
VALE DO RÍO VERDE FARM,  
MATO GROSSO (CERRADO)
Vale do Río Verde Farm is part of Agropecuária Vale do Río Verde, 
controlled by the brothers Orlando and Caetano Polato. The farm cultivates soya, maize and cotton.
194
In 2005, the government Inspection Group found 263 labourers whose rights were being violated, and eight were deemed to be working in conditions of enslavement. Almost all of the labourers 
were from Maranhão – one of Brazil’s poorest states. According 
to the inspection report the workers had not been paid, their documents had been taken, and they were forced to work at gunpoint. One of the bossmen brought in a relative who worked for the police to intimidate the labourers. Working conditions were 
appalling, with workers forced to clear land of tree roots for planting 
in their bare feet. There was proper sanitation and no proper accommodation. Food and other goods had to be bought through the farm shop at inflated prices – this was then deducted from 
salaries – driving labourers into debt bondage.
195
The Polato brothers were charged with breaking labour laws and 
fined R$140,000 (US$56,000) for back payment of salaries.196
In June 2005, the farm appeared on the Dirty List.197
Greenpeace has documentary evidence that Grupo André Maggi, ADM and Cargill have bought soya from Vale do Río Verde Farm.
MAJOR TRADERS IMPLICATED IN ILLEGAL PRACTICES AND AMAZON DESTRUCTION
 *tbc - to be confirmed     Grupo  
    André  
 ADM  Bunge  Cargill Maggi
  
 4 6 13 13  
     
   
 
 
     
    
 
   
  
   
 
  tbc
* tbc* tbc* tbc*
 
 
 tbc* tbc* tbc* tbc* 
      
     
    
 
    
 
    
    
  
 
 
 
      
     Built infrastucture in the AmazonNumber of silos within the Amazon biomePort and storage facilitiesIllegal export facilities – Santarém 
 
  
Received international financing  
Public banks – International Finance Corporation (IFC), World Bank
Private banks – Rabobank, HSBC, etc  
Bought from farms involved in land grabbing  
Membeca Farm – Manoki indigenous land, Amazon biomeLavras Farm – Amazon biome
 
Bought from farms inside proposed protected areasRío Azul Farm – Parque Estadual das Castanheiras 
 
Bought from farms employing slave labourRoncador Farm – Amazon biomeVó Gercy Farm – cerradoTupy Barão Farm – Amazon biome
Vale do Río Verde Farm – cerrado
 
Bought from farmers along illegal soya highway
Saul Stefanello – Amazon biomeGiovani Zamberlan – Amazon biomeEliseu Zamberlan – Amazon biome
Agenor Favarin – Amazon biome
 
Bought from farms planting GM soya
Antonio Galvan, President of the  
Agricultural Union of Sinop – Amazon biome   São Carlos Farm – Amazon biome


34


EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON35


36
‘Santar ém, New Agricutural Frontier for the World…  
The future of the BR163 starts here.’ 
Cargill sign, Santar ém199

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON37
‘As the remaining available land in 
Northern Mato Grosso continues to 
be bought at a rapid pace, increasing 
land values have pushed soybean production into the new frontier areas of Pará, Tocantins, and Rondónia, 
areas with more affordable prices and 
lower transportation costs due to port facilities in Santarém and Itacoatiara.’
US GAIN Report198
‘Land is only US$18 per acre around Santarém. $106 per acre clearing cost.’
Gilmar Tirapelle, Cargill agroeconomist200
Cargill is the largest private firm in the USA and possibly the 
world,201 with revenues of nearly US$63 billion in 2003.202 
Founded in 1865, Cargill has its headquarters in a 63-room replica of a French chateau outside Minneapolis, Minnesota, 
USA. It is the undisputed ruler in the global grain trade and 
food system: ‘We buy, trade, transport, blend, mill, crush, process, refine, season, distribute and deliver around the clock, around the globe.’
203 
Brazil is now one of Cargill’s largest sources of revenue 
outside the United States,204 and the company is expanding 
rapidly into the Amazon. In recent years, Cargill has 
considerably increased its export potential for commodities 
such as soya by building new ports in Santarém and Porto 
Velho. Eager to find a shorter and less costly route from new production areas in the Amazon to Europe, Cargill came to Santarém, at the head of the BR163, as its door for the 
northern export route. Cargill estimates that 2–3 million 
tonnes of soya a year will be trucked into its Santarém plant once the BR163 has been paved.
205 
Cargill’s illegally built US$20 million grain terminal at 
Santarém is the pioneer terminal in the region. The port 
consists of two silos, one with capacity to handle 60,000 tonnes of dry soya daily and the other 2,500 tonnes of wet soya daily, as well as an elevator with three drop-pipes to load 
cargo ships.
206 Santarém has not yet reached its full capacity 
and less than 10% of the soya comes from the surrounding 
region.207 The largest portion comes from Rondônia and Mato 
Grosso via Cargill’s Porto Velho terminal.208THE SANTARÉM PLANT IS ILLEGAL
‘The Cargill port isn’t legal.’
Felício Pontes Jr. Federal Prosecutor,  
Belém, Pará State209
In June 1999, the Ministry of Public Prosecution initiated a civil action to stop Santarém’s Port Authority renting the site for the terminal to Cargill prior to completion 
and approval of an environmental impact assessment 
(EIA).
210 Instead of complying, the Port Authority and 
Cargill chose to contest this requirement in the courts. 
Next, in November 2003, the Court of Final Instance 
ruled unanimously against Cargill and the Port Authority. In the interim, however, Cargill has already constructed its facility, in the process destroying a beach used by 
local fishermen and 25 small family businesses.
211
In December 2003, Federal Prosecutors launched a legal 
action calling for the demolition of the facility. They also asked for the immediate suspension of Cargill’s activities 
in Santarém until a legal decision could be reached.
212 In 
January 2004, a judge ordered a suspension of activities, 
on penalty of R$100,000/day (US$35,000),213 but this 
decision was quickly overturned by another court.214
In May 2004 , the Santarém Federal Judge ruled that 
Cargill must carry out an EIA. Cargill and the state government appealed
215 and Cargill continued to defy 
the requirement: ‘No, we will be doing no EIA!’216
Finally, in February 2006, Brazil’s second highest court ruled against Cargill, stipulating that the company must comply with Brazilian law and complete an EIA 
not only for the port terminal but for impacts on the 
surrounding region.
217 
Greenpeace investigations have found that Cargill’s plant is not only illegal in its own right, but is already laundering soya from illegal 
deforestation to world markets (see the Lavras 
Farm case study below). The size and location of the plant show that Cargill is counting on increased deforestation in the Amazon to meet 
its huge export capacity. The plant offers yet 
another incentive for farmers to open up new frontiers in Rondônia and Pará along the BR163.CARGILL IN SANTARÉM:  
MOST CULPABLE OF  
THE SOYA GIANTS

38
‘They simply said that the land was theirs 
and that we had to leave. 
They came and they  
burned down the house…  
it was horrible…  
they burned down 20 homes… One of our friends was assaulted and 
had a shotgun shoved into his chest.
Others were forced to watch
 
their belongings burn. We’re living in a time of terror. 
 
It is horrible.’
Zezinho, Santar ém218

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON39
CARGILL’S IMPACTS AROUND SANTARÉM
Since Cargill arrived in Santarém, soya has been the major driver 
of deforestation in the municipality. Between 2002 and 2004, annual deforestation rates jumped from 15,000 to 28,000 
hectares in Santarém and the neighbouring municipality of 
Belterra (also in Pará state).
219 Forests have started to give way 
to mechanised soya monocultures. While direct conversion of 
rainforest to soya plantation in the Santarém area has been 
estimated at 10% of the area deforested during recent years,220 
this figure fails to show the whole impact the soya industry 
and its infrastructure is having in the region. Much land is also 
indirectly converted – secondary forest is felled, and squatters 
are forcibly removed from land they have already cleared (inevitably leading to clearance elsewhere).
In August 2002, Cargill’s director in Santarém declared that the area 
has the potential to make 300,000 hectares of land available to produce one million tonnes of soya a year.
221 According to Cargill’s 
manager in Santarém, by 2004 some 14,000 hectares in Belterra and Santarém were already under cultivation, producing 34,000 
tonnes of soya annually.
222 Farmers from the south have since 
started to buy up land and new roads are appearing.223
Cargill makes no secret of actively aiding farmers from the 
south to establish themselves in Santarém: ‘We have even brought lime from Ceará to help producers, now we are helping 
them to increase production.’
224 By prefinancing soya harvests, 
Cargill makes soya economically attractive for producers – and 
helps fund forest conversion.   
Since the arrival of Cargill and the soya producers there has been a 
dramatic rise in land prices – up 6,600% since 2002 to R$1,000–2,000 (US$471–942) per hectare, although land is still cheaper 
than in Mato Grosso.
225 Local and state government agencies have 
been accused of being actively involved in land grabbing.226 
LAVRAS FARM, PARÁ (AMAZON BIOME)
Greenpeace investigations have conclusively linked Cargill’s 
export terminal in Santarém to land grabbing and illegal deforestation. For example, Greenpeace traced soya supplied 
to the terminal back to the Lavras Farm, run by the brothers 
Edno and Clóvis Cortezia. In October 2004, the Cortezia brothers signed a contract with Cargill to supply a total of 600 tonnes of soya before the end of July 2005.
227
In 2000 (when rumours of the Cargill export plant were heard in the south), the brothers Edno and Clóvis Cortezia established the Lavras Farm, totalling 8,000 hectares, 20km outside Santarém 
on the west side of the BR163 (see Lavras map right). 
The Cortezia brothers fraudulently obtained land titles for areas 
occupied by landless settlers ( colonos ), as well as areas of public 
land, with the help of a lawyer who is currently under investigation by the Federal Police for his role in facilitating land grabbing in the region. The brothers themselves have repeatedly tried to launder their ownership of the land they occupy through various government departments. 
In 2002 they paid Rural Territorial Tax to the government 
through the Bradesco Bank in Santarém, to create the illusion of legality through official paperwork.
228 They were then able 
to use the tax receipts to obtain loans from Brazilian banks to fund their soya expansion.
In 2003, the brothers then tried to register ownership of only 
2,487 hectares of the farm.
229 The rationale for this is clear: 
parcels of public land greater than 2,500 hectares can only get conclusive land titles with the approval of the National 
Congress. Even if they had been successful in fraudulently 
getting official documents for this area of the farm, the Cortezia brothers have already cleared 1,718 hectares within this area.
230 This level of clearing violates the Brazilian Forest 
Code, which states that private landowners in the Amazon must preserve 80% of their forest areas.
231 
Ama
zon Rive
rCargill 
Port
Sant arém
BelterraLavr as
Farm
BR-163 Deforestat ion to 1998
 Deforestation 20 00
  Farm
  RoadLand grabbers around  
Santarém – Lavras Farm

40
‘Companies should avoid  
situations of complicity  
for reasons of principle.’
Global Compact/OHCHR Briefing Paper (2005) 233

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON41
‘Biodiversity is the sum of all life 
on Earth … Food and agricultural 
production systems should protect 
native species and biodiversity by preserving natural habitats.’
McDonald’s ‘Socially responsible food supply guidelines’232
 
FROM THE AMAZON TO EUROPE
In 2005, soya originating from municipalities within the 
Amazon biome was shipped to global markets through seven major Brazilian ports: Itacoatiara
 (Amazonas state), 
Santarém (Pará state), Ponta da Madeira – São Luis (Maranhão state), Tubarão – Vitória (Espírito Santo state), 
Santos (São Paulo state), Paranaguá (Parana state) and
 
São Francisco do Sul (Santa Catarina state) [see map on 
page 53].234
Nearly 15% of the EU’s total soya imports originate from Mato Grosso.
235 Most of this soya is exported directly 
through the same seven ports (see Annex 1). An unknown proportion of soya meal is imported into the EU from 
Mato Grosso via other states in Brazil. For example, Cargill 
transports soya beans from many of its Amazon silos in Mato Grosso to its crushing facility in Minas Gerais in the south of Brazil. The soya meal is then exported.
236
Almost all of the soya passing through Cargill’s terminal at Santarém is destined for Europe. In 2005, 787,000 tonnes of soya were exported from the plant.
237 Of this, 52% went 
to the Netherlands, 31% went to the UK, Spain received 6.5%, and France took just over 6%.
238 The Netherlands 
is a hub for many countries in Europe such as Germany, Switzerland and the UK.
 Greenpeace investigations in Brazil have traced soya linked to illegal deforestation, slavery and other crimes in the Amazon 
to giant commodities companies such as Cargill. 
Our investigations in Europe tell the other half of the story, 
exposing the links between the environmental and social 
crimes of Brazil’s soya industry, and Europe’s leading food 
processors, supermarkets and iconic global fast food chains: the partners in crime. 
These are major European and global corporations with very 
public commitments to corporate social responsibility (CSR) 
policies. CSR policies generally express a commitment to minimise the social and environmental impact of the business along the supply chain, and to work against all forms of 
corruption and human rights abuses. But CSR policies are empty slogans if corporations cannot be held accountable to 
their commitments.
Despite the across-the-board rush by big European and global 
brands to publish CSR statements in recent years, none of the 
30 major supermarket chains and fast food outlets contacted 
by Greenpeace
239 were able to say whether the soya animal feed 
used by their meat suppliers originated in the Amazon or not. Their responses clearly indicated their failure to enact their CSR 
intentions.  But their attitudes varied widely:
240
· Regretful : One major European supermarket that claims 
to have independent audit of its own products back to 
source to ensure fair employment (eg to exclude slave 
labour) admitted that ‘In the case of palm oil and soya, 
both are global commodity products and sadly, we, like all other major retailers and producers, are currently unable to trace the source of palm or soya back to an individual 
plantation.’ 
· Patronising : Burger King was more cavalier, and said 
that, with regard to the source of soya, ‘Unfortunately we 
do not have the resource to answer specific questions, 
although you should be able to obtain further information 
from your local library.’
· Wilfully ignorant : The parent company of KFC and Pizza 
Hut hid behind the assertion that the ‘main soya producing regions in Brazil ... are away from the Amazon region’ (in 
truth, Mato Grosso, half of which is in the Amazon biome, 
accounts for about a third of Brazil’s European soya exports
241). However it admitted to buying its chicken 
from the ‘same suppliers as other leading retailers.’
· Passing the buck : When one supermarket chain was 
asked about whether it had a segregation policy on soya to distinguish between Amazon and non-Amazon soya, 
it said ‘This is a matter for our feed suppliers who in turn 
supply our product suppliers.’ However, Cargill, a major supplier to supermarkets, states that ‘It is our customers who determine what we process and supply.’
However dressed up their CSR statements and however green the messages of their brand marketing campaigns, by failing to address the issue of Amazon soya the food giants are silently complicit in the destruction of the Amazon.
The crime stretches across the European food industry. Soya 
is a key protein in virtually all animal feed and an ingredient in innumerable processed foods, including most bread. While 
the volume of soya produced in the Amazon is relatively small 
on the global market scale, its identity is lost by the time it is fed to animals supplying the European food industry. Therefore, the whole food industry risks being a partner in this forest crime.EUROPEAN CORPORATE 
COMPLICITY IN AMAZON 
DESTRUCTION 

42
THE END OF THE LINE FOR  
AMAZON SOYA CRIMES
The supply chain from soya producers in the Amazon to 
chicken, beef and pork products sold at supermarkets and fast food chains in Europe has many links. 
When it comes to Cargill’s own production of chicken meat 
products, it controls the whole chain: from the soya farmer in the Amazon, to meat production and distribution, right 
up to the doors of the supermarkets and fast food chains.
Below is a simplified supply chain illustrating Cargill’s links 
to supermarkets and fast food chains.
Step one  
– from Amazon crime to export
Criminal soya production   
(eg Membeca Farm, Vó Gercy Farm, Lavras Farm)
Trader/Crusher (eg Cargill)
Transhipment (eg Porto Velho to Santarém)
Export (eg Santarém, Santos)
Step two  
– from European port to farmer
Import (eg Amsterdam, Liverpool)
Internal distribution (eg the Netherlands to the UK)
Importer/ Crusher (eg Cargill)Feed producer (eg Cargill subsidiary Sun Valley)
Meat producer (eg Sun Valley)
Step three  
– from food processor to fast  
food outlets and supermarkets 
Slaughterhouse (eg Sun Valley)
Food processor (eg Vion Food Group, Sun Valley)
Supermarkets/Fast food chains   
(eg McDonalds, Dutch Laurus Group,  
KFC Netherlands)
1
2
3

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON43


44
McDONALD’S CHICKEN M cNUGGETS:  
A CASE IN POINT
‘McDonald’s mission … involves 
protecting the environment at both 
a local and global level. We strive to 
ensure that our operations today do not have a negative impact on the lives of future generations. … The 
preservation of tropical rain forest 
land is a top priority at McDonald’s.’
242
‘Our influence in the marketplace brings a responsibility to ask for more 
than quality and price. … Supporting 
responsible actions in our supply chain helps to advance important social, economic and environmental 
goals and will ensure the continued 
supply of high quality ingredients we need in the future. That’s why 
social responsibility is one of our key 
strategic supply chain priorities.’
243
Chicken McNuggets are on the menu at McDonald’s in 
Barcelona, Hamburg, London, Marseille or Milan – the grub is so cheap and so universal, you can easily forget the 
environmental cost of such food. McDonald’s has, after all, an 
explicit CSR policy to protect rainforests by not buying beef from any recently deforested rainforest land.
244 Who would 
think that these innocuous looking bits of chicken are helping to drive the destruction of the Amazon, one of the most 
biologically diverse rainforests on earth? 
Yet the case of McDonald’s Chicken McNuggets is 
a clear and straightforward illustration of how the 
European food industry is implicated in fuelling the 
destruction of the Amazon for soya. Cargill controls every step of the chain from the soya farm in the Amazon to the food processing plants which produce the nuggets supplied to McDonald’s across Europe.
McDonald’s is one of the world’s best-known brands. The 
name is everywhere – from high street billboards to its sponsoring of mascots for England matches during the 
football World Cup. The golden arches are hard to miss.Founded in 1954, McDonald’s is the world’s biggest 
fast-food chain. It has 31,000 restaurants and employs over 1.5 million people, serving 47 million people in over 100 countries each day.
245 In the USA, McDonald’s is the 
largest purchaser of beef and one of the largest buyers of chicken and pork.
246
McDonald’s Europe:
· had sales of over US$6.7 billion in 2004247
· has sales which make up 35% of the  
company’s global sales248
· operates over 6,200 restaurants, serving around 10 million people every day
249
· uses 170,000 tonnes of beef and 110,000 tonnes of chicken per year
250 
· claims to be supplied with beef by over 500,000 farmers
251
McDonald’s claims that ‘the preservation of tropical rainforest is a top priority’
252 and that it is ‘committed to establishing and 
enforcing responsible environmental practices.’253 In addition, 
McDonald’s rainforest policy states: ‘McDonald’s does not, has not and will not permit destruction of tropical rain forests 
for our beef supply.’
254 What is not covered by this policy is 
the feed given to the chickens that end up as products such 
as Chicken McNuggets, or the cattle and pigs that are used to 
make other products.
Greenpeace investigations show that, despite its claims 
to be rainforest friendly, McDonald’s deep fat fryers are 
directly responsible for a trail of destruction right into the 
heart of the Amazon rainforest.
 
FROM THE AMAZON TO  
CARGILL SUBSIDIARY SUN VALLEY  
– AND SO TO MCDONALD’S
‘We have invested in a soybean export 
facility in the northern Brazilian port 
of Santarém ... From here we export 
soya primarily sourced from the Central Brazilian state of Mato Grosso and also from ... around Santarém.’
Letter from Sun Valley to Greenpeace  
supporter, 23 February 2006

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON45
McDonald’s names Cargill  
‘supplier of the year’. 
Minneapolis-St Paul Business Journal.  
12 December 2005
Liverpool is one of the UK’s busiest ports. In 2004 it 
imported nearly three million tonnes of animal feed. The national motorway network runs virtually to the dock 
gates, allowing quick and easy transport of feed to mills 
throughout the UK.
255
Brazilian export data shows that between March 2005 and February 2006, Cargill exported over 220,000 tonnes of Brazilian soya originating in the Amazonian states of Mato 
Grosso, Pará and Rondônia through its Santarém port to the 
UK – the majority to Liverpool.
256 
Greenpeace has recently tracked the delivery of this 
soya from Cargill’s terminal in Liverpool to Cargill 
subsidiary Sun Valley. In conversations with two senior managers at Sun Valley,
257 Greenpeace investigators 
confirmed that 25% of the feed used to feed Sun Valley chickens is Brazilian soya, which is supplied almost 
exclusively from the Cargill facility in Liverpool. Another 
25% is a mix of ingredients including soya oil.
 The 
remaining 50% is mainly locally grown wheat.258
SUN VALLEY FOODS EUROPE
Cargill-owned Sun Valley is an example of integrated food production. Founded in 1960, the firm was bought by Cargill in 1980, and now operates across Europe.
259
Sun Valley is a producer, marketer and distributor. It processes about 1 million chickens a week into fresh and frozen meat, as well as producing 250-300 tonnes a week 
of value-added products.
260 Sun Valley’s biggest customers 
are McDonald’s and supermarket chain Morrisons.261 
Through separate McDonald’s business units in Wolverhampton and Orléans in France,
262 Sun Valley is 
McDonald’s largest poultry supplier in Europe and the UK, 
supplying Chicken McNuggets and sandwich patties. The firm 
produces half of all chicken products used by McDonald’s 
across Europe.263
Sun Valley also has its own brand of consumer products and supplies other retailers under their own brand names. 
Sun Valley has its own feed mill at the company’s 
integrated poultry production facility near Hereford,
264 
and produces feed including Brazilian soya imported through Cargill’s plant at Liverpool.
265 In 2000, Sun Valley committed to using only GM-free ingredients in its chicken feed.
266
RESPONSIBILITY OR GREENWASH?
McDonald’s is just one example of a key player in a game where the majority are criminals. Despite spending millions on CSR to clean up its brand image, 
the company is glacially slow to take concrete steps 
to change its behaviour. It is cheaper and easier to greenwash by boasting of existing practices such as not sourcing beef from rainforest areas (a policy 
brought about largely as a result of campaigning by 
environmental groups and concerned individuals) than to make concern for environmental and social impacts a real part of procurement processes. 
By selling the products of Amazon soya, McDonald’s and 
other companies show that they still prefer to disguise the real practices behind their products rather than combat them. Slavery, pollution and deforestation are all linked to 
soya coming from states within the Amazon. The focus on 
image over substance shows that it is still only external pressure based on verifiable evidence that will force companies to change. 
 
 
CARGILL AMSTERDAM:  
LINKS TO SUPERMARKET  
AND FAST FOOD SECTORS 
In 2005, more than half of the soya exported 
from Cargill’s Santarém facility was shipped to Cargill’s facility in Amsterdam. The soya 
originated in the Amazonian states of Mato 
Grosso, Pará and Rondônia.
267 
Cargill is a major supplier to the Dutch animal feed 
industry. For example, farmers supplying pigs to 
the Dutch based Vion Food Group buy animal feed from suppliers
268 who source soya meal from Cargill 
Amsterdam.269 The Vion Food Group control over 
8% of the European pork market, supplying at least seven EU countries
270 including major supermarkets 
like the Dutch Laurus Group.271
Another large Dutch animal feed company is also a soya customer of Cargill Amsterdam.
272 It works 
with the Dutch chicken producer Storteboom, which supplies chicken to KFC Netherlands.
274

46
By 2050, current trends in agricultural 
expansion will eliminate a total of 40% of 
Amazon forests, including at least two thirds 
of the forest cover of six major watersheds and 12 ecoregions, releasing carbon into the atmosphere… equivalent to four years of 
current annual emissions world wide.
Nature, March 2006 277

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON47


48
Solutions to the destruction of the Amazon for soya need 
to come from two directions: an environmental solution for the rainforest and the global environment, and an agronomic 
and economic solution for the global animal feed market, to 
minimise its environmental impact.
LARGE PROTECTED AREAS  
–  what the Amazon needs  
and where it needs it
Brazil has two faces: one beautiful and one ugly. Its rainforest is the richest habitat in the world; but the rate of illegal destruction of that rainforest is the highest in 
the world.
275 The Amazon rainforest contains a significant 
proportion of the world’s biodiversity, with as many as 300 
species of tree in a single hectare.276 A new study, published 
in Nature in March 2006, says the Brazilian Government’s 
conservation strategies fall far short of what is needed to 
prevent escalating destruction. On present trends, cattle 
ranchers and soya farmers will destroy 40% of Amazon rainforest by 2050, threatening biodivesity as well as massively contributing to climate change.
277
The front line lies where the interests of the agriculture industry meet the rainforest. Here, strategies for protecting the Amazon’s rich biodiversity and halting the illegal 
expansion of agriculture into the forest are simple and 
proven – if only they can be decisively and effectively enforced. Large networks of properly protected areas – national parks, demarcated indigenous territories, extractive 
reserves, community areas – are critical to preventing 
species loss and adequately supporting indigenous peoples.
278 When reserves are fragmented or isolated, they 
risk losing wide-ranging top predators such as jaguars, pumas, harpy eagles and bush dogs,
279 ultimately upsetting 
the whole ecological balance.
Extractive and indigenous reserves also requires huge areas to 
maintain traditional culture and livelihoods. Large indigenous territories allow communities to use the land non-intensively because they have the space to move periodically, allowing 
an exploited area to recover. Low-density reserves are often 
still recovering from the fatal impacts of epidemic disease and warfare associated with recent contact with white people. These reserves need to retain large territories if entire indigenous peoples are to be able to subsist on traditional 
practices for generations to come.
280Large undisturbed forest reserves also act as giant 
firebreaks, decreasing the likelihood of future catastrophic wildfires that would further erode the 
biodiversity of the Amazon rainforest and compromise 
the ecological services it provides.
281
Location is also critical. Placed in key vulnerable areas, large protected areas act as a barrier to the illegal land grabbing that precedes deforestation and the advancing agricultural 
frontier. A speculator or would-be farmer cannot get fake 
paperwork showing ownership of land that is clearly defined as a protected area. 
Recent action by the Brazilian Government shows that 
this strategy works. Between 2004 and February 2006, President Lula protected nearly 14.5 million hectares of Amazon rainforest through the creation of national parks and areas limited to defined local community use.
282 Further 
indigenous lands have been officially demarcated, critical to defending them from illegal incursion.
The results speak for themselves: after the record-breaking 
deforestation levels of 2003–04, deforestation dropped by 30% to 18,900km
2 the following year – bringing destruction 
back in line with the average over the last 25 years.
Greenpeace investigations along the unpaved northern 
section of the BR163, where large areas have recently been protected, show that land grabbers are now targeting vulnerable areas elsewhere. For example, they are 
targeting the vulnerable unprotected frontiers in the state 
of Amazonas, along the Transamazon Highway and the unpaved BR319 connecting Manaus to Porto Velho.
The Brazilian Government is committed to protecting 
10% of the Amazon by 2013.
283 Demarcation of 
indigenous territories, which cover more than 20% of 
the region, is also critical. However, for Greenpeace, 
these targets on their own are insufficient – the goal 
is to stop deforestation. So volume alone is not a true measure of forest protection: protected areas need to be placed strategically at the front line of destruction, 
where they can act as an effective obstacles to the 
destruction of a much larger area. Long term measures need to be adopted that allow traditional forest communities and other people in the Amazon region to meet their needs – food security, health, education and 
access to goods.STRATEGIES TO PROTECT 
THE AMAZON AND THE 
GLOBAL CLIMATE

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON49
CONTROLLING INDUSTRY  
–  how the market can help  
control deforestation
Unlike its competitors, Brazil is not running 
out of land. Agriculture occupies 60m 
hectares now; it could stretch out to 
another 90m hectares without touching the Amazon rainforest.
Silvio Crestana, Director of Embrapa,  
Brazil’s main agricultural research institute284
Global market forces are key drivers of the deforestation of 
the Amazon and other forests. Soya is just one of the latest commodities driving this clearance. Others may follow.
The soya industry sees the Amazon rainforest as a cheap 
source of land, often aquired through illegal land grabs. The exploitation of workers – including the use of slaves – reduces 
labour costs to a vanishing point. Combined with the large 
corporate incentives being pumped into the country from Cargill and other multinationals, these factors have made soya a boom industry in Brazil, and a cheap commodity for the world. 
The market needs to share responsibility for this criminal advance 
of agriculture into the world’s threatened ancient forests, and take urgent action to end its role in fuelling destruction.
Within Brazil, it is possible to buy soya free from environmental or 
social injustices. Further, experts are confident that the country could meet international demand for non GM soya without expanding the industry into the Amazon. 
For this to succeed however, the market needs to put policies in 
place to address the environmental and social impact of industries right down the supply chain. This means that big food processors, supermarkets and fast food retailers in Europe need to ensure that 
the origin of the soya used in animal feed is not from within the 
Amazon biome, is not GM, and that its production complies with Brazilian labour laws and international human rights. 
Traceability of soya (and other commodities) is clearly vital. 
Independently verified chain-of-custody schemes allow 
supermarkets and fast food retailers to connect their products with responsible production and avoid being complicit in environmental and social crimes (see Annex 1).RETHINKING AGRICULTURE  
–   bringing home the problem  
and creating a solution
When your priority is to get the cheapest soya globally – or other feed input – you also buy habitat destruction, social conflict and fuel climate change.
The problem of getting cheap protein to feed factory 
farmed animals has been creating environmental and social conflicts for the last 40 years.
Until the collapse of the fishery in the 1970s, Peruvian 
anchovy was one of the largest sources of animal feed protein for the European market.
285 The market shifted 
from mining the oceans to rendering animal carcasses. When this market collapsed because of mad cow disease 
(BSE), the feed sector increased dependence on soya 
which has driven its expansion in sensitive habitats on a global level.
European governments, banks and the food industry 
must re-examine their agriculture policies and support more environmentally responsible and socially just ways of meeting food and farming needs without damaging rainforests or the climate.
Long term solutions to the social, economic and 
environmental problems of the industry would be to reverse the current trend of intensive factory farmed 
meat production with its reliance on global trade in 
cheap commodities. 
Social responsibility –whether it be corporate, political 
or financial – needs to be meaningful if we are to tackle 
these challenges head on. Governments, banks, and the 
food industry need to support more extensive meat production strategies, encouraging the production of feed close to point of use if not on the farm. 
Brazil and European countries need to re-examine 
agriculture policies and support only environmentally responsible ways of meeting food and farming needs without damaging rainforests or the climate and 
without introducing the additional problems caused 
by the use of GM crops. 

50


EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON51
STOP AMAZON 
DESTRUCTION
Trade
·  Stop buying soya from the 
Amazon rainforest biome289
·  Stop buying meat products 
made from animals fe d 
on soya from the Amazon 
rainforest biome
Banks
·  Immediately stop financing companies involved in soya production and trade in the Amazon rainforest biomeCLEAN UP THE  
SOYA TRADE
Trade
·  Demand full chain of custody for all Brazilian soya to ensure it comes from legal sources outside the Amazon rainforest biome
·  Ensure that all soya used is GM freeSUPPORT  
THE SOLUTION
Trade
·  Develop responsible animal feed 
supplies in order to eliminate the pressure on the world’s remaining ancient forests
Banks
·  Ensure that funding does not 
contribute to deforestation and land conversion
EU governments
·  Develop food and agricultural 
policies to eliminate the pressure on
 the world’s 
remaining ancient forests
·  Support the implementation 
of protected areas in the Amazon rainforest biome and other ancient forestsDEMANDS

52
Traceability is a key issue for companies not wishing to be 
implicated in Amazon destruction or the use of GM soya.
The state in which soya is produced and the port through which 
it is shipped are first indicators of whether there are known problems with soya for buyers. 
This annex lists Brazilian states according to whether they fall 
entirely within the biome, partially within the biome, or outside the biome. It also links ports of export with the supplying soya producing states.
This indicates whether soya from a given state or port is clearly 
a problem (ie implicated in Amazon destruction) or potentially a problem (eg potentially GM or from within the biome).
In fact, the conclusion one must draw is that state of origin 
and port of export are no guarantee of the origin (or GM status) of the commodity. Nor do these assure that other illegalities – eg unauthorised deforestation, land grabbing, slave labour – are not involved.
What is needed is independently verified chain-of-custody 
(CoC) back to the producer.
Brazil has 26 states and one Federal District ( Bras
ília). Soya 
is currently grown in 16 states, seven of which are entirely or 
partially in the Amazon biome.290
A) These four states are fully within the Amazon biome and where soya was grown in the period 2001/2006. Greenpeace opposes the use of the soya grown within these states. Companies should NOT 
source soya originating from these states.
RR –  Roraima
AM –  Amazonas
PA –  Pará
RO –  Rondônia
B) These two states are fully within the Amazon biome but where 
soya has NOT been grown to date Companies should NOT source 
soya originating from these states, if it is grown here in the future.
AP –  Amapá
AC –  Acre
C) Areas of these three states are within the Amazon biome 
and where soya was grown in the period 2001/2006. Greenpeace opposes the use of the soya grown within the Amazon biome in these states. Companies should either NOT source soya originating from these states or must have clear and detailed verification that the origin of the soya was grown outside the Amazon biome.
MA – Maranhão (33.2% inside Amazon biome)
TO – Tocantins (9% inside Amazon biome)MT – Mato Grosso (53.5% inside Amazon biome)
The state of Mato Grosso is where the largest share of Amazon soya 
is grown. While the bulk of Mato Grosso soya is non-GM and from outside the biome, some is Amazon soya or GM. 
D) These 10 states are outside the Amazon biome and currently 
grow soya. Greenpeace does not oppose the use of soya grown 
in these states so long as it is non-GM and from legally verified sources. GM free soya can be sourced from many of these states.
PI –  Piauí
BA –  BahiaDF –  BrasíliaGO –  GoiásMG – Minas Gerais
SP –  São Paulo
MS –  Mato Grosso do SulPR –  ParanáSC –  Santa Catarina
RS –  Río Grande do Sul
 
The state of Paraná has a GM free policy controlled by the state government and is the state to which Greenpeace points companies 
who wish to source GM free soya. The state of Río Grande do Sul is 90%+ contaminated with GM soya and so we warn companies against buying soya from this state.
PORTS OF EXPORT
The table overleaf (page 54) gives a very rough guide to the ports through which a region’s soya may pass to Europe. Greenpeace has identified seven major Brazilian ports through 
which Amazon soya is exported to world markets. 
Two further ports are known to export soya from states mainly 
or entirely outside the Amazon biome, though Amazon soya may 
be passing through these ports as well – for instance, soya may 
be processed into soya meal in other states. For example, Cargill transports soya beans from a number of its Amazon silos in Mato Grosso to its crushing facility in Minas Gerais in the south of Brazil. The soya meal is then exported.
291ANNEX ONE  
– GUIDANCE ON TRACEABILITY

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON53
AMA ZONAS
RONDÔNIAMATO
GROS SOPARASantarémItacoatiara
São Francisco do SulParanaguaSantosVitóriaPonta de Madeid a
São Luis
 Amazon biome 
  State boundaries
  Port
  Roads
  Roads (unpaved)
  Rivers
  Rivers (proposed routes)
  Railway
  Transportation of soya  

54
Ports and  
Companies
Itacoatiara - east of Manaus (AM)
ADM, Bunge, Grupo André Maggi
 
Santar ém (PA)
Cargill
 
Ponta da Madeira – S ão Luis (MA)
ADM, Bunge, Cargill
 
Tubar ão – Vit ória  (ES)
ADM, Bunge
Santos (SP)
ADM, Bunge, Cargill, Grupo André Maggi
Paranagu á (PR)
ADM, Bunge, Cargill  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
São Francisco do Sul (SC)
Bunge, Cargill  
 
 
 
 
Río Grande (RS)
Bunge
 
Ihéus (BA)
Bunge, CargillStates growing soya in Amazon 
biome (full or partial)
Mato Grosso (MT)
Roraima (RR)Rondônia (RO)
Amazonas (AM)
Amapá (AP)
 Mato Grosso (MT)Pará (PA)
Rondônia (RO)
 
Mato Grosso (MT)Pará (PA)
Tocantins (TO)
Maranhão (MA)
 Mato Grosso (MT)
 
 
Mato Grosso (MT)
Mato Grosso (MT)
 
 
 
 
Mato Grosso (MT)
 
 
 
 
 Mato Grosso (MT)
 
 Non-Amazon states growing 
soya (outside Amazon biome) 
 
 
 
Goiás (GO)  
Piauí (PI)
Bahia (BA)  
Brasília (DF)  
Goiás (GO)  
Mato Grosso do Sul (MS)  
Minas Gerais (MG)  
São Paulo (SP)
Bahia (BA)  
Brasília (DF)  
Goiás (GO)  
Mato Grosso do Sul (MS)  
Minas Gerais (MG)  
Paraná (PR)  
São Paulo (SP)Bahia (BA)
 
Goiás (GO)  
Mato Grosso do Sul (MS)  
Minas Gerais (MG)  
Paraná (PR)  
Río Grande do Sul (RS)  
Santa Catarina (SC)  
São Paulo (SP)Río Grande do Sul (RS)
 
Minas Gerais (MG)  
Paraná (PR)  
Santa Catarina (SC)  
São Paulo (SP)Río Grande do Sul (RS)
 
Santa Catarina (SC)  
 
Bahia (BA)  EXPORTATION OF BRAZILIAN SOYA292

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON55
GM soya was first exported to Europe from the US in 1996. 
The technology was introduced by the agriculture and chemical giant Monsanto as a response to the end of its 
patent on its best selling product, the glyphosate-based 
herbicide Roundup. Monsanto’s seeds were genetically modified to survive large doses of Roundup. If you bought the seeds, you had to buy the chemicals. The technology 
ensured a continued market for Roundup.
Between 1996 and 1999, Monsanto’s GM soya spread 
rapidly across the USA and Argentina. The reasons for this rapid adoption were mainly based on the false 
promise of higher yields from the GM soya, Monsanto 
dropping the price of Roundup, and Monsanto increasing its control of the global seed market. GM varieties were readily available and farmers were left with fewer 
conventional (GM free) seed options.
By 1999, European companies started to specifically 
demand GM free soya from their suppliers in large volumes in response to demands from European 
consumers and food producers.
As a result of legal action by Greenpeace and a Brazilian 
consumers organisation (IDEC), which required 
the Brazilian Government to carry out a proper 
environmental impact assessment (EIA) before the legal introduction of GM crops, Brazil became the main supplier of GM free soya on the international market. 
Many EU buyers simply switched to buying Brazilian soya on 
the understanding that it was GM free. And, of course, there is actually zero market demand for GM soya – ie no buyer actually demands GM soya.
Today demand for GM free soya exists not just 
internationally but also from within Brazil itself. Large poultry exporters use high volumes of soya and many domestic food producers guarantee GM free products to 
Brazilian consumers. 
In recent years, there has been evidence of GM soya being 
grown illegally in the southern Brazil state of Río Grande do Sul using black market seeds that had been smuggled into 
the country from Argentina. 
The Brazilian Government has not acted responsibly. In 
2003, it had effectively legalised the illegal planting of 
GM soya without conducting the proper environmental 
impact assessments, thus opening the door to increased contamination and environmental damage.
The government is now involved with Monsanto to 
produce versions of GM soya adapted to the Amazon and 
other regions of Brazil. The introduction of GM soya will certainly fuel the destruction of the Amazon due to the ‘kill everything green’ concept of using high doses of herbicides 
in cultivating GM soya.
The European food industry needs to develop responsible 
animal feed supplies in order to eliminate pressure on the world’s ancient forests and climate. This will include 
policies to source their products from more local, 
sustainable sources. ANNEX TWO  
– A SHORT HISTORY OF GM SOYA, 
BRAZIL AND THE EUROPEAN MARKET

56
REFERENCES
AgWeb (2005). ‘The asphalt 
jungle,’ 1 November 2005. www.agweb.com/get_article.
asp?pageid=114463&newscat
=GN&src=gennews
AgWeb (2004). ‘More beans in 
Brazil.’ 1 February 2004. www.
agweb.com/get_article.asp?pageid=104507&newscat+GN&src+gennews 
Altieri M and Pengue W (2006). 
‘GM soybean: Latin America’s new colonizer,’ in Seedling, January 2006. www.grain.org/
seedling/index.cfm?id=421
Asner GP et al (2005). 
‘Selective logging in the Brazilian Amazon,’ in Science, 
21 October 2005, pp480-482
Assembléia Legislativa do 
Estado de Mato Grosso (2006). 
Al debate criação do Parque das 
Castanheiras. www.al.mt.gov.br/viewp.asp?no_codigo=9660 (last accessed 24 March 2006)
Astor M (2003). ‘Groups 
clash over soybean boom in Brazil,’ Associated Press. www.mongabay.com/external/
soybeans2003.htm
Barnett A (2004). ‘They hailed 
it as a wonderfood. But soya not only destroys forests and small 
farmers – it can also be bad for 
your health’ in The Observer Food Monthly November 2004 pp31–39
Benbrook C (2004). 
‘Genetically engineered crops and pesticide use in the United States: the first nine years,’ 
Technical Paper Number 7. 
www.biotech-info.net/Full_version_first_nine.pdf
Benbrook C (2005). ‘Rust, 
resistance, run down soils, and rising costs: problems facing soybean producers in Argentina,’ Technical Paper Number 8 www.greenpeace.org/international/
press/reports/rust-resistence-
run-down-soi.pdf
Bickel U (2005). ‘Human rights 
violations and environmental 
destruction through soybean production in Brazil’
Bickel U and Dros JM 
(2003). ‘The impacts of 
soybean cultivation on Brazilian ecosystems’ report commissioned by the WWF 
Forest Conversion Initiative 
October 2003. www.wwf.ch/images/progneut/upload/Impacts_of_soybean.pdf   
Blackburn P (2005). ‘Brazil GM 
soy growth disappoints seed breeders.’ Reuters 12 December 2005
Bromano (2006). ‘Farm 
historic: huge farm – soy and cattle.’ www.bromano.com/pages/farm.htm and 
www.bromano.com/pages/
FarmHistoricPortuguese.htm (last accessed 12 February 2006)
Cargill (2002). Chegamos em 
Santarém. Cargill Agrícola SA, São Paulo, Brazil
del Carmen Diaz M and 
Schwartzman S (2005). ‘Carbon offsets and land use in the Brazilian Amazon’ in eds P 
Moutinho and S Schwartzman 
Tropical Deforestation and Climate Change pp93–98
Cattaneo A (2002). ‘Balancing 
agricultural development and 
deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon’ Report Number 129, International Food Policy 
Institute
Chu H (2005). ‘Deforestation, burning turn Amazon rain forest 
into major pollution source,’ in The Los Angeles Times, 20 June 
2005
CIFOR (2004). ‘Livestock, 
development and deforestation 
Brazil’s Amazon.’ www.cifor.
org/docs/_ref/publications/newsonline/33/livestock.htm (downloaded 17 June 2004)
Coodetec (2005). Company 
brochure, Central Cooperative of Agricultural Research.
Coelho M (2003). University 
of Mato Grosso, quoted in ‘Transgenicos rondam Mato Grosso.’ 24 February 2003. www.estacaovida.org.br/one_
news.asp?IDNews=85
Cohenca D (2005). ‘A expansão 
da fronteira agrícola e sua 
relação com o desmatamento 
detectado em imagens Landsat TM e ETM+ na região norte da BR-163, Pará entre os anos de 1999 a 2004.’ www.ibama.gov.
br/flona_tapajos/download.
php?id_download=136 
COIAB (2006). História. 
Coordenação das Organizações 
Indigenas da Amazõnia Brasileira. www.coiab.com.br/historia.php
CPT (2004). Conflitos no 
Campo Brazil 2003, Comissão Pastoral da Terra. April 2004 pp148-152. www2.prudente.
unesp.br/dgeo/nera/caderno_
conflitos_2004.zip (last accessed 24 February 2006)
CPT (2005). Conflitos no 
Campo Brazil 2004, Comissão 
Pastoral da Terra. April 2005 pp12-15. www2.prudente.unesp.br/dgeo/nera/caderno_
conflitos_2005.zip (last 
accessed 24 February 2006)
CONAB (2004). ‘Quinto 
Levantamento da Safra 
Agrícola 2003/2004.’ Quadro 
21. Companhia Nacional de Abastecimento, Ministério da Agricultura, Pecuária e 
Abastecimento. www.cnpso.
embrapa.br/download/numeros/conab_jun_04.pdfCompassion in World Farming Trust (2004). ‘Reducing meat consumption: the case for 
urgent reform.’ www.ciwf.
org.uk/publications/reports/Global_benefits_summary.pdf 
CAO (2005.). ‘CAO audit of 
IFC’s environmental and social categorization of the Amaggi expansion project.’ Final Report May 2005. Compliance 
Advisor/Ombudsman. www.
cao-ombudsman.org/pdfs/AmaggiFinal_Editedversion_05-26-05.pdf
CONAB (2006). Soja Brazil 
– Série Histórica de Área Plantada, Safras 1976/77 a 2005/06. Companhia Nacional 
de Abastecimento. www.
conab.gov.br/download/safra/boletim.pdf 
Coordenação das Organizações 
Indigenas da Amazõnia Brasileira (COIAB). website www.coiab.com.br
Costa FG, Caixeta-Filho JV and 
Arima E (2001). ‘Influência do transporte no uso da terro: o caso da logistica de 
movimentação de grãos e 
insumos na Amazônia Legal’ in eds JV Caixeta-Filho and AH Gameiro Transporte e Logística em Sistemas Agroindustriais pp. 
21–39
Diário do Pará (2006). ‘Pará 
state leads in slave like work 
conditions.’ 17 January 2006.
De Heus (2004/5). Leesvoer 
magazines, De Heus Brokking Koudijs: February 2004, June 
2004, October 2004, January 
2005 and April 2005. www.de-heus.nl/index2.html ->actueel ->leesvoer (last accessed 23 
March 2006)
Dros JM (2004). ‘Managing the 
soy boom: two scenarios of soy production expansion in South 
America.’ AIDEnvironment 
report commissioned by WWF Forest Conversion Initiative, Amsterdam, June 2004
The Economist (2004). ‘The 
Brazilian Amazon and the 

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON57
jungle,’24 July 2004
The Economist (2005). ‘The 
harnessing of nature’s bounty,’ 3 
November 2005
e.Logistics (2002) ‘How Sun 
Valley streamlined for European 
growth,’ October 2002. www.im.se/news/news/eLogistics_Sun_Valley.pdf
Embrapa (1997). ‘Embrapa e 
Monsanto desenvolvem soja tolerante a herbicida’ 15 April 1997 www21.sede.embrapa.
br/noticias/banco_de_
noticias/1997/abril/bn.2004-11-25.8434017366/mostra_noticia
Embrapa (2006). ‘Produtores 
vão conhecer novas variedades de soja,’ 17 February 2006. www21.sede.embrapa.
br/noticias/banco_de_
noticias/folder.2005-12-09.1049352883/foldernoticia.2006-02-15.3920532760/noticia.2006-
02-17.3798657594/mostra_
noticia)
Eurostat (2006). Imports of 
soya into EU 25 countries, 
Eurostat online database. epp.eurostat.cec.eu.int
Ewing R (2003). ‘Soy farmers’ 
dream road may hasten Amazon 
ruin’ Reuters 23 September 2003 www.planetark.org/dailynewsstory.cfm/
newsid/22323/story.htm
Fearnside P (2001). ‘Soybean 
cultivation as a threat to the environment in Brazil,’ in 
Environmental Conservation, 
28: 23–38
Fearnside P (2005). 
‘Deforestation in Brazilian 
Amazonia: history, rates, and consequences’ in Conservation Biology, 19: 680–688
Forbes (2004). Cargill 
profile. America’s Largest Private Companies, Forbes. www.forbes.com/finance/
lists/21/2004/LIR.jhtml?passLi
stId=21&passYear=2004&passListType=Company&uniqueId=5ZUZ&datatype=Company 
Garcia EG (2002). ‘Pesticide 
control experiences in Brazil,’ 
in Pesticide Safety News 1(2) September 2002, ICPS Bulletin/International Centre 
for Pesticides and Health Risk 
Prevention www.icps.it/english/bollettino/psn97/970206.htm 
Gentry AH (1988). ‘Tree species 
richness of upper Amazonian 
forests’ in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,85: 156–159
Glaser JL (2004). interview with 
O Liberal, 14 January 2004
Glaser JL (2002). ‘The new 
route of soy from Pará,’ Cargill’s 
Santarém Director interviewed in Gazeta Mercantil newspaper, 15 August 2002
Governo do Estado de Mato 
Grosso (2004). ‘Zonamento sócio econômico ecológico do estado de Mato Grosso 
2004.’ www.seplan.mt.gov.br/
arquivos/A_bc03c174afcd22ab4ec05d74b5b7e0ccMapa%20-Zoneamento_1_3000000.pdf  
Greenpeace (2005a). ‘The 
André Maggi Group: soy chain of custody from the State of Mato Grosso to four European 
markets,’ internal report, 4 
August 2005
Greenpeace (2006). 
Greenpeace documentary: ‘In 
the name of progress.’
Greenpeace (2004). ‘GM 
and dairy cowfeed: steps to 
a GM-free future for the UK 
dairy industry.’ Greenpeace UK, London
Greenpeace (2005b). ‘Grilagem 
de terras na Amazônia: negócio bilionário,’ in Amazônia, 8 March 2005
Greenpeace (1997). ‘Industrial 
“Hoover” fishing: a policy vacuum.’ archive.greenpeace.org/comms/cbio/hoovrpt.html
Greenpeace (2005c). ‘Soy 
supply chains from the Brazilian Amazon to retail products in four European markets,’ internal report, 4 August 2005
Greenpeace (2003). ‘State 
of conflict: an investigation into the landgrabbers, loggers 
and lawless frontiers in Pará 
State, Amazon.’ Greenpeace International, Amsterdam
Grupo Maggi (2004). Projeto 
de Expansão, Programa de 
Consulta e Divulgação Publica (PCDP). Junho 2004.
Grupo Maggi (2005a). Andre 
Maggi Group signs National Pact for the Eradication of Slave Labor, 22 December 2005. www.grupomaggi.com.br/us/
news.asp?idnews=188
Grupo Maggi (2005b). 
‘Numbers of the Agro division’ 
www.grupomaggi.com.br/br/
agro/numeros.htm
Grupo Maggi (2005c). ‘New 
storage silos guarantee soybean 
storage quality,’ 30 March 
2005. www.grupomaggi.com.br/us/news.asp?idnews=104
Hall KG (2004). ‘Slavery exists 
out of sight in Brazil’ Knight Ridder, 5 September 2004
Hattenstone (2006). ‘The 
peaceful warriors,’ in The 
Guardian Weekend, 11 February 2006 p19
Heap I (2004). ‘International 
survey of herbicide resistant weeds.’ www.weedscience.org/in.asp
Hendrix Meat Group (2006). 
Feed – Compulsory Information. www.hendrixmeatgroup.com/consumer/template.
php?sectionId=15 (last 
accessed 20 March 2006) and Greenpeace conversation with Derk Oorburgs, Veternarian/Quality Control at Vion, 
Netherlands (20 March 2006)
HSBC (2004). ‘Forest land 
and forest products sector 
guideline,’ May 2004. www.img.
ghq.hsbc.com/public/groupsite/assets/newsroom/forest_land_and_forest_products_summary_3.0_final.pdf
 IBGE (2004). ‘Levantamento 
sistemático da produção agrícola.’ 
Instituto Brasileiro de Geografía 
e Estadísticas, May 2004. www.ibge.gov.br
IBGE (2005). ‘Mapa de biomas.’ 
Instituto Brasileiro de Geografía 
e Estadísticas, November 2005. www.ibge.gov.br
IBGE (2006). ‘Levantamento 
sistemático da produção agrícola,’ Table 1618 ‘Produção, área plantada e área colhida por período e produto,’ January 
2006. www.sidra.ibge.gov.
br (last accessed 24 February 2006)
INPE (2004). ‘Estimativas 
annuais das taxas de desflorestamento da Amazônia Legal,’ Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais, 4 April 
2004. www.obt.inpe.br/
prodes/prodes_1988_2003.htm (last accessed 14 May 2004)
Instituto Socioambiental 
(2003). ‘O Xingu na mira da soja.’ www.socioambiental.org/website/especiais/soja/
l.shtm (last accessed 22 January 
2004)
Instituto Sociambiental (2004). 
‘Desmatamento na Amazônia 
fica no patamar de 23 mil km2 em 2003.’ 7 April 2004. www.socioambiental.org/nsa/detalhe?id=1706 (last accessed 
14 May 2004)
Iowa Farm Bureau Federation 
(2003). Presentation ‘Should 
Brazil give you heartburn?’ 
September 2003. www.ifbf.org/programs/commodity/pdf/200309-brazil/sld001.htm (last accessed 6 February 
2006)
Jica (2003). Monthly 
environmental report summary 
paper, December 2003
Kaimowitz D et al (2004). 

58
‘Hamburger connection fuels 
Amazon destruction: cattle ranching and deforestation in 
Brazil’s Amazon.’ Center for 
International Forestry Research (CIFOR). www.cifor.cgiar.org/publications/pdf_files/media/
Amazon.pdf
Ketting A (2005). Load out or 
out of Load? A study into the performance of the soybean 
meal load-out facility of Cargill 
Amsterdam. University of Groningen
Kirby A (2004). ‘Soya boom 
threat to South America.’ BBC London, 3 September 2004. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/3622108.stm 
Kneen B (2002). Invisible giant: 
Cargill and its transnational strategies, second edition.
Kruse D (2005). ‘Brazilian farm 
crisis.’ 3 November 2005. www.thecommstockreport/Newspaper/2005-1103colm.
htm
Lameira W and Alencar A 
(2002). ‘Multitemporal analysis 
of soybean expansion in 
Santarém region.’ IPAM, Belém, Brazil
Laurance W et al (2004). 
‘Deforestation in Amazonia’ 
letter to the editor in Science 304: 1109 21 May 2004 and subsequent correspondence in 
Science 307: 1043-1047 18 
February 2005
Laurance W (2005). ‘Razing 
Amazonia,’ in New Scientist, 15 
October 2005, pp 35-39
Laurus (2004). Laurus NV 
Prospectus, 9 November 2004. 
www.laurus.nl/privatedata/
DocUpload/3758/DOC/73/Doc.pdf
Legislatura da Câmara Municipal 
de Feliz Natal (2004). Ata 
da 09ª Sessão Ordinária, do 1º Período Legislativo, da 3ª Sessão Legislativa, da 3ª 
Legislatura da Câmara Municipal 
de Feliz Natal, Estado de Mato Grosso, 11 April 2004. www.camarafeliznatal-mt.com.br/atas/ATAN009.doc
Lilley S (2004). ‘Paving the 
Amazon with soy: World Bank bows to audit of Maggi loan.’ 16 December 2004. 
www.corpwatch.org/article.
php?id=11756
Maggi (2006). Statement 
by Andre Maggi,. History of 
André Maggi Group. www.
grupomaggi.com.br/us/grupo/index.asp
Margulis S (2003). ‘Causes of 
deforestation of the Brazilian Amazon,’ World Bank working paper number 22. www-wds.worldbank.org/servlet/
WDS_IBank_Servlet?pcont
=details&eid=000090341_20040202130625
McCarthy M (2003). ‘The 
great rainforest tragedy,’ in The Independent, 28 July 2003
Meyer L (2005). ‘The changing 
soya world,’ PowerPoint 
presentation by CEO of LaSoy GmbH, Germany
Ministério Público Federal 
(2004). Procuradoria Da República Em Mato Grosso -PROCESSO 200436000022948. www.pgr.
mpf.gov.br/pgr/pfdc/grupos_
encerrados/trab_escravo/coordenadoria/Denuncias/Mato%20Grosso/Fazenda%20
Vo%20Gercy%202002.pdf
Ministry of Justice of Brazil 
(1996). Legal Framework of the Demarcation Process of 
Indigenous Lands in Brazil www.
brasilemb.org/social_issues/demarcation_indigenous_land.shtml
MMA (2005). ‘Plano de controle 
e prevenção ao desmatamento,’ Ministry of Environment Secretariat of Biodiversity and 
Forests. www.mma.gov.br/doc/
desmatamento2003_2004.pdf
MCT (2004). ‘Primeiro 
inventário Brasileiro de emissões 
antrópicas de gases de efeito estufa.’ Ministry of Science and Technology. www.mct.gov.br/Clima/comunic_old/invent1.htm (last accessed 24 February 
2006)
Morais RC (2005). ‘The 
great Brazilian land grab,’ 
in Forbes. 25 July 2005. 
www.forbes.com/business/global/2005/0725/052.html
Moutinho P and Schwartzman S 
(2005). ‘Tropical deforestation 
and climate change’ Amazon Institute for Environmental Research
MTE (2001).  Relatarório de 
Fiscalização – Fazenda Vale Do Río Verde. Ministério do Trabalho e Emprego, Setembro 
200
MTE (2002a). Relatório de 
Fiscalização – Fazenda Vó 
Gercy. Ministério do Trabalho e 
Emprego, Junho 2002
MTE (2002b). Relatório de 
Fiscalização – Fazenda Tupy 
Barão. Ministério do Trabalho e 
Emprego, Junho 2002 
MTE (2004). Relatório 
de Fiscalização – Fazenda 
Roncador. Ministério do Trabalho e Emprego, Agosto 2004
MTE (2006). List suja, 
Ministério do Trabalho e Emprego. www.mte.gov.br/Noticias/download/lista.pdf
Nepstad D and Capobianco JJP 
(2002). ‘Roads in the rainforest: environmental costs for the Amazon’ Instituto de Pesquisa 
de Amazonia and Instituto 
Socioambiental, Belem
Nierenberg D (2006). 
‘Rethinking the global meat 
industry’ in Worldwatch Institute State of the world 2006 pp24–40
Peres C (2005). ‘Why we need 
mega reserves in Amazonia’ in Conservation Biology 19(3): 728–733
Phillips T (2006). ‘Raids across 
Brazil free 4,000 slaves’ in The Guardian, 16 January 2006. www.guardian.co.uk/brazil/story/0,12462,1687150,00.
html 
Procuradoria da República no 
Pará (2006). ‘Decisão do TRF 
assegura vitória do MPF no caso 
do porto da Cargill Assessoria de Comunicação, Procuradoria da República no Pará,’ 20 February 2006. www.pgr.mpf.gov.br/
pgr/imprensa/iw/nmp/public.
php?publ=6455
Prodes (2004). ‘Monitoramento 
do desmatamento em 
formações florestais na Amazônia Legal.’ www.obt.inpe.br/prodes 
Proforest (2004/5). ‘The BASEL 
criteria for responsible soy production: local interpretation for use in Brazil’ prepared for 
Coop Switzerland in cooperation 
with WWF Switzerland, version 16 February 2005
Radiobras (2004). ‘Mato Grosso 
plantations have advanced 
technology and slave-like work conditions,’ 21 June 2004. www.amazonia.org.br/english/
noticias/noticia.cfm?id=113317 
Relyea RA (2005a). ‘The lethal 
impact of Roundup on aquatic and terrestrial amphibians’ in 
Ecological Applications 15: 
1118–1124
Relyea RA (2005b). ‘The 
lethal impacts of Roundup and 
predatory stress on six species of North American tadpoles’ in Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 
48: 351–357
Reporter Brasil (2003). ‘Nova 
escravidão traz mais vantagem 
econômica para os patrões que 
a da época colonial’ December 2003. www.reporterbrasil.org.br/materia_escravo.php?nick=novaescravidao
Richard S et al (2005). 
‘Differential effects of glyphosate and Roundup on 
human placental cells and 
aromatase’ in Environmental Health Perspectives 113: 

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON59
716–720
Rohter L (2003). ‘Relentless foe 
of the Amazon jungle: soybeans’ 
in The New York Times 17 September 2003. www.nytimes.com/2003/09/17/
international/americas/
17BRAZ.html?ex=1379131200&en=d3b8dc0bcec988e8&ei=5007&partner=USERLAND
Romero S (2004). ‘Brazil’s 
spreading exports worry Minnesota farmers’ in The New York Times 22 June 2004
Rylands, AB et al (2002). 
‘Amazonia’ in eds RA Mittermeier, CG Mittermeier, PR Gil, J Pilgrim, GAB da 
Fonseca, T Brooks and WR 
Konstant Wilderness: earth’s last wild places pp56-107
Schutter Group (2006). Line up 
Brazil. www.schuttergroup.com > Information> Line-up Brazil (last accessed 20 March 2006)
SECEX/MDIC/Aliceweb 
(2006). Secretaria de Comércio Exterior (SECEX), Ministério do Desenvolvimento, Indústria 
e Comércio Exterior (MDIC), 
Aliceweb (2006) aliceweb.desenvolvimento.gov.br
Shean MJ (2004). ‘The 
Amazon: Brazil’s final soybean 
frontier’ US Foreign Agricultural Service/Production Estimates and Crop Assessment Division. 
www.fas.usda.gov/pecad/
highlights/2004/01/Amazon/Amazon_soybeans.htm (last accessed 20 April 2004)
Smith J and Scherr SJ (2002). 
‘Forest carbon and local livelihoods: assessment of opportunities and policy 
recommendations.’ CIFOR 
occasional paper number 37
Soares-Filho, BS et al (2006). 
Modelling conservation in the 
Amazon basin. 440 Nature 
440:520-523. 23 March 2006
Sovion (2006). Vion Profile. 
www.sovion.com/en/files/
vion_profile.htm (last accessed 20 March 2006)Steward C (2004). ‘The Santarém agricultural landscape, Pará, Brazil: a working paper on 
agro-industrial and smallholder 
agriculture in Santarém’ Tropical Resources Institute Working Paper #110. 17 June 2004
Stickler CM et al (2004). ‘An 
evaluation of International Finance Corporation financing of Grupo André Maggi (Project 
No 113444) in the soybean 
sector: environmental and social impact considerations.’ 14 May 2004
Sun Valley (2005).Webpages: 
www.sunvalleyeurope.com/food_service.asp; www.sunvalleyeurope.com/history.
asp; www.sunvalleyeurope.
com/423.asp (last accessed 1 May 2005)
Teixeira G(2005). ‘Índice de 
desmatamento na Amazônia cai 31%.’ 5 December 2005 www.mma.gov.br/ascom/ultimas/index.cfm?id=2147 
UNB (2006). Sustentabilidade: 
Prejuízos da devastação. Universidade de Brasília 
www.unb.br/acs/bcopauta/
sustentabilidade3.htm (last accessed 24 March 2006).
UN Global Compact and OHCHR 
(2005) joint publication. 
‘Understanding sphere of influence and complicity.’ www.unglobalcompact.org/Issues/
human_rights/gc_and_human_
rights.pdf 
United Kingdom Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office Global 
Opportunities Fund (2004). 
‘Amazonian deforestation: tackling a root cause and contributing to Brazil’s 
economic prosperity through 
soya certification’ project proposal
USDA/ERS (2005). ‘USDA 
agricultural baseline projections 
to 2014.’ www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/soybeansoilcrops/2005baseline.htm (last 
accessed 7 March 2006)
USDA/FAS (2003). ‘Brazil: Future Agricultural Expansion 
Underrated.’ 21 January 2003. www.fas.usda.gov/pecad2/
highlights/2003/01/Ag_
expansion/
USDA/FAS (2004a). ‘Brazil 
livestock and products semi-
annual 2004.’ GAIN report BR4605. 11 February 2004
USDA/FAS (2004b). ‘Brazil 
oilseeds and products annual 
2004.’ GAIN report BR4611. 13 May 2004. www.fas.usda.gov/gainfiles/200405/146106387.
pdf
USDA/FAS (2004c). ‘The 
Amazon: Brazil’s final soybean frontier.’ 13 January 2004.  
www.fas.usda.gov/pecad2/
highlights/2004/01/Amazon/Amazon_soybeans.htm
USDA/FAS (2005a).  www.
fas.usda.gov/oilseeds/circular/2005/05-03/table4.pdf
USDA/FAS (2005b). www.
fas.usda.gov/oilseeds/circular/2005/05-03/table5t7.pdf
van Gelder JW (2004). ‘Bank 
loans and credits to Grupo André Maggi’ research paper prepared for Fundação CEBRAC, 
Profundo, The Netherlands
van Gelder JW (2005). 
‘European soybean markets 
and companies’ PowerPoint 
presentation at European NGO meeting, Brussels, 19–20 September 2005
van Gelder JW et al (2006). 
From rainforest to chicken breast. Effects of soybean cultivation for animal feed 
on people and nature in the 
Amazon region – a chain of custody study. Profundo AIDEnvironment. January 2006. www.milieudefensie.
nl/landbouw/publicaties/index.
htm
Villas-Boas A et al (2005). 
‘Partnerships for sustainability 
in indigenous lands and regional change: the Xingu Indigenous Park and the Instituto Socioambiental.’ 25 July 2005. news.mongabay.
com/2005/0725-cbc_
indigenous.html
Wallop H (2006). ‘Golden 
arches lose lustre in the UK’ in 
Telegraph Business. 2 February 2006
Watts J (2005). ‘A hunger 
eating up the world’ in The 
Guardian. 10 November 2005. www.guardian.co.uk/china/story/0,,1638858,00.html
World Rainforest Movement 
(2004). ‘Role of agriculture and cattle raising in deforestation.’ WRM Bulletin.5 August 2004
Worldwatch Institute (2006). 
State of the world 2006
Worldwatch Institute (2005). 
Vital Signs 2005–2006: the trends that are shaping our future
WRI (2005). ‘The wealth of the 
poor – managing ecosystems to fight poverty,’ Table 10. World 
Resources Institute
Ziggers D (2005). ‘McDonald’s 
Europe: “we want all our raw materials to come from audited 
farms!”’ in AgriWorldVision 
5(2): 14–15

60
1 Rylands et al (2002) and WRI (2005)
2 Gentry (1988) 
3 COIAB (2006)
4 Greenpeace estimates based on 
data from Prodes (2004): January 
2003 – July 2003 14,003km2 (based on 57% of 24,567km2, annual figure for August 2002 –July 2003); August 2003 – July 2004 27,000km2; August 2004 – July 2005 18,900km2; August 2005 – December 2005 8,127km2 (based on 43% of 18,900km2, assuming that rate will not fall from previous year). Historic data shows that 57% occurs in the first half of the year (January – July) and 43% in the second half (August – December).
5 Greenpeace analysis of data from 
IBAMA, FEMA and IMAC shows that 74% of the areas deforested between August 2003 and August 2004 did not have authorisation from the government
6 Teixeira (2005). The area of 
a football pitch is taken to be 0.007km2, the average of the FIFA recommended maximum and minimum sizes for international matches.
7 Area of soya in municipalities in the 
Amazon biome. Greenpeace estimates based on interpretation of IBGE (2004) soya production figures for 2004-05 crop season and analysis of satellite data from Prodes (2004).
8 CPT (2005) and CPT (2004) www.
cptnac.com.br/?system=news&action=read&id=1266&eid=6 
9 59% of emissions from deforestation 
come from Amazon deforestation. Source: MCT (2004)
10 Around 80% of the capacity is 
controlled by these three companies. Source: Dros (2004) p8
11 Number of silos located  within 
the Amazon biome.Source: flyovers by Greenpeace staff and Protocolo ICMS 18/05 ‘Dispõe sobre a remessa de soja em grão, do Estado de Mato Grosso para industrialização por encomenda no Estado de Minas Gerais, com suspensão do imposto’ 11 July 2005. www.sefaz.am.gov.br/Areas/OpcaoSistemas/SILT/Normas/Legisla%E7%E3o%20CONFAZ/Protocolo%20ICMS/Ano%202005/Arquivo/PT_ICMS_018_05.htm 
12 Worldwatch Institute (2006)
13 MMA (2005) – data for the 
period between 1996/1997 and 2004/2005
14 Imports of soya beans and meal 
EU25 for the period December 2004 – November 2005: worldwide, 45.16 million tonnes; Brazil, 17.7 million tonnes (40%). Source: Eurostat (2006)
15 Greenpeace estimates based on data from Prodes (2004): January 2003 – July 2003 14,003km2 (based on 57% of 24,567km2, annual figure for August 2002 –July 2003); August 2003 – July 2004 27,000km2; August 2004 – July 2005 18,900km2; August 2005 – December 2005 8,127km2 (based on 43% of 18,900km2, assuming that rate will not fall from previous year). Historic data shows that 57% occurs in the first half of the year (January – July) and 43% in the second half (August – December).
16 Asner GP et al (2005)
17 Area of soya in municipalities in the 
Amazon biome. Greenpeace estimates based on interpretation of IBGE (2004) soya production figures for 2004-05 crop season and analysis of satellite data from Prodes (2004). 
18 Amazon biome mapped by IBGE 
(2005)
19 Greenpeace estimates based on 
interpretation of IBGE (2004) soya production figures for 2004-05 crop season and Greenpeace of satellite data from Prodes (2004). The remaining was produced in Rondônia (5.5%), Pará (3.3%), Roraima (0.88%), Amazonas (0.18%), Tocantins (0.03%) and Maranhao (0.01%).
20 MMA (2005) – data for the 
period between 1996/1997 and 2004/2005
21 Watts (2005) 
22 USDA/ERS (2005) 
23 USDA/ERS (2005)
24  Morais (2005) 
25  Morais (2005) 
26  IBGE (2006) 
27  UK land = 241,590km2 (www.
cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/geos/uk.html); Great Britain land = 229,334km2 (www.citypopulation.de/UK-UA.html)
28 The cerrado is a savanna region of 
South America rich in biodiversity. In Brazil, it is the second largest biome after the Amazon and covers 2 million km2, or around 21% of the country as a whole. Source: IBGE www.ibge.gov.br/home/geociencias/recursosnaturais/mapas/mapas_doc1.shtm?c=9  
29  The Legal Amazon is an 
administrative region covering the states of Acre, Amapá, Amazonas, Mato Grosso, Pará, Rondônia, Roraima and Tocantins (formerly the northern part of the state of Goiás), and most of Maranhão: 24% is private land, 42% public land (not including 8% protected areas), 20% indigenous lands and 6% settlement areas.
30 MMA ‘Plano nacional florestas’ 
www.mma.gov.br/index.php?ido=conteudo.monta&idEstrutura=5&idConteudo=3323 (last accessed 25 February 2006)
31  Steward (2004) 
32  Bickel and Dros (2003) citing 
Costa, Caixeta-Filho and Arima (2000)
33  www.brazil.studyintl.com/team/
kory/koryblog/01_firsttours.htm
34  487,992km2 (53.5%) of Mato 
Grosso is in the Amazon biome, of which 152,540km2 (31.2%) has already been destroyed. Source: IBGE (2005) and Greenpeace analysis of Prodes (2004) 
35 Bickel (2005) p8
36  IBGE (2004)
37  Stickler et al (2004) p12 citing 
Schepf et al (2001)
38 CONAB (2006)
39 Greenpeace analysis of satellite 
data from Prodes (2004) and IBGE (2005)
40  MMA (2005) p6
41 48.1%.  Source: MMA (2005) p7
42  Rodrigo Justus, the then Director 
of Forest Resources at the Mato Grosso State Environment Foundation (Fundação Estadual do Meio Ambiente; FEMA), now known as the State Secretariat of the Environment (Secretaria Estadual do Meio Ambiente; SEMA)
43 Stickler et al (2004) p17 
citing Teixeira (2004); Instituto Sociambiental (2003)
44  Iowa Farm Bureau Federation 
(2003). p34 
45 USDA/FAS (2003)
46 Bickel and Dros (2003) 
47 USDA/FAS (2004c) 
48 Kruse (2005) 
49 Arnaldo Carneiro, Coordinator 
of GEO data, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia (INPA; National Institute of Amazon Research) quoted in Greenpeace (2006)
50 Dros (2004) p8 
51 Cargill Sun Valley Europe vision 
statement www.cargill.com/about/organization/sun_valley_europe.htm 
52 www.socioambiental.org/
nsadetalhe?id=1706 
53 Grupo Maggi (2005b), Bickel 
(2005) p12 citing Carvalho (1999) and Thompson (2003)
54  www.grupomaggi.com.br/br/
grupo/index.aspMaggi (2006)
55 Grupo Maggi (2004) and 
Greenpeace investigation
56  Rohter (2003)
57  8,177km2 in 2001/2002 and 
10,458km2 in 2003/2004. Source: MMA (2005) p6
58  Rohter (2003)
59  Bickel and Dros (2003) p19 citing 
personal communications
60 Stickler et al (2004) p2
61 An overview of these loans 
for 1999 – 2004: 1999, Société Générale, France, US$15m; 2001, DEG, Germany, US$24m; Standard Chartered Bank, UK, US$70m; 2002, Rabobank, Netherlands, US$100m; 2002, Standard Chartered Bank, UK, U$50m; 2002, IFC, International,U$30m; 2003, WestLB, Germany, U$80m; 2004, Rabobank, Netherlands, U$230m; 2004, BNDES, Brazil, U$34m; 2004, IFC, International, U$30m. Total: U$663 million. Source: van Gelder (2004)
62  Bickel and Dros (2003) 
63  IFC mission statement www.
ifc.org/ifcext/about.nsf/Content/Mission
64  Stickler et al (2004) p15
65  CAO (2005) p8 
66 Lilley (2004)
67 Bickel (2005) p5
68  Stickler et al (2004) p17 citing IFC 
(2002)
69 Stickler et al (2004) p17
70 For instance, the 
Deutsche Investitions und Entwicklungsgesellschaft (DEG) criteria state: ‘No tropical rainforest… will be used for the silos or the expansion of farmland. Indigenous groups will not be expropriated. The soya will be grown in an environmentally responsible way and will not be grown as a monoculture. Grupo André Maggi will follow World Bank environmental guidelines.’ However, no mechanisms have been put in place to independently monitor respect for these criteria. Source: van Gelder (2004) 
71 Bickel (2005) p5 citing CAO (2005) 
72  van Gelder (2004)
73  HSBC (2004) 
74  Chu (2005) 
75  Moutinho and Schwartzman 
(2005)
76  World Resources Institute Climate 
Analysis Indicators Tool (CAIT) – cait.wri.org
77 MCT (2004). Deforestation 
emissions include Amazon rainforests, cerrado, Atlantic forests and Caatinga. This figure is based on data from over a decade ago (1990 – 1994), when Amazon deforestation rates were much lower than in more recent years. This means we now expect much higher emissions from deforestation in the Amazon. Nb: del Carmen Diaz and Schwartzman (2005) citing Mendonça et al (2004) state that fires are excluded.
78  Altieri and Pengue (2006)
79  Altieri and Pengue (2006)
80  Altieri and Pengue (2006)
81  Altieri and Pengue (2006)
82  Altieri and Pengue (2006)
83  Stickler et al (2004) citing Garcia 
(2002) and IFC (2002)
84  Stickler et al (2004) citing Garcia ENDNOTES

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON61
(2002)
85  Garcia (2002)
86  Altieri and Pengue (2006)
87  www.pan-uk.org/pestnews/
actives/paraquat.htm 
88  Relyea (2005a), Relyea (2005b), 
and Richard et al (2005)
89  Benbrook (2004) and Benbrook 
(2005)
90  Altieri and Pengue (2006)
91  Stickler et al (2004) citing 
Gunderson et al (1995) and Pringle 
(2001)
92 Astor (2003) 
93  Hattenstone (2006) 
94 Stickler et al (2004) citing Instituto 
Sociambiental (2004)
95  The park is inhabited by 14 ethnic 
groups that speak different languages and are distributed among 49 villages and government Indian posts, with a total population of around 4,700 people. www.socioambiental.org/e/prg/xng.shtm 
96  Villas-Boas et al (2005) 
97  1,259,022 hectares were 
deforested in the 2003 – 2005 period. Source: Greenpeace analysis of Prodes (2004)
98  Stickler et al (2004) citing Instituto 
Sociambiental (2004)
99  Stickler et al (2004) citing Instituto 
Sociambiental (2004)
100  Astor (2003)
101  www.brazil.studyintl.com/states/
matogrosso/cities/sorriso.htm 
102  Greenpeace analysis of satellite 
data from Prodes (2004). 547,867 hectares in the Amazon biome and cerrado; 149,000 in the Amazon biome.
103  Embrapa (2006) 
104  Embrapa (1997) 
105  Article 11 of Law 10.814 15 
December 2003 www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/Leis/2003/L10.814.htm 106  Benbrook (2004) and  Benbrook (2005)
107  Benbrook (2005) 
108  Benbrook (2005)
109  Heap (2004) 
110  Benbrook (2004)
111  Coelho (2003) 
112  Greenpeace communication 
with agronomist at the Ministry of Agriculture (2005). Figures based on Declaration of Commitment, Responsibility and Agreement of Conduct (Termo de Compromisso, Responsabilidade e Ajustamento de Conduta; TCRAC). 
113 Coodetec (2005)
114  Kaimowitz et al (2004) 
115  Iowa Farm Bureau Federation 
(2003) p43
116  AgWeb (2004)
117 Fearnside (2001) and Fearnside 
(2005)
118 Laurance et al (2004); see also 
Laurance (2005). William Laurance is with the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute.
119  Margulis (2003)
120  Shean (2004) 
121  Greenpeace communication 
with biologist Marília Kerr do Amaral (University of São Paulo Zoology Museum), 22 February 2006. From 1993 – 2000 she worked in the Ecological, Economical and Social Diagnosis of the Mato Gross Agro-ecological Development Program (DSSE PRODEAGRO), financed by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), an organization of the World Bank.
122 12,626km2 including federal and 
state conservation units. Source: Secretaria Especial do Meio Ambiente (SEMA).
123 487,992km2 (53.5%) of Mato 
Grosso is in the Amazon biome, of which 152.540km2 (31.2%) has already been destroyed. Source: IBGE (2005) and Greenpeace analysis of Prodes (2004) 
124 Stickler CM et al (2004) p18 citing 
Fontes (2003)
125 Greenpeace analysis of satellite 
data from Prodes (2004); see also MMA (2005) p6
126 Margulis (2004)
127 The Economist (2004)
128 Jornal de Santarém e Baixo 
Amazonas, 3–9 April 2004
129 Eg Steward C (2004) and Cohenca 
D (2005)
130 The Economist (2004)
131 AgWeb (2004) and AgWeb (2005) 
132 The conservation unit would 
include the sources of the River Manissauá-Miçu (affluent of the River Arraias, in the River Xingu basin), in the east border of the Cuiabá-Santarém Highway (BR-163), between the municipalities of Sinop and Itaúba, and areas of the municipalities of Itaúba, Marcelândia, Cláudia and União do Sul. Source: Governo do Estado de Mato Grosso (2004) 
133 The white monkey is being 
described by biologists Marília Kerr do Amaral and Juliana Gualda de Barros from the University of São Paulo Zoology Museum.
134 Between 1993 and 2000 the 
researchers were working for the Ecological, Economical and Social Diagnosis of the Mato Grosso Agro-ecological Development Program (DSEE PRODEAGRO), financed by International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), an organisation of the World Bank.
135 Greenpeace communication with 
biologist Marília Kerr do Amaral from the University of São Paulo Zoology Museum.
136 Greenpeace interview with 
Megaron Txucarramãe in Colider, Mato Grosso, 19 January 2006
137 Interview with Pedro Bueno de 
Lara (19 January 2006), between the municipalities of Sinop and Itaúba, and areas of the municipalities of Itaúba, Marcelândia, Cláudia and União do Sul 
138 UNB (2006) 
139 UNB (2006)  
140 Federal Decree 1282/94
141 Assembléia Legislativa do Estado 
de Mato Grosso (2006).
142 Cargill Agrícola SA Estrada Gladis, 
s/nº, Lotes 354 e 355 – Cuiabá. 78540-000 – Claudia – MT; Bunge in Claudia.
143  Legislatura da Câmara Municipal 
de Feliz Natal (2004)
144  Greenpeace field investigations, May and December 2005 
145  www.imoveisvirtuais.com.br; 
www.mercadodeterras.com.br; www.fazendas.e1.com.br: www.sofazendas.com.br
146 Greenpeace interview with Alison 
Delcético, technician to the Secretary of Agriculture of Feliz Natal, May 2005
147 Greenpeace field investigations, 
May and December 2005
148  Greenpeace interview with Alison 
Delcético, technician to the Secretary of Agriculture of Feliz Natal, May 2005
149  Greenpeace analysis of satellite 
data from Prodes (2004)
150  Cargill from Eliseu Zamberlan, 
Giovani Zamberlan and Saul Stefanello; Bunge from Eliseu Zamberlan and Agenor Favarin
151  Greenpeace field interviews 
along the BR163. 3 August 2005 investigation.
152  Grilagem (land grabbing) is the 
illegal appropriation of land through false land titles.
153  Bickel (2005) p17
154  COIAB (2006)
155  For more details on grilagem and 
methods applied by grileiros, see Greenpeace (2003). 
156  Greenpeace (2005b) 
157  Article 231 of the Federal 
Constitution of 1988
158  Article 231 of the Federal 
Constitution of 1988 recognises the rights of indigenous peoples to their ‘social organization, their customs, languages, beliefs and traditions and the original rights over lands they traditionally occupy.’ Source: Ministry of Justice (1996). 
159  Greenpeace communication with 
Rinaldo Seérgio Vieira Arruda, 16 February 2006
160  Greenpeace analysis of satellite 
data Prodes (2004)
161  Phillips (2006)
162  Hall (2004) 
163  ‘Article 1 of the UN Supplementary 
Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade and Institutions and Practices similar to Slavery, 1956’ defines debt bondage as a form of slavery.
164  Diário do Pará (2006)
165  Reporter Brasil (2003) 
166  CPT (2005)
167  CPT (2005)
168  Hall (2004)
169  Ministério do Trabalho e Emprego 
(MTE) www.mte.gov.br/Noticias/Conteudo/5773.asp 
170  Marcelo Campos, Minister of 
Labour and Employment’s Inspection Mobile Special Group Coordinator
171  Grupo Maggi (2005a)
172  Bickel (2005) p5
173  Bickel (2005) p11
174  USDA/FAS (2004b) p33
175  412km2 and 419km2, 
respectively. Source: MMA (2005) p10 
176  Bromano (2006)
177  81,544 out of 150,000 hectares. 
Greenpeace analysis of satellite data Prodes (2004)
178  MTE (2004)179  In January 2005, the solicitor from 
the Public Ministry of Mato Grosso, Douglas Lingiardi Strachicini, launched a legal case against Penido, the farm manager and others, charging them with setting up an organised gang and infringement of workers’ rights. Strachicini requested the preventive detention of the accused to curb their activities. At the end of January 2005, Judge Angelo Judai Junior of the Judiciary District of Querência accepted the case. Source: Public Prosecution Office, Canarana.
180  Data from government database 
SECEX/MDIC/Aliceweb (2006
181  Grupo Maggi (2005b)
182  Grupo Maggi (2005c)
183  Data from government database 
SECEX/MDIC/Aliceweb (2006) 
184  Ministério Público Federal (2004).
185  Greenpeace communication with 
José Pedro Taques, Procurador da República Ministério Público Federal
186  MTE (2006)
187  Greenpeace communication with 
José Pedro Taques, Procurador da República Ministério Público Federal
188  MTE (2006)
189  MTE (2006)
190  MTE (2006) and MTE (2002b) 
191  MTE (2002b)
192  MTE (2006) 
193  Greenpeace has documentary 
evidence that shows Bunge Bunge and Grupo André Maggi bought soya  from Agropecuária Tupy 
194  MTE (2001)
195  MTE (2001)
196  MTE (2001) 
197 MTE (2006)
198 US GAIN BR4623, p4
199  Iowa Farm Bureau Federation 
(2003). p48
200  Iowa Farm Bureau Federation 
(2003). P49
201  Kneen (2002)
202  Forbes (2004) 
203  Cargill company brochure 2005
204  Romero (2004) 
205  USDA/FAS (2004a) p9
206  Cargill (2002)
207  Jornal de Santarém e Baixo 
Amazonas, 11–17 December 2004
208  Data from government database  
SECEX/MDIC/Aliceweb (2006)
209  Interview with Felecio Pontes Jr 
Federal Prosecutor, Belém, Pará State, in Greenpeace (2006) 
210  Processo 2003.39.02.001733-
3, classe 9.108; MPF: Informação Técnica  Nº 065/00 – 4ª CCR, Brasília (DF), 7 July 2000; Dossiê Nº 030/2000 – 4ª CCR
211  Agravo de Instrumento 
N.2000.01.00.019713/1/PA Tribunal Regional Federal da 1a. Região – Brasilia  DF, 29 September 2003
212  Ação de Atentado com pedido de 
laminar, Ministerio Publico Federal, Procuradoria da Republica no Municipio de Santarém, Santarém/Belém, 12 December 2003
213  Processo 2003.39.02.001733-
3, classe 9.108, Santarém 8 January 2004
214  Agravo de instrumento N 
2004.01.00.000377-2/PA Proceso na Origem 200339020017333, 

62
Brasilia, 14 January 2004
215  O Liberal, 27 May 2004
216  Processo 2000.39.02.000141-0 
07100 Ação civil Publico Santarém 18 
May 2005; Glaser (2004).
217  Procuradoria da República no Pará 
(2006) 
218 Quote from Greenpeace (2006) 
219 Cohenca (2005)
220 Lameira and Alencar (2002) 
221 Glaser (2002)
222 Interview with Antenor Giovaninni, 
Cargill Santarém, Jornal de Santarém e Baixo Amazonas, 11–17 December 2004
223  Steward (2004) and Greenpeace 
interviews
224  Glaser (2004)
225 Glaser (2004)
226  See, for instance, federal judge 
ruling on public financing of land grabbing in the Santarém area, Jornal de Santarém e Baixo Amazonas, 10–16 April 2004
227  Greenpeace has obtained a copy 
of the contract. 
228  Greenpeace has obtained a copy 
of the tax document.
229  Greenpeace has obtained a copy 
of the INCRA registration document. 
230  Greenpeace analysis of Prodes 
(2004) 
231  Article 231 of the Federal 
Constitution of 1988
232  www.mcdonalds.com/corp/
values/socialrespons/market/food_supply_initiative/food_supply_guidelines.htmlhttp://www.mcdonalds.com/corp/values/socialrespons/market/food_supply_initiative/food_supply_guidelines.html 
233  UN Global Compact and OHCHR 
(2005)
234 Greenpeace interpretation of 
data from MDIC/SECEX and www.exportadoresbrasileiros.gov.br/g36157/servlet/serpro.siscomex.cadexp.servlet
235  EU25 imports of soya beans and 
meal for the period December 2004 – November 2005 totaled 45.16 million tonnes; 6.45 million tonnes (14.3%) were exported from Mato Grosso in 2005. Source: data from government database SECEX/MDIC/Aliceweb (2006) and Eurostat (2006).
236  Protocolo ICMS 18/05 ‘Dispõe 
sobre a remessa de soja em grão, do Estado de Mato Grosso para industrialização por encomenda no Estado de Minas Gerais, com suspensão do imposto’ 11 July 2005 www.sefaz.am.gov.br/Areas/OpcaoSistemas/SILT/Normas/Legisla%E7%E3o%20CONFAZ/Protocolo%20ICMS/Ano%202005/Arquivo/PT_ICMS_018_05.htm 
237  Data from government database 
SECEX/MDIC/Aliceweb (2006) 
238  Data from government database 
SECEX/MDIC/Aliceweb (2006) 
239  Responses sent to both 
Greenpeace and Greenpeace supporters January – February 2006.
240  Greenpeace can make available 
copies of the letters, all from early 2006.
241  In the period December 2004 – November 2005, EU25 imports of soya beans and meal totalled 17.7 million tonnes; 6.45 million tonnes were exported from Mato Grosso in 2005. Source: data from government database SECEX/MDIC/Aliceweb (2006) and Eurostat (2006)
242 ‘McDonald’s factfile 2004’ 
Corporate Affairs Department, McDonald’s Restaurants Ltd, 2004
243  McDonald’s Worldwide ‘Corporate 
responsibility report 2004’ http://www.mcdonalds.com/corp/values/socialrespons/sr_report.html 
244  McDonald’s ‘Rain forest policy’ 
www.mcdonalds.com/corp/values/socialrespons/market/rain_forest_policy.html
245  McDonald’s Canada ‘FAQs’ www.
mcdonalds.ca/en/aboutus/faq.aspx
246  Worldwatch Insitute (2005) p24
247  ‘McDonald’s factfile 2004’ 
Corporate Affairs Department, McDonald’s Restaurants Ltd, 2004
248  Wallop (2006) 
249  ‘McDonald’s franchising’ 
McDonald’s Restaurants Ltd, 2004 www.mcdonalds.co.uk/resources/img/sections/companyinfo/Franchising_Broc.pdf
250  Ziggers (2005)
251  McDonald’s Europe 2005 
‘Social responsibility report’ p34 http://www.mcdonalds.com/corp/values/socialrespons/sr_report/otherreports.RowPar.0003.ContentPar.0001.ColumnPar.0029.DownloadFiles.0001.File.tmp/European_Corporate_Responsibility_Report_2005.pdf 
252  McDonald’s Canada ‘Environment’ 
www.mcdonalds.ca/en/community/environment_rainforest.aspx
253  McDonald’s ‘Rain forest policy’ 
www.mcdonalds.com/corp/values/socialrespons/market/rain_forest_policy.html
254  McDonald’s ‘Rain forest policy’ 
www.mcdonalds.com/corp/values/socialrespons/market/rain_forest_policy.html
255  Port of Liverpool website www.
merseydocks.co.uk/index2.htm 
256  Data from government database 
SECEX/MDIC/Aliceweb (2006) 
257  Greenpeace communications with 
Aden Leek, nutritionist at Sun Valley Tram Inn, 1 January 2006, and Stuart Rowney, Feed Mill Manager at Sun Valley Hereford, 6 February 2006
258  Greenpeace communication with 
Stewart Rowney, Feed Mill Manager at Sun Valley Hereford, 7 February 2006
259  Sun Valley (2005) 
260  Sun Valley (2005) 
261  Greenpeace communication with 
Stewart Rowney, Feed Mill Manager at Sun Valley Hereford, 7 February 2006
262   Sun Valley (2005)
263  e.Logistics (2002) 
264  www.calsoftware.co.uk/
custcase4.htm or www.cargill.com/files/sve_tram.pdf 
265  Greenpeace ommunication with 
Aden Leek, nutritionist at Sun Valley Tram Inn, 1 January 2006, and Stuart Rowney, Feed Mill Manager at Sun Valley Hereford, 6 February 2006
266  Greenpeace communication with Stewart Rowney, Feed Mill Manager at Sun Valley Hereford, 7 February 2006
267  Data from government 
database SECEX SECEX/MDIC/Aliceweb (2006) 
268  Hendrix UTD. Source: Hendrix 
Meat Group (2006). 
269  Ketting (2005), van Gelder 
JW et al. (2006) and Greenpeace identified the barge Tabula Rasa being loaded at Cargill Amsterdam on 29 November 2005 and it was observed offloading at a Hendrix UTD facility in Deventer, The Netherlands on 30th November 2005.
270  The Netherlands, Germany, 
Italy, Belgium, France, Greece and the UK. Source: Sovion (2006). 
271  Laurus (2004)
272  Animal feed company De Heus 
Brokking Koudijs. Source: Ketting (2005)
273  De Heus (2004/5)
274  Greenpeace communication 
with Mr Rooijen, assistant purchasing forKFC Netherlands 27 March 2006 (recorded call).
275  Soares-Filho et al, (2006)
276  Peres (2005) citing INPE 
(2004)
277  Gentry (1988) 
278  Soares-Filho et al, (2006)
279  Peres (2005) citing Newmark 
1995
280  Peres (2005) 
281  Peres (2005) 
282  Peres (2005) 
283  eg www.socioambiental.org/
nsa/detalhe?id=1924
284  MMA (2006). Programa Áreas 
Protegidas Da Amazônia Arpa. Brazilian Ministry of Environment www.mma.gov.br/port/sca/arpa/index.html (last accessed 21 March 2006)
285  The Economist (2005)
286  Greenpeace (1997)
287  Greenpeace’s use of the term 
‘Amazon rainforest’ in this report is equivalent to the term ‘Amazon biome’ as mapped by the Brazilian Government in 2004.
288  CONAB (2006) 
289  Protocolo ICMS 18/05 ‘Dispõe 
sobre a remessa de soja em grão, do Estado de Mato Grosso para industrialização por encomenda no Estado de Minas Gerais, com suspensão do imposto’ 11 July 2005 www.sefaz.am.gov.br/Areas/OpcaoSistemas/SILT/Normas/Legisla%E7%E3o%20CONFAZ/Protocolo%20ICMS/Ano%202005/Arquivo/PT_ICMS_018_05.htm 
290  Source for company 
chartering ships for soya exports –  Shutter Group (2006). www.schuttergroup.com (last accessed 20 March 2006). Source for ports of soya exports – data from government database SECEX/MDIC/Aliceweb (2006) PHOTO CREDITS
PAGE  
cover  © Greenpeace/Beltra 
inside cover © Greenpeace/Rouvillois
4  © Greenpeace/D’Avila 
6  © Greenpeace/Petterson 
7  © Greenpeace/Beltra 
10-11  © Greenpeace/Beltra 
12  © Pantoja/Infoto 
14-15  © Greenpeace/Beltra 
16  © Greenpeace/D’Avila 
19  © Greenpeace/Fonseca
20   © Greenpeace/Beltra;  
 © Salgado 
24-25  © Salgado
26   © Greenpeace/D’Avila;  
 © Greenpeace/Beltra
30  © Greenpeace/Beltra
31  © Ripper/ Imagens Humanas
34-35  © Greenpeace/Rudhart
36  © Greenpeace/Beltra
38  © Greenpeace/Cesar
40  © Greenpeace/Sims
42  © Greenpeace/Rudhart;  
 © Greenpeace/Sims ;
 © Greenpeace  
43  © Greenpeace/Beltra;   
© Greenpeace/Beltra;  
© Greenpeace;  
© Greenpeace;
 © Greenpeace;   
 © Greenpeace
46-47  © Greenpeace/Beltra
50  © Greenpeace/Baatz
63  © Greenpeace/Novis

EATING UP 
THE AMAZ ON63
The Amazon rainforest is one of the most 
biodiverse regions on earth. It is home to 
nearly 10% of the world’s mammals1 and a 
staggering 15% of the world’s known land-based plant species, with as many as 300 
species of tree in a single hectare.PHOTO CREDITS
PAGE  
cover  © Greenpeace/Beltra 
inside cover © Greenpeace/Rouvillois
4  © Greenpeace/D’Avila 
6  © Greenpeace/Petterson 
7  © Greenpeace/Beltra 
10-11  © Greenpeace/Beltra 
12  © Pantoja/Infoto 
14-15  © Greenpeace/Beltra 
16  © Greenpeace/D’Avila 
19  © Greenpeace/Fonseca
20   © Greenpeace/Beltra;  
 © Salgado 
24-25  © Salgado
26   © Greenpeace/D’Avila;  
 © Greenpeace/Beltra
30  © Greenpeace/Beltra
31  © Ripper/ Imagens Humanas
34-35  © Greenpeace/Rudhart
36  © Greenpeace/Beltra
38  © Greenpeace/Cesar
40  © Greenpeace/Sims
42  © Greenpeace/Rudhart;  
 © Greenpeace/Sims ;
 © Greenpeace  
43  © Greenpeace/Beltra;   
© Greenpeace/Beltra;  
© Greenpeace;  
© Greenpeace;
 © Greenpeace;   
 © Greenpeace
46-47  © Greenpeace/Beltra
50  © Greenpeace/Baatz
63  © Greenpeace/Novis

64
April 2006
Greenpeace InternationalOttho Heldringstraat 5
 
1066 AZ Amsterdam  
The Netherlandswww.greenpeace.org/forest
s Printed on recycled paper – 100% post-consumer wasteGreenpeace is committed to protecting the world’s 
remaining ancient forests and the plants, animals and peoples that depend on them.