# Archivo original: endangered-forests-technical-d.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:31 -03 2025

1ECOLOGICAL COMPONENTS OF ENDANGERED FORESTS 
April 2006 
 
 ForestEthics, Greenpeace, Natural Resources Defense Council, and  
Rainforest Action Network  
 1.  B
ACKGROUND  
 
The concept of Endangered Forests emerged out of  concern over the continuing loss of critical 
forest ecological values, which has resulted from  an increasing array and intensity of stressors 
throughout the world.  Endangered Forests are native forests of high ecological  value that require 
protection from intensive industrial us e to maintain these values.   
 Note that the use of the word “endangered” shou ld not be confused with the U.S. Endangered 
Species Act (ESA), where the term carries a par ticular connotation.  Under the legal definition of 
the ESA, endangered means that a species is at risk of becoming extinct—or of ceasing to exist 
altogether.  Not all Endangered Fo rests are necessarily facing immi nent extinction; however, due 
to the threats posed by one or more stressors (cli mate change, industrial use, urbanization, etc.), 
they are in danger of loosing their ability to f unction as complete and intact, natural ecological 
communities, and thereby to continue supporting  numerous species and essential ecological 
processes.  Vulnerable forests of high ecological  value that require protection to maintain these 
values are what characterize Endangered Forests.  
2.  I
NTRODUCTION AND RATIONALE  
 
Consumers and corporations that buy and sell forest products have a growing interest in 
achieving ecologically sustainable consumption and procurement.  Ecological  sustainability is 
defined in this document as, “the capacity of ecosy stems to maintain their essential processes and 
functions and to retain their bi odiversity without impoverishment.”1  In the face of the many, 
growing stressors being placed on the world’s forests (highlighted  later in this document), the 
likelihood of reaching this fundamentally importa nt goal will require multiple strategies and 
approaches that will rely on productive interactions among governments, businesses, and 
consumers.  No single conservation strategy (e .g., creating forest reserves or certified forests) can meet the 
complex set of challenges facing th e world’s forests.  Some bene fits afforded by native forests 
require protecting large, relativel y pristine tracts, with  little or no human intervention, whereas 
others may require well-planned human interven tion, such as reinstati ng natural disturbance 
regimes or eradicating invasive exotic species.  Sustaining ecological f unctions and values for 
the worlds Endangered Forests will require multi -scale prescriptions that include additional 
protection, improved forest ma nagement, and restoration.
2 
                                                      
1 Williams, J.  2001.  Australia State of the Environment Report 2001 (Theme Report), Department of the 
Environment and Heritage, Commonwealth of Australia.  Available at: 
www.deh.gov.au/soe/2001/biodiversity/glossary.html  (April 2005). 
2 Slosser, N. et al.  2005.  The landscape context in forest conservation: integrating protection, restoration, and 
certification.  Ecological Restoration  23(1):15-23. 

 
 
 2 
It is important to emphasize that there remain significant forest areas around the world that require protection from intensive industrial use if they are to maintain their ecological values.  
These forests are the “Endangered Forests.”  Many companies have adopted, or are in the proc ess of adopting, polices promoting preservation 
or special management of ecologically significant fo rests, but they need di rection from scientists 
on defensible methods for defining and mapping such  forests.  The Endangered Forest concept is 
specifically intended to provide this scien tific underpinning with a focus on ecological 
sustainability.    Ecological sustainability is different  from but not incompatible with sustainable forest 
management , which attempts to simultaneously sustain a full range of economic, societal, and 
environmental values.
3  Thus, whereas ecological sustainab ility focuses heavily on sustaining the 
natural ecological values of forests, sustainable forest management may seek to sustain certain 
(perhaps lower) levels of ecological values while also managing for economic (e.g., sustained 
timber production), recreational, or other goals.  The concept of sustainable forest management 
has grown in popularity at the inte rgovernmental level.  For example, the Montréal Process for 
Criteria and Indicators was cr eated in 1994 with the mission of  providing policy makers with 
information about temperate and boreal forests in  support of sustainable forest management.  
This international effort includes 12 signatory na tions that account for 90 percent of the world's 
temperate and boreal forests in the northern and southern hemispheres and approximately 60 
percent of all of the world’s forests.4 
 Advocates of the Endangered Forest concept fully recognize the role of these and other 
sustainable forest management efforts.  Howe ver, they emphasize sustaining ecological values, 
which have historically been co mpromised in favor of economic and social values in forest 
management decisions.  
3.  S
TATUS AND IMPORTANCE OF FORESTS  
 
Forests cover approximately 3.9 billion hectares or  30 percent of the earth’s land surface. This is 
about half the amount of forested land that wa s present at the dawn of  agriculture roughly 10,000 
years ago.5  Only about a fifth of the world’s original  forest cover remains in relatively large, 
undisturbed tracts, with 70 percent of these remaining “intact fore sts” found in three countries – 
Russia, Canada, and Brazil.6  Much of the world’s forests are no longer in their original 
condition, having changed in composition, structure, and function to varying degrees.  Fifty-six 
percent of the world’s forests are tropical/s ubtropical, 44 percent are temperate/boreal, and 
                                                      
3 Roundtable on Sustainable Forests.  Available at: www.sustainableforests .net/management.php  (April 2005). 
4 Montreal Process Working Group.  1998-2005.  Available at: www.mpci.org/whatis_e.html  (April 2005). 
5 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).  2001.  State of the World’s Forests 2001.  
Rome, Italy.  Available at: http://www. fao.org/forestry/index.jsp  (April 2005).  AND United Nations Environmental 
Program’s Global Environment Outlook 3 (GEO) 2002, p. 92. Nairobi, Kenya. Available at: 
http://www.unep.org/GEO/geo3/english/pdfs/c hapter2-3_forests.pdf   (April 2006). 
6 Bryant, D., et al.  1997.  The Last Frontier Forests: Ecosystems and Economies on the Edge.  World Resources 
Institute: Washington, D.C. 

 
 
 3approximately 5 percent of the world’s forest s are currently classified as plantations.7  In spite of 
the many changes that have occurred within them, the world’s natural forests remain critical to 
the overall ecological health of our planet; they  contain over half of the world’s biodiversity, 
making them the richest of all terrestrial systems.8   
 Forests provide a wide range of socioeconomic a nd ecological benefits (or ecosystem services).  
The Millennium Assessment (2005) identified four  basic categories of ec osystem services: (1) 
supporting, (2) provisioning, (3) regula ting, and (4) cultural (Figure 1).
9  Supporting services 
provided by forests such as producing oxygen, rebu ilding soils, and cycling nutrients make 
possible all of the other services.  
 
 
 
    
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
    
 
  
                                                     
 
7 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).  2001.  State of the World’s Forests 2001.  
Rome, Italy.  Available at: http://www.fa o.org/forestry/index.jsp  (April 2005). 
8 UNEP, Convention on Biological Diversity.  Forest Biodiversity.  Available at: 
http://www.biodiv.org/programme s/areas/forest/  (April 2004). 
9 The Millennium Assessment.  2005.  Millennium Ecosystem Assessment Synthesis Report.  Available at: 
http://www.millenniumassessment.org/en/index.aspx  (April 2005). Ecosystem Services 
 
 
 
Supporting 
  
• Nutrient Cycling 
• Soil Formation 
• Primary  
      Production 
• etc. Provisioning 
• Food 
• Freshwater 
• Wood and Fiber 
• Fuel 
• etc. 
Regulating 
• Climate Regulation 
• Flood Regulation 
• Disease Regulation 
• Water Purification 
• etc. 
Cultural 
• Aesthetic 
• Spiritual 
• Educational 
• Recreational 
• etc. 
Figure 1 .  Diagram depicting four classes of ecosystem 
services as described by The Millennium Assessment 
(2005). 

 
 
 4Under provisioning services, forest s provide medicines, food, fuel, and a wide array of wood and 
other products including building materials and pa per products.  Because of the direct link to 
local and global economics, more atte ntion has been paid to this cla ss of service than any other.  
Human use of forests for obtai ning provisions varies markedly  among cultures and countries 
around the world.  For example, developed co untries produce and consume approximately 70 
percent of the world’s total value-added w ood products (lumber, plywood and veneer, and 
pulpwood) while developing countries consume r oughly 90 percent of the world’s fuelwood and 
charcoal, with the total volume of fuelwood and charcoal slightly exceed ing that of industrial 
roundwood.   Global consumption of wood products is  approximately 3.3 billion cubic meters 
per year and rising, and the average consumption rate is 0.55 cubic meters per person per year.  
Per capita wood use in most developed countries  is much higher (e.g., 2.1 cubic meters per 
person per year in the U.S.).10  Demand for fuelwood and charcoal is expected to increase at a 
rate of approximately 1.1 percent per y ear between 1999 and 2010 while the demand for 
industrial roundwood is expected to  increase at a rate of 1.7 per cent per year over this same 
period.11  World demand for paper and paperboard is forecast to grow from the current 300 
million tons to over 420 million tons by the year 2010 or an average growth rate of 2.8% per 
year.12 
 Forests also provide many esse ntial regulatory services, whic h, although less obvious to most 
citizens, have the greatest ove rall impact on human well-being
13.  Until recently, these essential 
services have been largely regarded as “i ntangible benefits” or “economic externalities”14 even 
though their combined value has been estimated to exceed US$4.7 trillion – or about 10 percent 
of the gross world product.15  Among their many regulatory se rvices, forests moderate water 
flow into rivers and streams; prevent erosion; and filter and purify water.16  They regulate local 
temperature, moisture , and weather conditions17 and serve as a major regulator of global climate.  
Forests remove the prim ary greenhouse gas (CO 2) from the atmosphere and exude oxygen.  In 
fact, forests systems including soils hold about 62 –78 percent of the world’ s terrestrial biospheric 
carbon, more than any other ecosystem.18   
 Forests provide numerous cultural values that  cannot be quantified but whose impacts are 
immense.  Forests have frequently played a ma jor role in shaping human societies since the 
                                                      
10 Howard, J.R.  1999.  U.S. timber production, trade, consumption, and price statistics 1965-1997.  General 
Technical Report FPL-GTR-116.  USDA Forest Serv ice, Forest Products Laboratory.  Madison, WI. 
11 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).  1999.  State of the World’s Forests 1999.  
Rome, Italy.  Available at: http://www.fa o.org/forestry/index.jsp  (April 2005). 
12 ABARE-Jaakko Pöyry.  1999.  Global Outlook for Plantations.  ABARE Research Report 99.9, Canberra. 
13 The Millennium Assessment.  2005.  Millennium Ecosystem Assessment Synthesis Report.  Available at: 
http://www.millenniumassessment.org/en/index.aspx  (April 2005). 
14 Daily, G.C. (editor).  1997.  Nature’s Services. Societ al Dependence on Natural Ecosystems.  Island Press, 
Washington, D.C. 
15 Larsen, J.  2002.  Forest cover shrinking.  Earth Policy Institute.  Available at:  http://www.earth-
policy.org/Indicators/indicator4.htm (April 2005) 
16 Maltby, E.  1997.  Peatlands:  The science case for conservation and sound management.  Pages 121-131, in: 
Parkyn, L., et al. (editors)  Conserving Peatlands.  Cent re for Agriculture and Biosciences (CAB) International, 
Wallingford, U.K. 
17 Hall, J.P., et al.  1990.  A Forestry Canada approach to environmental forestry.  The Forestry Chronicle  66 (2): 
138-142. 
18 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.  2001.  IP CC Special Report on The Re gional Impacts of Climate 
Change An Assessment of Vulnerability.  Available at: www.grida.no/climate/ipcc/regional/index.htm (April 2004). 

 
 
 5origin of man.  Based on existing data, approxi mately 2/3 of the known ethnolinguistic centers 
originated in temperate and tropi cal forest biomes.  Many people s remain strongly linked to the 
ecosystem services provided by forests, and fo rests remain firmly integrated into their 
economies, religions, values, beliefs, and ritu als.  For many people living in industrialized 
nations, personal links to forests has been severed to varying degr ees, but the almost innate love 
for forests remains.   
4.  T
HREATS TO FORESTS  
 
Threats to native forests are severe and growi ng.  From the onset of the Industrial Revolution, 
forests have undergone dramatic a nd widespread changes.  Over th e past 50 years, humans have 
changed natural ecosystems (including forests) fa ster than in any other period in human history.19  
Driving many of these threats is a growing hu man population, which is currently over 6 billion 
and doubling every three to four decades.  The hu man population is expected to nearly stabilize 
at just over 10 billion by 2200.20  Based on today’s consump tion rates, demand for wood 
products alone would increase from 3.3 billion cubic meters per year today to 5.2 million cubic meters per year by 2050.
21  However, this does not take in to account the spread of technology 
and the concomitant increase in resource consumption, which is currently doubling every decade 
or two.  The combined effect of human populatio n growth and increased per-capita resource use 
amplifies environmental impacts.22 
 Forests must contend with both deterministic (or direct) impacts (e.g., logging, road building, 
and mining) as well as stochastic ones (e.g., wildfi re and disease).  Dire ct impacts are significant 
and expected to increase over time as the human population grows and demand for forest 
products swells.  Managing and monitoring fore sts under the best of conditions is becoming 
increasingly challenging, and made far more difficult by the large levels of illegal logging in 
some parts of the world.   Illegal logging is al so an increasing threat to forests worldwide, 
especially in Indonesia where th e government estimates that as much as 90% of the country’s 
timber production is unlawful.
23 
  Numerous studies demonstrate synergistic effect s from multiple stressors acting concurrently on 
forests.  The combined effects of factors such as logging, fire, insect pe sts, livestock grazing, and 
invasive alien species have had profound and of ten unpredictable negative consequences in many 
native forests.
24  Furthermore, it may take decades for a species to disappear from a landscape 
after a point of no return has been surpasse d by multiple (sometimes compounding) stresses. 
                                                      
19 The Millennium Assessment.  2005.  Millennium Ecosystem Assessment Synthesis Report.  Available at: 
www.millenniumassessment.org/en/index.aspx  (April 2005). AND Vitousek, P.M., et al.  1997.  Human 
domination of the Earth’s ecosystems.  Science  277:494-499. 
20 UN, Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division.  Available at: 
www.un.org/esa/population/publications/sixbillion/sixbilpart1.pdf  (April 2005). 
21 Society of American Foresters.  2005.  World forest ry: A position of the Society of American Foresters.  
Available at: www.safnet.org/policyandpress/psst/WorldForestry_6302.cfm  (April 2005). 
22 Woodwell, G.M.  2001.  Forests in a Full World .  Yale University Press, New Haven, CT. 
23 Greenpeace.  April 2006.  Kayu Lapis Indonesia, the Untouchabl e God of Indonesian anci ent forest destruction  
24 Lindenmayer, D.  1995.  Disturbance, forest wildlife conservation and a conservative basis for management in the 
mountain ash forests of Victoria.  Forest Ecology and Management  74:223-231. 

 
 
 6 
The leading threats to biodiversity, which E.O.  Wilson terms the “mindless horsemen of the 
environmental apocalypse,” are habitat destructio n, alien invasive specie s, overexploitation, and 
exotic disease.25  Some would add pollution as a fifth horseman26, and climate change could soon 
equal or surpass habitat destru ction as the leading cause of  species endangerment.  The 
Millennium Assessment created a matrix showing le vels of impact from five major drivers of 
biodiversity decline for three major forest biomes (Table 1).   Table 1.  Matrix showing five major drivers of biodiversity decline for the three major forest 
biomes.  Shaded boxes denote impact over the last  century (black = very  high; medium gray = 
high; light gray = moderate; white = low) and the arrows indicate current trends (arrow straight 
up = very rapid increase of impact; arrow angl ed up = increasing impact; horizontal arrow = 
continuing impact; and arrow angled down = decreasing impact).
27 
 
 Habitat 
Destruction Climate 
Change Alien Invasive 
Species Overexploitation Pollution 
(e.g., nitrogen) 
Boreal Forest 
     
 
Temperate 
Forest       
Tropical Forest       
 
 
Habitat Destruction  
 
The Millennium Assessment reports that habita t destruction remains the leading immediate 
threat to the world’s forest bi odiversity, particularly in tropica l and boreal forests, which were 
many of the same regions reported as having high levels of “ frontier forest s” as reported by 
Bryant et al. (1997) in cluding the Northern Amazon Basin and Guyana Shield, Canadian and 
Russian boreal regions, Indone sia, and Central Africa.28  Further support for this assertion in 
provided by the most recent global FAO Forest A ssessment that reports global forest cover was 
reduced by 2.2 percent between 199 0 and 2000, with the most sign ificant changes occurring in 
Africa (-7.8%), South America (-4.1%), and Oceani a (-1.8%).  Europe was the only region in the 
world that posted forest area ga ins (+0.8%) during this time period.29  However, it is important to 
                                                      
25 Wilson, E.O.  1992.  The Diversity of Life.  Ca mbridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 
26 Wilcove, D., et al.  2000.  Leading threats to biodiversity .  in, Precious Heritage:  The Status of Biodiversity in the 
United States.  Oxford University Press, New York, NY. 
27 The Millennium Assessment.  2005.  Millennium Ecosystem Assessment Synthesis Report.  Available at: 
www.millenniumassessment.org/en/index.aspx  (April 2005). 
28 Bryant, D., et al.  1997.  The Last Frontier Forests: Ecosystems and Economies on the Edge. World Resources 
Institute: Washington, D.C. 
29 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).  2001.  State of the World’s Forests 2001.  
Rome, Italy.  Available at: www.fao.org/forestry/index.jsp  (April 2005). 

 
 
 7point out that measuring changes in  forest cover is difficult due to the lack of direct measurement 
and complexity of using remote sensing in global  monitoring.  In fact, independent studies in 
Indonesia and Brazil suggest th at FAO results tend to underestimate actual forest loss.30   
 Deforestation is expected to continue in many of the same regions that posted losses over the last 
decade.  However, there is more to habitat dest ruction than conversion, a nd much more forested 
land is impacted each year than  can be effectively monitored by global or national assessments.  
Even in regions where total forest area is increa sing or stable, forest health is being degraded by 
various impacts that operate at re gional and local scales, such as  (1) reduction or elimination of 
old growth seral stages; (2) changes in natural fo rest composition; (3) conversion of native forest 
to plantation forests; (4) lives tock grazing; (5) damage to soil fertility; (6) road building; (7) 
forest fragmentation; and (8) alteration of natural disturbance regimes . 
 Plantation forestry is a particul arly challenging topic, for it can  be both a threat and a partial 
solution to the forest biodiversity crisis.  If applied carefully, plantati ons can help alleviate 
pressures on the remaining native forests, because they can produce more wood faster and on less land.  In 2000, five percent of the world’s fore sts were classified as plantations, but they 
produced 35 percent of the roundwood volume; and th is proportion is expect ed to increase to 44 
percent by 2020.
31  However, many of the best locations for plantations also contain many native 
forest biodiversity values.  Where native fore sts are replaced by planta tion forests (especially 
ones planted with exotic trees),  native biodiversity can be se verely compromised or lost 
altogether.32   
 Plantation forestry has a long history in Europe, fr om where it has spread to other regions with 
increasing demand for wood.  In the southeastern U.S., plantation acreage grew from one percent 
of timbered area in 1952 to 48 percent in 1999
33; and plantations have expanded rapidly 
throughout portions of Chile.34  An increase in plantation fore stry is expected to continue 
particularly in locations where yields can be kept high and production costs low.35 
 
Alien Species Invasion  
 
Invasion by alien species is second only to ha bitat destruction in de trimental effects on 
biodiversity.36  Alien invasions tend to be surreptitious, mildly to extremely disruptive to native 
species and ecosystem processes, and o ccasionally are ecologically transforming.37  Sometimes 
                                                      
30 UNDP, UNEP, World Bank, and World Resource Institute.  2000.  World Resources 2000-2002: People and 
ecosystems: The fraying web of life.   
31 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).  2001.  State of the World’s Forests 2001.  
Rome, Italy.  Available at: www.fao.org/forestry/index.jsp  (April 2005). 
32 Hunter, M.L.  1999.  Maintaining Biodiversity in Fore st Ecosystems.  Cambridge University Press.  New York 
NY. 
33 USDA Forest Service.  2002.  Southern Forest Resour ce Assessment. D. N. Wear and J.G. Greis (editors).  
Technical Report GTR SRS-53, US Forest Service Southeast Region. 
34 Neira E., et al.  2002.  Chile’s Frontier Forests: Cons erving a Global Treasure. A Global Forest Watch Report. 
World Resources Institute and US Forest Service. 
35 The Millennium Assessment.  2005.  Millennium Ecosystem Assessment Synthesis Report.  Available at: 
www.millenniumassessment.org/en/index.aspx  (April 2005). 
36 Wilson, E.O.  1992.  The Diversity of Life.  W.W. Norton and Company, New York, NY. 
37 Vitousek, P.M., et al.  1997.  Introduced species: a si gnificant component of human- caused global change.  New 

 
 
 8the introduction of alien species ar e introduced intentionally (for exam ple, exotic tree plantations 
or introduced game animals), but more frequently  alien species are intro duced by accident.  The 
risk of introducing alien invasive species has grown recent response to market globalization and 
increased international trade.    Alien tree diseases and pests have been particul arly disruptive, causing widespread damage to 
regional forest industries and eco logical integrity.  For exampl e, the American chestnut once 
accounted for a quarter of the standing timber in eastern North America, and it became the most 
popular commercial species in the region by the mid-1880s.  Ecologically, the American 
chestnut was a dominant component of the eas tern deciduous forest ecosystem upon which many 
other species depended.  In 1904, the New York Z oological Park imported Asian chestnut in the 
hope of crossbreeding American and Asian forms to produce a tree that provided high-quality 
timber and large nuts.  Unfortunately, the Asian chestnut specimens cont ained fungus blight to 
which the American form had no resistance.  Within 50 years, the American chestnut was effectively eliminated from eastern North America.
38 
 Stressors of forested ecosystems often operate in powerful synergistic ways, reducing our ability to predict the types and magnitude  of changes that may occur.  For example, habitat disturbance 
makes forests more susceptible to alien invasions
39, and invading species in turn can alter 
natural disturbance regimes , thus increasing alie n invasion rates even more in a positive 
feedback loop.40  These kinds of interactions can lead  to substantial ecological changes with 
fundamental shifts in ecological pr ocesses and losses to native species.41 
 
Climate Change  
 
Of all the identified drivers of forest biodive rsity loss, climate cha nge has the potential to 
become the leading agent in the coming decades, a lthough its effects remain difficult to predict.  
Since 1900, the burning of fossil fuels has contri buted the most to atmospheric green house 
gases, although clearing and burning of tr opical forests accounts for between 20-25% of 
anthropogenic greenhouse gases released each year.42  Forests act in concert with climate –
influencing it while at the same time being imp acted by it.  Prior to 1900, deforestation was the 
dominant source of increased atmospheric CO 2 (the dominant greenhouse gas).  Since then, the 
burning of fossil fuels has contributed most to greenhouse gases, although harvesting of forests 
still accounts for 25 percent of released atmospheric CO 2 each year.43  When large areas are left 
undisturbed and forest growth exceed s harvest, forests can reduce CO 2 levels in the atmosphere 
and therefore are important tools for slowing global climate cha nge.  Unfortunately, the capacity 
                                                                                                                                                                           
Zealand Journal of Ecology 21:1-16.  AND  Parker, I.M., et al.  1999.  Impact: toward a framework for 
understanding the ecological effects of invaders.  Biological Invasions  1:3-19. 
38 Van Driesche, J. and R. Van Driesche.  2000.  Natu re Out of Place.  Island Press, Washington, D.C. 
39 Orians, G.H.  1986.  Site characteristics favoring invasions.  Pp. 133-148  In: H.A. Mooney and J.A. Drake 
(editors), Ecology of Biological Invasions of North America and Hawaii.  Springer-Verlag, New York, NY. 
40 Mack, M.C. and C.M. D’Antonio.  1998.  Impacts of biological invasions on disturbance regimes.  TREE  13:195-
198. 
41 Vitousek, P.M.  1986.  Pp. 163-178  In: H.A. Mooney and J.A. Drake (editors), Ecology of Biological Invasions 
of North America and Hawaii.  Springer-Verlag, New York, NY. 
42 Moutinho, P. and S. Schwartzman.  2005.  Tropical Deforestation and Climate Change.  Amazon Institute of 
Environmental Research. 
43 Metafore.  Available at: www.c ertifiedwood.org  (April 2005). 

 
 
 9of the world’s forests to maintain native com position, structure, and function (including their 
capacity to sequester carbon) is being increasi ngly compromised by the multitude of stressors 
they face.  Predictions concerning the types and severity of changes expected in forest ecosystem 
composition, structure, and function vary  by forest biome and regional history.
44  Most of the 
world’s forests are expected to experience some le vel of disturbance due to the changing climate, 
posing a serious threat to global forest biodiversity45, forest-based economies, and ecosystem 
services.  A growing body of scie ntific literature indicates th at climate changes is already 
affecting forests by shifting species ranges, fostering pests and pa thogens, altering fire 
disturbance regimes, changing migration patterns,  and causing species extinctions.  Northern 
latitude and mountain forest systems are showing the greatest changes.  For example, in the 
Canadian boreal, increased fire freq uency and intensity has been reported46 while climate change 
is being postulated as the primary cause of some amphibian extincti ons in tropical cloud 
forests.47  
 Recent research also demonstrates a time lag between increasing greenhouse gas concentrations 
and measurable climate change and associated im pacts.  This means that even if greenhouse gas 
concentrations are stabilized, global warming will continue into the future, with even greater 
changes in the future than t hose we have already observed.
48  This argues for a rapid and 
significant response to reducing gr eenhouse gasses – and forest cons ervation plays a role in this 
response.  It is important to evaluate cumulative effects of all stressors acting together in Endangered 
Forests.  This will help in prioritizing whic h forest areas require the most immediate mapping 
and protection.  Understanding cumulative and syne rgistic threats is also essential to designing 
management prescriptions to  counter adverse effects. 
 
5.
  ECOLOGICAL COMPONENTS OF ENDANGERED FORESTS  
 
Ecological components used to define Endangere d Forests were derived from key ecological 
components identified by scienc e-based reserve-design efforts,49 and are based on an evolving 
discussion among environmentalists, corporations, and scientists.50  The components include: 
                                                      
44 Watson, R.T., et al.  1997.  IPCC Special Report on th e Regional Impacts of Climat e Change: An Assessment of 
Vulnerability.  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.  Available at: www.grida.no/climate/ipcc/regional/198.htm  (April 2004). 
45 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 2001.  State of the World’s Forests 2001.  
Rome, Italy.  Available at: www.fao.org/forestry/index.jsp  (April 2005). 
46 Gillett, N.P., et al.  2004.  Detecting the effect of climat e change on Canadian forest fires.  Geophysical Research 
Letters  31 (18): L18211. 
47 Pounds, A., et al.  1999.  Biological response to climate change on a tropical mountain.  Nature  398:611-615. 
48 Meehl, G.A., et al.  2005.  How much more global warming and sea level rise?  Science  307(18):1769-1772. 
49 For example, see World Wildlife Fund’s ecoregiona l assessments, the Forest Stewardship Council’s High 
Conservation Value Forest categories, Conservation Inte rnational’s Biodiversity Hotspots, and World Resources 
Institute Last Frontier  Forests.  ALSO SEE:  Myers, N., et al.  2000.  Biodiversity hotspots for conservation 
priorities.  Nature 403: 853-858.  AND  Groves, C.R., et al.  2002.  Planning for biodiversity conservation: Putting 
conservation science into  practice.  BioScience  52:499-512.  AND  Wade, T.G., et al.  2003.  Distribution and 
causes of global forest fragmentation.  Conservation Ecology 7(2): 7.  Available at: www.consecol.org/vol7/iss2/art7  

 
 
 10 
Landscape Integrity Components  
1) Intact forest landscapes  Geographically isolated forests 2) Remnant forests and rest oration cores, including: 
3) Landscape connectivity  
 
Biodiversity Components  
4) Rare forest types (c omposition and structure) 
5) Forests of high species ric hness (alpha and beta diversity) 
6) Forests containing high concentrati ons of rare and endangered species 
7) Forests of high endemism 8) Core habitat for focal speci es (aquatic and terrestrial) 
9) Forests exhibiting rare ecologi cal and evolutionary phenomena 
  
Landscape Integrity Components
 
 
1)  Intact forest landscapes  
 
There is no place on Earth not affected by modern humans51, but some regions have been more 
directly and severely impacted than others.  We know that natural forest landscapes lose 
components and functionality as human uses e xpand and continue over time.  Some ecosystem 
changes can be quite gradual (e .g., loss of interior forest hab itat over time) while others are 
punctuated (e.g., loss of a keystone species ).  Intactness is not a bi nary (yes/no) quality, but 
actually one of degree.  One can envision a c ontinuum of intactness from a totally pristine 
environment on one end to a totally developed environment on the other.  Quantifiable and 
replicable indices and scales of measurement ar e needed to score landscap es on this continuum.  
Although significant progress is being made,52 this area of applied research remains quite young.  
Nevertheless, although ranking forest  landscapes by their relative in tactness may be imperfect, it 
need not be arbitrary.  And despite imperfect  knowledge, rating forest intactness remains a 
conservation imperative. 
 
An intact forest landscape  does not necessarily consist of old trees and may not even be entirely 
forested. Simply stated, intact forest landscape s are contiguous mosaics of natural habitat types 
(forest and non-forest alike) in forest-dominated ecoregions  that have either never been 
subjected to industrial hu man activities or have sufficiently r ecovered from such activities in the 
past to the point where the composition, struct ure, and function of the forest landscape are 
                                                                                                                                                                           
(April 2004). 
50 Sometimes called the “Wye Group” after an early meeti ng at Wye River, Maryland, the organizations supporting 
this description of endangered forest values have been wo rking together and with other environmentalists, scientists, 
and interested corporations to develop Endangered Forests Values. 
51 Vitousek, P.V., et al.  1997.  Human alteration of the glob al nitrogen cycle: sources an d consequences.  Ecological 
Applications  7 (3):737-750. 
52 Anderson, J. E.  1991.  A conceptual framework for evaluating and quantifying naturalness.  Conservation 
Biology  5 (3):347-352 AND Angermeier, P.L.  2000.  The natural imperative for biological conservation. 
Conservation Biology  14 (2):373-381. 

 
 
 11relatively complete. In some localities (e.g., por tions of Canada, Russia, Amazonia, Central 
Africa, Indonesia, and the U. S.), these are the remaining frontier forest s as defined and mapped 
at a very coarse level by Bryant et al. in 1997 (Appendix B, MAP 1).53 In other localities, these 
are forest landscapes that have recovered from previous human disturbance to the point where 
they possess many if not most of their original fo rest characteristics (e.g., portions of the eastern 
U.S. and Canada, eastern Europe, and portions of As ia). It is important to  note that these forests 
are not static.  On the contrary, an  ecosystem with a high level of intactness is one that is able to 
maintain its biodiversity and ecosystem functi onality over time – not in any fixed, quantitative 
sense, but  rather as a dynamic property.54 
 To a large extent, many of the compositional (e.g., types of species present) and structural (e.g., 
size of trees and complexity of forest canopy)  components of forest  landscapes are size-
independent.  However, home range  needs for some animal species – forests are more than a 
collection of trees – and many ecological pr ocesses (e.g., natural regeneration, natural 
disturbance, nutrient cycling, predator-prey inte ractions, and migration and dispersal) require 
considerable areal extents to operate within thei r natural range of variab ility.  Therefore, the 
definition of intact forests landscapes requires a reference to some minimum size.  But how large 
do forest landscapes have to be to be considered intact?  Ecologically, there are two main determinan ts to help answer this question – (1) natural 
disturbance regimes  and (2) area requirements for large  home range  species.  Operationally, the 
interaction of these two criteria should dictate any minimum size threshold. Unfortunately from a 
mapping standpoint, both are difficult to  rely on for determining absolute
 size thresholds and 
both criteria vary greatly from forest type to forest  type.  The best we can do with available data 
is to establish threshold es timates based on our current knowledge of these two important 
ecologically-based considerations for th e various forest systems being mapped. 
 
Natural disturbance regimes  
 
If we consider the first criterion – natural disturbance regimes  – we can illustrate how different 
forest systems require different areal extents in order to accommodate the dominant natural 
disturbance agent(s) for that fo rest type.  The objective is not  to determine the minimum size a 
single forest landscape must be to accommodate every conceivable natural disturbance event; 
rather, it is to establish a size threshold for ma pping purposes that reasonabl y reflects the scale of 
the dominant disturbance agent.  For example, fi re is the primary natural disturbance agent in 
boreal forest systems that can impact very larg e areas.  Based on the available data on fires for 
boreal Alaska and Canada over the last decade, the minimum dynamic area using one proposed technique would be approximately 30,000 ha.
 55  However, under extreme weather conditions, 
fires in the boreal can cover 100,000 - 200,000 ha, a nd occasionally over 1 million ha, in a single 
event.  How an area naturally recovers after fi re depends upon the surviv al of individual trees 
                                                      
53 Bryant, D., et al.  1997.  The Last Frontier Forests: Ecosystems and Economies on the Edge.  World Resources 
Institute: Washington, D.C . 
54 O’Neill, R.V., et al. 1986.  A hierarchical concept of eco systems.  Princeton Univers ity Press, Princeton, N.J. 
AND  Holling, C.S.  1992.  Cross-scale morphology, geometry, and dynamics of ecosystems.  Ecological 
Monographs  62:447-502. 
55 Shugart, H.H. and D.C. West.  1981.  Long term dynamics  of forest ecosystems.  American Scientist  69:647-652. 

 
 
 12and small patches (sometimes referred to as legacies),56 and on the recolonization of species and 
individuals destroyed by the fire from adjacent u ndisturbed sites.  The area necessary to ensure 
survival or recolonization of di sturbed sites has been termed minimum dynamic area .57 
 The minimum dynamic area  for many boreal forests is obviously quite large, which in part is 
what led Global Forest Watch to choose 50,000 ha as the minimum size threshold for intactness 
in boreal forests, which allowed for the consiste nt mapping of intact forest landscapes for the 
entire boreal zone (Appendix B, MAP 2).
58 
 Catastrophic windthrow (lar ge scale wind damage), especially in wind prone aspects, is a major 
disturbance agent in coastal temperate rainforests such as in Southeast Alaska and coastal British 
Columbia, where a single event can impact hundreds of hectares.
59  A reasonable minimum size 
threshold for these systems might be 5,000 ha, wh ich is the threshold Global Forest Watch has 
used in Chile, Alaska, and draft maps of intact forests in British Columbia (which were created 
using satellite images and ancillary data).  In many deciduous forests around the world, phase gap dynamics (the loss of individual trees or 
small clusters of trees from wind or ice) is the most important natural disturbance regime ; phase 
gap dynamics impact approximately one percen t of the forest canopy per year in deciduous 
forests in the United States.
60  Based on phase gap dynamics, a reasonable minimum size 
threshold for these systems might be 500 ha.  
Home range
 
 
The second forest intactness threshold considera tion is the area required to maintain viable 
populations of large home range  forest species.  As with natura l disturbances, the objective is 
not to determine the size a single forest landscap e has to be to maintain an entire viable 
population of a given species in this case, but rath er to determine a meaningful forest landscape 
size that provides functional habitat blocks for th e particular species bein g evaluated.  In some 
instances, these areal estimates will fall below the areal estimates for natural disturbance.  In other cases, the minimum size of intact forest la ndscapes will need to be adapted to account for 
this additional information.  For example, a r easonable minimum size threshold for some eastern 
deciduous forest types is 500 ha. Ho wever, if one considers the area requirements for the forest 
                                                      
56 Perry, D.A.  1994.  Forest Ecosystems.  John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. 
57 Pickett, S.T.A. and J.N. Thompson.  1978.  Patch dynamics and the design of nature reserves.  Biological 
Conservation  13:27-37. 
58 Yaroshenko, et al.  2001.  Last Intact Fo rest Landscapes of Northern European Russia . 
Global Forest Watch.  Available at: www.globalforestw atch.org/english/russia/maps.htm (12/08/03); Aksenov, 
D.E., et al.  2002.  Atlas of Russia’s Intact Forest Landscapes .  Global Forest Watch.  Available at: 
www.globalforestwatch.org/english/russia/maps.htm (12/08/03)  AND  Lee, P., et al.  2003.  Canada’s Large Intact Forest Landscapes.  Global Forest Watch Canada, Edmonton, Alberta.  Available at: www.globalforestwatch.ca 
(April 2004). 
59 Nowacki, G.J. and M.G. Kramer.  1998.  The effects of wind disturbance on temperate rain forest structure and 
dynamics of Southeast Alaska. PNW-GTR-421. USDA Forest Service.  AND  Pearson, A.F.  2003.  Natural and 
logging disturbances in the temperate rain forests of the central coast, British Columbia. Vancouver, BC: Coast 
Information Team. 
60 Runkle, J.R.  1982.  Patterns of disturbance in some old-growth mesic forests of eastern North America.  Ecology 
63: 1533-1546. 

 
 
 13species with the largest area n eeds (e.g., black bear), increasi ng the size threshold may be 
warranted.  In the case of the black bear, a large territorial mammal that occurs in some eastern 
North American forests, home ranges differ considerably based on various environmental factors 
such as food productivity, den site availability, and the abundance of escape habitat.  Home 
range needs for black bears range from 1,000 - 5,000 ha for females with young and from 4,500 - 
40,000 ha for males who wander more regularly in search for mates.61  In high productivity and 
biodiversity-rich areas (i.e., some  parts of the southeastern US),  forest intactness thresholds 
should be increased from 500 ha to 1,000 - 2,000 ha. 
 
Geographically isolated forests 
 
Under some circumstances, forest landscapes ar e naturally isolated and are smaller than the 
minimum size threshold estimates for mapping intact  forest landscapes.  These relatively small 
actual islands or habitat islands should be identified as int act forests if they are undisturbed by 
industrial activity.  In southeas t Alaska, for example, there are over 27,000 forested islands 
smaller than 500 ha most of which have never been  impacted by industrial use.  Individually they 
are small, but collectively they cover over 60,000 ha.  In general, intact forest landscapes should be la rge enough to act as coarse -filter habitat anchors 
for species that require large home ranges  and should also be large enough to recover from 
natural disturbance even ts without losing their natural resilience .  In parts of the world where 
there is not a clear set of  size thresholds for the different fore st systems, the most pragmatic and 
useful approach would be to first map the be st remaining examples of the relatively large
 intact 
forest landscapes for each forest ecoregion  and then to map smaller forest landscape units.  This 
should be done on an ecoregional basis since eco regions are widely believed to be the most 
ecologically useful organizing unit for conservation purposes.62 
 Intact forest landscapes form the primary nuclei for maintaining the remaining biodiversity and 
natural processes in forest landscapes around the world, which in turn, provide extremely 
important ecosystem services to human societies as outlined earlie r in this document.  Some of 
the services operate at global sc ales (e.g., intact forests are ex tremely important for regulating 
global carbon); others operate at regional scales (e.g., intact forests help regulate regional 
climate); and still others operate  at local scales (e.g., intact fo rests protect local drinking water 
supplies and stabilize hillsides).  Intact areas form one of th e most critical components in 
developing a global framework fo r ecological sustainability as  they form the foundation for 
regional forest conservation plans.  As the wo rld’s human population co ntinues to climb along 
with a simultaneous increase in  overall consumption, intact forest landscapes are becoming 
increasingly rare at the global level.  Examining ecological components at multiple spatial scales is an extremely important aspect of 
identifying and mapping Endangered Forests.  Forest management occurs at the forest 
management unit level, so there is a natural te ndency to consider only a particular forest  
                                                      
61 Rudis, V.A. and J.B. Tansey.  1995.  Regional assessment of remote forests and black bear habitat from forest 
resource surveys.  Journal of Wildlife Management  59: 170-180. 
62 Olson, D.M., et al.  2001.  Terrestrial ecoregions of the world:  A new map of life on Earth.  Bioscience   51 (11): 
933-938. 

 
 
 14management unit when addressing Endangered Forest s.  However, without adequate perspective 
from global, regional, and subreg ional spatial scales, it is virtually impossible to evaluate 
ecological components properly, establish meani ngful ecological thresholds, and maintain 
consistency and replicability.  Only by consider ing multiple spatial scales in relation to the 
different ecological components can  these be achieved (Figure 3).  For example, in ecoregions 
with few remaining intact forest landscapes (e.g ., southern boreal ecoregions of Canada), most 
remaining intact forest landscapes should be id entified as Endangered Forests and targeted for 
strict protection within a regi onal conservation framework.  In ecoregions dominated by intact 
forest landscapes (e.g., northern boreal ecoregion s of Canada), not every intact polygon should 
be identified as an Endangered Forest based on the criterion of intactness alone.  By working 
through the other ecological compon ents reviewed in this document , a subset would be identified 
based on their collective value.  Under these circumstances, the precautionary principle  would 
be followed until the remaining values were adeq uately evaluated.  At the conclusion of the 
assessment, some of the intact forest landscapes  would be open for some industrial use provided 
that the maintenance of ecological integrity re mains an overriding guiding principle and that 
compliance to this end is supported by ongoing monitoring results.  
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
           2)  Remnant forests and restoration cores  
 
Remnant forests and restoration cores (or remnan t blocks) are the remaining forest landscapes 
that are globally, ecoregionally, or locally rare as a result of histor ic and current human activities.  
It is important to evaluate these remaining fore st landscape blocks in all ecoregions, but it is 
particularly important in those ecoregions that are the most h eavily altered by industrial human 
activities.  In some regions of the world, thes e are the only remaining patches of forest upon Global Scale
Regional Scale 
Subregional Scale 
Forest Management Unit 
Figure 3 .  Diagram depicting multiscale assessment units desired for 
identif ying and ma pping Endan gered Forests.e.g., Biomes 
e.g., Ecozone or 
Ecoprovince 
e.g., Ecoregion 

 
 
 15which to build a regional forest conservation strategy.  Some remnant forests are comprised 
primarily of native species (relatively intact but sm all in area), in which case they may be highly 
prized for protection.  More often, these forest landscapes have experienced some losses to their 
overall natural quality and will require some re storation activities to improve their biological 
value to the region.  At the global level, heavily a ltered and degraded regions incl ude: Atlantic Forests of South 
America, Southeastern Mixed and Coniferous Fo rests of the U.S., Redwood Forests of the U.S., 
Lowland Tropical Rainforests of Indonesia, a nd Tropical Dry Forests of Thailand and Costa 
Rica.  Data on remnant blocks in  these areas at the regional and local levels is scattered but 
important to collect.  For example, roadless forest  blocks have been mapped for some regions in 
the United States (e.g., National Forests), but much more work is necessary in many parts of the 
world.  Once identified and mapped on an ecoregion-by -ecoregion basis, potential remnant blocks 
should be included as another im portant building block in Endange red Forest mapping efforts.  
And as with intact forest lands capes, assessing which blocks w ould be identified as Endangered 
Forests will require a solid unders tanding of their collective valu es as well as their regional 
context and history.  In regions where there are few or even no remaining intact blocks, remnant 
blocks become more important, but that doe s not mean that all remnant blocks would 
automatically be classified as an Endangered Fo rest.  In ecoregions where remnant blocks are 
rare, it may be that all of them would be identifi ed as Endangered Forests, but in most areas only 
the remnant blocks that either possessed th e highest conservation va lue or potential for 
successful restoration would be designated as such. 
 
3)  Landscape connectivity 
 
Overall, habitat loss and fragmentation is consider ed to be the most impor tant factor leading to 
the loss of native species (especially in forested landscapes), and to be one  of the primary causes 
of the present extinction crisis.63  Habitat fragmentation is gene rally defined as the process of 
subdividing a continuous habitat type  into smaller patches, which re sults in the lo ss of original 
habitat, a reduction in patch size, an d the increasing isolation of patches.64  Depending on the 
severity of the fragmentation process and on th e sensitivity of the ecosystems affected, native 
plants and animals and many natural ecosystem  processes (e.g., nutri ent cycling, pollination, 
predator-prey in teractions, and natural disturbance regimes ) are compromised or fundamentally 
altered.  For many plant and animal species, migr ation between suitable habitat patches becomes 
more difficult, leading to smaller population si zes, decreased gene fl ow, and possible local 
extinctions.65 
 
                                                      
63 Wilcox B.A. and D.D. Murphy.  1985.  Conservation strategy:  The effects of fragmentation on extinction. 
American Naturalist   125:879-887. 
64 Andrén H.  1994.  Effects of habitat fragmentation on birds and mammals in landscapes  with different proportions 
of suitable habitat: a review.  Oikos  71(1994):355-366. 
65 Wilcove, D.S.  1987.  From fragmentation to extinction.   Natural Areas Journal 7:23-29. AND Vermeulen, J.W. 
1993.  The composition of the carabid fauna on poor sandy road-side verges in relation to comparable open areas. 
Biodiversity and Conservation  2:331-350. 

 
 
 16Declines in forest species as a result of fragme ntation have been documented for numerous taxa 
including neotropical migrant songbirds,66 small mammals,67 and invertebrates.68  Forest 
fragmentation has also been closely associated with increased susceptibility to exotic invasion.69 
 To counter the negative effect s of forest fragmentation, pr omoting functional connectivity 
between existing cores of native ha bitat is fundamentally important.  This can be achieved in the 
form of actual landscape linkages  (narrow bands of native fore st habitat between existing 
protected areas or other core natural habitats) or by planni ng for an effective level of landscape 
permeability .  Both of these methods should target  area- and habitat-sensitive species.  
Landscape level connectivity is also important  for maintaining broader scale ecological 
processes (e.g., aquatic-terrestrial  interaction, natural plant and an imal dispersal, predator-prey 
interactions, and species migration), and to th e degree possible, regiona l planning should strive 
to identify important locations wher e these processes can be supported. 
 
Biodiversity Components  
 
Certain forests worldwide are recognized as cont aining globally, regionall y, or locally significant 
biodiversity values.  Biodiversity  components that can be mapped include: rare forest types, 
species rich forests, forests containing high c oncentrations of rare and endangered species, 
forests with high species endemism, core hab itat for focal conservation species, and forests 
exhibiting rare evolutionary phenomena.  As with the landscape level compon ents, it is important to cons ider the biodiversity components 
at multiple scales (i.e., global, regional, subregional, and local).  Unlike the landscape components of Endangered Forest identific ation and mapping, however, biodiversity 
components require additional contextual informa tion regarding such things as representation 
and population viability analyses, which are f undamental aspects of several biodiversity 
components.  
4) Rare forest types (composition and structure) 
 Rare forest types are restricted in occurrence and extent at various  spatial scales.  Some forest 
types are naturally rare due to somewhat unusua l and spatially restrict ed combinations of 
climate, topography, geology, soils,  and other ecological factors.  At the global scale, commonly 
cited examples of rare major
 forest types include Mediterran ean climate forests (five regions 
worldwide), temperate rainforests (seven regions  worldwide), Madagascar forests, and island 
forests (e.g., Hawaii, New Guinea, and parts of Indonesia).  These forest regions are 
comparatively rare to other major forest t ypes found around the world and many of these have 
been heavily altered by industrial human activ ity, making sites of reasonable quality highly 
valued for protection. 
                                                      
66 Ambuel, B. and S.A.Temple.  1983.  Area-dependent ch anges in the bird communities and vegetation of southern 
Wisconsin forests.  Ecology 64:1057-1068. 
67 Verboom, B. and R. Apeldoorn.  1990.  Effects of habitat fragmentation on the red squirrel, Sciurus vulgaris  L. 
Landscape Ecology   4:171-176. 
68 Mader, H.J.  1984.  Animal habitat isolation by roads and agricultural fields.  Biological Conservation  29:81-96. 
69 Rejmanek, M.  1989.  Invasibility of plant communities.  Pages 369-388 in Drake J.A., et al. (editors).  Biological 
Invasions:  A Global Perspective.  John Wiley and Sons, New York, NY. 

 
 
 17Under some circumstances, a forest’s particular expression (e.g., structure or age) as opposed to 
its type or composition define its rarity.  For example, the redwood forests of the U.S. west coast 
once covered approximately 700,000 ha.70  Some of this region has been converted to other land 
cover since European settlement, but because of  the commercial value of redwood, much of the 
region remains as redwood forest.  Most rare in this region are high-quality (old growth) 
redwood stands, which have been reduced to onl y four percent of their original extent.71  These 
stands possess high biodiversity values that ar e becoming increasingly rare in this ecoregion. 
 Scattered within other major forest types or su rrounded by other major biomes are regionally or 
locally restricted forest types.  The tropical cloud fore sts of the Americas and the pocosin forests 
of the Southeastern US are two examples.  These have always been relatively rare, but as with 
the previous examples, they have been made rarer by industrial human impacts. 
 Another category of rare forests includes those forest types that were historically more 
widespread, but have been signi ficantly reduced and degraded by human activity over time.  For 
example, the longleaf pine forests of the U.S.  southeast once covered over 40 percent of the 
region
72 but they have been reduced to less than 2 percent of their former range.73 
 Regardless of the scale of rarity, forest ecosyst ems should be identified and mapped according to 
recognized classifications.  In some parts of  the world (e.g., the United States) significant 
progress has been made.  The Natural Heritage Program (NatureServe) currently maintains 
databases on rare plant communities.  Whether they are mapped or not, forests of particular interest in this context include  globally endangered to vulnera ble communities (G1-G3) as well 
national or  state endangered to vuln erable communities (N1-N3 or S1-S3). 
 
5) Forests of high species ric hness (alpha and beta diversity) 
 
Species richness is defined as “a simple measure of species diversity calculated as the total 
number of species in a habitat or community.”
74  Biodiversity is not di stributed randomly and it 
can be examined at various spatial scales.  Diversity measured with in a single habitat or 
community is sometimes referred to as alpha diversity .  Diversity measured among closely 
associated habitats or communities, usually asso ciated with some environmental gradient, is 
termed beta diversity , and diversity over large geographic areas is termed gamma diversity .75 
 At the gamma diversity level, various regions of the planet have been identified as being 
biodiversity hotspots .  Conservation International has highl ighted 25 forested and non-forested 
                                                      
70  USFWS. 1997. Recovery plan for the marbled murrelet ( Brachyramphus marmoratus ) in Washington, Oregon, 
and California. Portland, OR: U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
71  Noss, R.F., et al.  2000.  Conservation planning in th e redwood region.  In:  Noss, R.F. (editor), The Redwood 
Forest:  History, Ecology, and Conservation of the Coast Redwoods.  Island Press, Washington, D.C. 
72 White, P.S., et al.  1998.  Southeast.  Pages 255-314.  In : Mac, M.J., et al. (editors).  Status and Trends of the 
Nation’s Biological Resources.  Reston, VA: U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey. 
73 Noss, R.F., et al.  1995.  Endangered ecosystems of  the United States: a prelim inary assessment of loss and 
degradation.  Biological Report 28.  National Biological Service, Washington, DC. 
74 Fielder, P.L. and S.K. Jain.  1992.  Conservation Biology:  A Theory and Practice of Nature Conservation, 
Preservation, and Management.  Chapman and Hall, New York, NY. 
75 Whitaker R.H.  1960.  Vegetation of the Siskiyou Mountains, Oregon and California.  Ecological Monographs  
30:279-338. 

 
 
 18biodiversity hotspots (see Appe ndix B, MAP 3).  While such identified regions help 
conservationists focus their efforts globally, th e biodiversity within th em is typically not 
uniformly distributed.  Indee d, upon closer examination, one w ould discover hotspots within 
hotspots.  These hotspots reflect alpha and beta diversity  patterns.  This is also true of those 
forest ecoregions that are not globally recognized for their speci es richness; there are often 
concentrations of species at the subregional and local levels with in most forest ecoregions that 
are of particular c onservation importance. 
 Species richness (operating at the gamma diversity  level) and species endemism (discussed later 
in this section) weighed heavily  on World Wildlife Fund’s determ ination of the most outstanding 
forested ecoregions.
76  Of all the forest ecoregions examined (522), over half (288) were 
identified as globally outstandi ng and under significant threat (T able 3; Appendix B, MAP 4). 
  Table 3.   Summary of forest ecoreg ions and proportion identified as globally outstanding by 
World Wildlife Fund. 
Major Biome Number 
of  
Ecoregions Globally 
Outstanding 
Number Percent  
Tropical & Subtropical Moist Forests 231 148 64 
Tropical & Subtropical Dry Forests 59 27 46 
Tropical & Subtropical Coniferous Forests 17 12 71 
Temperate Broadleaf Forests 84 36 43 
Temperate Coniferous Forests 53 21 40 
Boreal Forests 28 9 32 
Mediterranean Forests & Woodlands 50 35 70 
Totals 522 288 55 
 
 Mapping forests with high species richness can be  conducted in conjunction with mapping of the 
three levels of diversity.  World Wildlife Fund, Conservation Internationa l, and others have 
adequately assessed gamma diversity from the globa l perspective with regions or ecoregions as 
the analytical mapping unit.  Mapping areas of high species richness at the alpha and beta 
diversity  levels within individual fore sted ecoregions is more chal lenging but equally important. 
 
6) Forests containing high concentra tions of rare and endangered species 
 
Endangered and threatened speci es are generally listed by gov ernments and receive varying 
levels of protection.  Some governments concen trate primarily on the individual species, while 
some have provisions to protect not  only the species themselves but also their critical habitat.  
The World Conservation Union’s (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species  is one international 
source of information for globally rare and endang ered species, but national and regional lists 
should also be consulted.  Because of the way na tural forests are impacted by human use, native 
species (plant and animal) are either eliminated  or significantly reduced  locally and regionally 
                                                      
76 Ricketts T.H., et al.  1999.  Terrestrial Ecoregions of North America:  A Conservation Assessment.  Island Press, 
Washington, D.C. 

 
 
 19before the species becomes globally rare.  The most effective conservation strategies should 
emphasize policy and management actions that k eep common species common and prevent rare 
species from local/regional extirpation or gl obal extinction.  Throughout most of the world’s 
forests, this ecological component focuses on those sites that contai n high concentrations of rare 
or endangered species at the global, regional, and (under some circumstances) local levels.  
Under some circumstances, a single forest species  may be so rare that its presence immediately 
elevates a particular forest’s st atus to Endangered Forest.  For example, in the neotropical forests 
of Columbia and Ecuador, an intact or remn ant forest block known to contain the Banded 
Ground-cuckoo ( Neomorphus radiolosus ), a species of severely limited distribution which has 
been on the IUCN Red List  since 1988,77 would automatically be identified and mapped as an 
Endangered Forest.  
7) Forests of high endemism 
 
Endemic species are those organisms that occu r within a narrow geogr aphic range and exist 
nowhere else.
78  Centers of endemism are areas wher e many endemic species occur together. 
Species endemism is caused by geographic isola tion and/or unusual habitats such as harsh 
physical environments, and therefore tends to  be concentrated in  localized habitats.79  Because of 
this localization, they are often at high risk of extinction.  Endemism can be described for entire physiogra phic regions.  For example, globally significant 
forest ecoregions for endemism include portions of  Southeastern USA, Central Chilean forests, 
Indo-Burmese forests, Guinean forests of West Africa, and New Zealand forests.  Although the 
global context is important, endemism is best mapped at intermediate spatial scales for the 
purpose of identifying and mapping Endangered Forests.  
High species endemism is often positively corr elated with high species richness, but these 
ecological considerations are very differe nt and should be examined separately. 
 
8) Core habitat for focal speci es (aquatic and terrestrial) 
 
All preceding biodiversity compone nts rely on community measures  in one way or another.  
Although these are extremely helpful in determini ng what elements need to be examined in 
defining Endangered Forests, they are unable to define the appropr iate quantity and distribution 
of landscape elements.  Answers to these questions  cannot be ascertained without considering the 
life history needs of individual sp ecies, and there are simply too many species to examine all of 
them efficiently.  The challenge has been to fi nd an effective way of m eeting the needs for all 
species without examining each one individually.  The concept of umbrella species has been 
proposed and used to address this issue.  Umbr ella species are “species whose requirements for 
persistence are believed to encapsulate those of an array of additional species.”
80  It is widely 
                                                      
77 IUCN Red List species description.  Available at: ww w.redlist.org/search/details .php?species=14536.  (April 
2005). 
78 Gentry, A.W.  1986.  Endemism in tropical versus te mperate plant communities. Page s 153-181, in Soule, M.E. 
(editor), Conservation Biology:  The Science of Scarcity and Diversity.  Sinauer Press, Sunderland, MA. 
79 Stebbins, G.L.  1980.  Rarity of plant species: a synthetic viewpoint.  Rhodora  82:77-86. 
80 Lambeck, R.J.  1997.  Focal species: a multi-species umbrella for nature conservation.  Conservation Biology  
11(4):849-856. 

 
 
 20held by conservation scientists that for any given region one single umbrella species is 
inadequate, but a small number of species is achievable and can reasona bly address the quantity 
and spatial configuration issues pertaining to regional conservation planning.  These “ focal 
species ” are used to cover the breadth  of forest landscapes and s hould include both terrestrial and 
aquatic species.  In the context of Endangered Forests, it is most important to identify and map existing critical 
habitat for the particular focal species  chosen for each forest ecor egion.  These species may or 
may not be rare and endangered.  The most important criteria for selecting focal species  for the 
Endangered Forest application in clude (1) dependence upon native fore sts during all or part of its 
life history, and (2) sensitivity to industri al use.  Generating spatially explicit focal species  
viability models is a time-consuming and expens ive undertaking.  Therefore, mapping of critical 
focal species  habitat should be carried out with the a ssistance of expert opinion using available 
forest habitat condition maps while pr edictive models are being generated. 
 
9) Forests exhibiting rare ecological and evolutionary phenomena  
 In the context of Endangered Forests, rare ecolo gical phenomena include conditions such as: (1) 
the presence of intact vertebrate  faunas, including all predators; (2) extraordinary concentrations 
of animals (e.g., breeding and wi ntering habitat for mammals, bi rds, and butterflies); and (3) 
large-scale movement areas for animals (e.g., migr atory bird stopovers or established migration 
routes).  Rare evolutionary phenomena include lo cations that display: (1) spectacular adaptive radiation  
within a taxon (e.g., hon eycreepers in Hawaii); (2) high conc entrations of unusual or unique 
higher taxa; (3) occurrences of primitive or relict  communities; and (4) very high levels of beta 
diversity.
 
 
In places where the expressions of ecologi cal or evolutionary phenomena are of global 
importance (e.g., Monarch butterfly wintering hab itat in the forested mountains of Michoacan, 
Mexico), a single phenomenon al one could warrant Endangered Forest status.  In other 
situations, the determination of Endangered Forests would be less st raightforward.  As with other 
ecological components, not every forest block th at exhibits or contains rare ecological or 
evolutionary phenomena would auto matically be identified as an Endangered Forest.  Seasonal 
migration is an important part of the lives of  many forest species (e.g., woodland caribou in 
Canada81 and forest birds in Costa Rica82); however, the exact fore st patches used are not 
necessarily the same from year to year, making it more difficult to pinpoint the location(s) of 
Endangered Forests.  In these situ ations it is important to ensure that an adequate proportion of 
forest blocks in the proper spatial a rrangement get the protection they need. 
   
                                                      
81 Ferguson, S.H. and P.C. Elkie.  2004.  Seasonal movement patterns of woodland caribou (Rangifer tarandus 
caribou).  Journal of Zoology, The Zoological Society of London.  262:125-134. 
82 Blake, J.G. and B.A. Loiselle.  2000.  Diversity of bird s along an elevational gradient in the Cordillera Central, 
Costa Rica.  The Auk  117(3):633-686. 

 
 
 21Steps for Identifying and Mapping Endangered Forests  
 
The previous review of landscape integrity a nd biodiversity components of Endangered Forests 
was intended to explain the major ecological cons iderations.  Each of the components reviewed 
in this paper should be considered separately when identifying and mapping Endangered Forests, 
but they also need to be integr ated together in a systematic fa shion.  As mentioned repeatedly 
throughout this document, the presence of a single attribute (or value) can be enough to warrant 
Endangered Forest status and pr otection, but in most cases, a combination of factors with 
reference to the regional context will be required to  make this determination.  To provide further 
guidance, we propose the following sequence of steps in order to assemble the various 
components in the identification and mapping of  Endangered Forests.  In various places 
(indicated below), ecoregional context and operati onal thresholds (based largely on ecology) are 
fundamentally important and will be necessary to assure consistency and replicability of 
independent efforts.  The ten proposed steps are:   1. Map large landscape integrity building bl ocks – Intact Forest Landscapes [ ecoregional 
context and thresholds required ] and Remnant Forests and Restoration Cores [ ecoregional 
context and thresholds required ] 
 2. Describe biodiversity components in a spatially explicit fashion for Intact Forest Landscapes 
and Remnant Forests and Restoration Cores [ ecoregional context and thresholds required ] 
 3. Describe the range of relative conservation va lue based on the outcome of steps one and two 
in the context of representation  [ecoregional context and thresholds required ] 
 4. Map potential landscape connectivity  
 
5. Assess threats (or stresses) to the native forests  
 6. Identify and map Endangered Forests  
 7. Define management prescriptions for each nativ e forest area based on current conditions and 
stressors 
 8. Identify a small but ecologically meaningful set of indicators to help inform the efficacy of 
Endangered Forests in their local , regional and global contexts 
 9. Monitor these indicators over time 
 10. Adjust Endangered Forest status and/or  management periodically as needed 
 These steps form an import ant foundation in a broader conservation area design  process 
focusing on forested landscapes that is requir ed to adequately bala nce protection, resource 
development, and restoration over space and time.  

 
 
 22In all likelihood, a massive global mapping effort  at the depth and breadth required to map 
Endangered Forests will not be possible due to budget and data constrai nts.  We therefore 
propose existing assessments and tools be used to help prioritize where to map and at what scale 
to map based on considerations such as conser vation value and level of  threat (modified for 
mapping purposes by data availability).  Using the relationship between conservation value and 
level of threat to prioritize acti ons is not a new idea in conservation science.  Endangered Forests 
identification and mapping are most important in those regions that cont ain conservation values 
that are most irreplaceable at the global or ecoreg ional and most at risk of  being lost (or of high 
vulnerability), especially as a re sult of industrial use (Figure 4).83 
 Essentially, irreplaceability
 is a measure assigned to an area that reflects its relative importance in 
the context of a planning domain (e.g., biome, ecoregion, or site) for achieving a set of regional 
conservation targets.84  Vulnerability is defined as the ri sk a planning unit (e.g., intact forest 
landscape, remnant block, etc.) has of being transformed by extractive uses.85  Figure 4 is being 
offered to help visualize the idea of priority setting, and it is important to point out that 
Endangered Forests are not restrict ed to Zone I; Endangered Forest s can occur in all zones.  We 
are only suggesting a mechanism for prioritizing  which regions should be  addressed to help 
assure important ecological values are not lost while the identification and mapping of 
Endangered Forests is carried out.  The shaded area denotes the highest priority. 
 
 
     
 
         
 
 
                                                      
83 Pressey, R.L., et al.  1994.  Shades of irreplaceability : Towards a measure of the contribution of sites to a 
reservation goal.  Biodiversity and Conservation  3:242-262. 
84  Cowling, R.M. and R.L. Pressey.  2001.  Rapid plant diversification: Planning for an evolutionary future. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Scie nces of the U.S.   98(10):5452-5457. 
85 Margules, C.R. and R.L. Pressey.  2000.  Systematic conservation planning.  Nature 405:243-253. Vulnerability 0 100 0 100 
Irreplaceability III 
IV II I 
Figure 4 .  Irreplaceability and vulnerability diag ram emphasizing the highest priority for 
addressin g Endan gered Forests (Zone I ).

 
 
 236.  .  RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENDANGERED AND HIGH CONSERVATION VALUE FORESTS  
 
All forests have some conservation value, but some  have such outstanding ecological values that 
they require full protection, while  recognizing the legal and custom ary rights of indigenous and 
traditional forest peoples86, from any intensive industrial use.87  These are Endangered Forests.  
For years, conservation focused primarily on land allocation.  For forests, most attention has 
been placed on the two extremes of a land allocation continuum—fr om protected parks or nature 
reserves on the one end to plantation forests on the other. However, this protection does not 
negate the full recognition and acce ptance of the legal and customary rights of indigenous and 
traditional forest peoples to use their land for commercial and traditional uses25 26. 
 According to the United Nations Environment Pr ogram, approximately 8 percent of the world’s 
forests are in some form of legal protection.
88  Unfortunately, these protected areas do not cover 
the full range of forest types or characteristics— or the most productive sites.  In many countries, 
large protected areas mostly re present “the lands nobody wanted.”89 For example, the largest 
protected areas in the U.S. and Canada are concen trated at higher elevations or in areas of low 
forest productivity.90  However, many of the ecologically mo st important forests occur at lower 
                                                      
86 As defined by the Proposed American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (Approved by the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights on February 26, 1997), available from: 
http://www.cidh.org/indigenous.htm 
1. This Declaration applies to indigenous peoples as we ll as peoples whose social, cultural and economic conditions 
distinguish them from other sections of the national community, and whose status is regulated wholly or partially by 
their own customs or traditions or by special laws or regulations. 2. Self identification as indigenous shall be regarded as a fundamental criterion for determining the peoples to which 
the provisions of this Declaration apply. 
87 Indigenous peoples have rights to maintain and enjoy thei r cultures, their traditional ways  of life; to own, develop, 
control, use and manage communal lands and resources tr aditionally owned or otherwise occupied and used by 
them; to represent themselves through their own institutions; to apply and enforce their customary law; to free and 
informed consent; and to full participation in decision-making. These rights are established in the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant of Economic Social and Cultural Rights and the 
Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Av ailable from: http://www.fern. org/pubs/reports/fear.pdf . 
25 As defined by the Proposed American Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (Approved by the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights on February 26, 1997), available from: 
http://www.cidh.org/indigenous.htm 
1. This Declaration applies to indigenous peoples as we ll as peoples whose social, cultural and economic conditions 
distinguish them from other sections of the national community, and whose status is regulated wholly or partially by 
their own customs or traditions or by special laws or regulations. 
2. Self identification as indigenous shall be regarded as a fundamental criterion for determining the peoples to which 
the provisions of this Declaration apply. 
26 Indigenous peoples have rights to maintain and enjoy their cultures, their traditional ways of life; to own, develop, 
control, use and manage communal lands and resources tr aditionally owned or otherwise occupied and used by 
them; to represent themselves through their own institutions; to apply and enforce their customary law; to free and 
informed consent; and to full participation in decision-making. These rights are established in the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant of Economic Social and Cultural Rights and the 
Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Av ailable from: http://www.fern. org/pubs/reports/fear.pdf . 
88 United Nations Environment Program.  2005.  Availa ble at: www.unep-wcmc.org/forest/data/cdrom2/world.htm 
(April 2005). 
89 Shands, W.E. and R.G. Healy.  1977.  The lands nobody wanted.  The Conservation Foundation, Washington, 
D.C. 
90 Scott, J.M., et al.  2001.  Nature reserves: Do they  capture the full range of Am erica’s biological diversity? 
Ecological Applications  11(4): 999-1007. 

 
 
 24elevations and on more productive sites, in conflict with economic uses. In addition, many 
protected areas are threatened by ineffective enfo rcement, and are in reality only “paper parks”. 
 Most of the world’s forests o ccur in the middle of the land al location continuum:  they lack 
strong, formal protections, but nevertheless s upport diverse ecologica l values along with 
economic uses.  A compelling case has been ma de for emphasizing ecologically sustainable 
management of these remaining matrix  forests  as essential to maintaining biodiversity.
91  
However, the Endangered Forests concept holds th at there remains insufficient protection for 
most of the world’s forests in light of the di verse threats discussed above, and that achieving 
ecological sustainability will require increasing the amount of protected forest as well as 
improved management of matrix forests.   The Endangered Forest concept offers a science- based approach for identifying those existing 
matrix native forests that deserve protection from  industrial use.  However, it is more than a 
reserve selection exercise.  It examines Enda ngered Forests in context with other forest 
conservation and management approaches, such  as sustainable forest management, while 
recognizing that forests of high ecological value can be protecte d in many different ways at 
many different scales (e.g., conventional parks, native lands, and forest management plans). 
 The concept of Endangered Forests has been de veloped amidst other initiatives to define 
ecologically important forests.
92  The Endangered Forest concept is  intended to be brand-neutral, 
but is most frequently associated with High Conservation Value Forests  (Principle 9) under the 
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) forestry certification standard.93  High Conservation Value 
Forests are forests that contain one or more High Conservation Value.  The Forest Stewardship 
Council defines High Conservation Value Forests us ing six criteria that indicate forests with 
significant biological, environmenta l, and social values.  The specific relationship between High 
Conservation Value Forests and Endangered Fore sts is shown in Table 2 and Figure 2.  In 
essence, Endangered Forests are those High Conservation Value Fo rests, or portions of them, 
that are so biologically distinct , rare, or ecologically important  that industrial use would be 
incompatible with maintaining these values . 
 
Table 2 .  Relationship between Endangered Forest s and High Conservation Value Forests.  
Endangered Forest Components Hi gh Conservation Value Forests 
 
Landscape Integrity Components  
1) Intact forest landscapes  
Intact forest landscapes are dominated by native 
species, are largely maintained by natural 
processes, and are large enough to form functional 
core habitat leading toward viable populations of  
HCV2: 
Forest areas containing globally, regionally or  
nationally significant large landscape level forests, contained within, or containing the management 
unit, where viable populations of most if not all 
naturally occurring species exist in natural patterns 
                                                      
91 Lindenmayer, D.B. and J.F. Franklin.  2002.  Conserving Forest Biodiversity: A Comprehensive Multiscaled 
Approach.  Island Press, Washington, D.C. 
92 For example see: The Nature Conservancy (ecoregional assessments), Conservation International (biodiversity 
hotspots), World Wildlife Fund Canada (enduring features gap analysis), World Resources Institute (frontier 
forests), Greenpeace (ancient fo rest definitions), and IUCN-T he World Conservation Union. 
93 Jennings, S., et al.  2004.  The High Conservation Value Forest Toolkit.  Edition 1, 2003. Proforest.  Available at: 
www.fscoax.org/principal.htm (April 2004). 
 

 
 
 25most native plant and animal species. 
 
2) Remnant forests and restoration cores 
Critical and/or intact forest fragments in heavily 
converted or degraded forest  ecosystems able, with 
sufficient time for recovery, to become viable forest ecosystems. These are globally, regionally, or locally rare forests as a result of historical human activities. 
 
3) Landscape connectivity 
Remaining natural or restorable landscape level 
linkages between existing protected areas or other core natural habitats that target area-sensitive 
species and which maintain broader scale 
ecological processes (e.g., aquatic-terrestrial interaction, natural plant and animal dispersal, predator-prey interactions, and species migration). of distribution and abundance. 
 
HCV3: 
Forest areas that are in or contain rare, threatened 
or endangered ecosystems.  
 
Biodiversity Components  
4) Rare forest types (composition and structure) 
5) Forests of high species richness ( alpha and 
beta diversity ) relative to their region 
6) Forests containing high concentrations of rare and endangered species 7) Forests of high endemism 8) Core habitat for focal species  (aquatic and 
terrestrial) 
9) Forests exhibiting rare ecological and evolutionary phenomena   
HCV1: 
Forest areas containing globally, regionally or nationally significant concentrations of biodiversity 
values (e.g. endemism, endangered species, refugia).  
HCV3:  
Forest areas that are in or contain rare, threatened or endangered ecosystems. 
 
 
Even though Endangered Forests should be off limits to industrial development, they may still require management – driven by conservation not economic imperatives  - to protect their 
ecological values.  In many cases (i.e., existing large,  intact forest landscapes ), little or no direct 
human intervention may be necessary; however, so me areas will require active management to 
counter threats, such as controlling alien invade rs or re-establishing natural disturbance regimes 
through prescribed fire or mechanical thinning.    At this time, the Endangered Forests concep t focuses on the ecological components and do not 
include the aspects of High Conservation Values  4, 5 and 6 that pertai n to human services.
94 
These forest values may be endangered and th erefore the forests may be classed "Endangered 
Forests", but they do not fall within the "/Ec ological/ Components of Endangered Forests" 
treated in this document.  Furthermore, identifica tion of some of the important social values can 
only be adequately assessed through a consultative stakeholder approach. 
                                                      
94 HCV 4: Forest areas that provide the basic services of  nature in critical situations (e.g., watershed 
protection, erosion control).  HCV 5: Forest areas fundamental to meeting the basic needs of local communities 
(e.g., subsistence, health) .  HCV6: Forest areas critical to local commun ities’ traditional cultural identity (areas of 
cultural, ecological, economic, or religious significance identified in cooperation w ith such local communities).  

 
 
 26 
Endangered Forests are identified based on ecologi cal components discussed in the previous 
section that are globally, regi onally, or locally important.  Th ese ecological components can be 
landscape level features or biodi versity related.  These components sometimes overlap and at 
other times are mutually exclus ive.  Any one component can be  enough to identify a specific 
forest area as an Endangered Fo rest depending on the circumstan ce, but a full assessment of all 
of the ecological components is warranted.  At this time, the most critical next step for 
Endangered Forests as well as for High Conservati on Value Forests is the creation of regionally 
specific protocols or decision trees  leading to consistent and defe nsible judgments for definition 
and mapping purposes.  This will require a system atic application of multiscale contextual 
information and the establishment of meaningful ecological thresholds.  
 
              
 
                   
Figure 2 . Diagram showing the relationshi p of Endangered Forests and High 
Conservation Value Forests in relation to  the intensity of forest management 
continuum, timber yield, and biodiversity pr otection [Adapted from Lindenmayer and 
Franklin (2002)].  Timber Yield Biodiversity 
Protection  
Dedicated 
Reserves  
Plantations Matrix 
Native Forests  High Conservation 
Value Forest Endangered 
Forest 
Intensity of forestry practices Ecological integrity 

 
 
 27 
     7.
  MAJOR CONSIDERATIONS FOR IDENTIFYING AND MAPPING ENDANGERED FORESTS  
 
There are numerous overarching considerations still requiring attention in order to make the 
process of identifying and mapping Endangered Forests scient ifically sound and technically 
operational.  Major considerati ons for identifying and mapping Endangered Forests include the 
following:  ¾ Spatially explicit data on the various components reviewed as well as other important themes 
(e.g., conservation status, historic  land cover, and human distur bance data) are needed to map 
Endangered Forests reliably and consistently.  Conservation status in the form of designated protected areas is curr ently being mapped and 
monitored by the World Protected Areas Databa se Consortium as part of the IUCN (World 
Conservation Union) and United Nations Enviro nment Program (UNEP).  While this work is 
incomplete, the organizational infrastructure is in place, allowing for ongoing improvements in 
completeness and accuracy.
95 
 Historic condition mapping has been completed for some areas of the world, but remains a data 
gap in others.  Historic condition mapping is im portant in order to understand how dramatically 
humans have altered the exte nt, composition, and structure of  forests through conversion and 
use.  It provides extremely important historic al context for defining appropriate conservation 
targets.  Continually monitoring human im pacts (especially using remote  sensing technologies) within 
forested ecoregions is importa nt in defining and mapping Enda ngered Forests.  There are 
numerous ongoing land cover change studies goi ng on throughout the world (being conducted by 
government and by the conservation NGO community ) that are important for understanding not 
only recent changes, but also in fo recasting probable future conditions. 
 ¾ Data themes used to identify and map Endangered Forests need to be applied at multiple 
scales – i.e., global, ecoregional,  and local levels.  Also, it will be important to generate results 
that will successfully translate be tween spatial scales and extents. 
 The concept of Endangered Forests is multifaceted and needs to be addressed using multiple spatial scales.  Ecoregion-based assessments  are convenient and eco logically meaningful
96 and 
are useful for addressing and summarizing endangered  forest considerations.  It is appropriate to 
                                                      
95 IUCN (World Conservation Union) and United Nations Environment Program (UNEP).  2004  World Database 
on Protected Areas.  Available at: http://sea.unep-wcmc.org/wdbpa/download/wdpa2004/index.html   (May 2004). 
96 Olson, D.M., et al.  2001.  Terrestrial ecoregions of  the world: a new map of life on Earth.  Bioscience 
51(11):933-938. 

 
 
 28address multiple spatial scales starting at th e ecoregion level and working down to the more 
specific local level and, concurren tly, to be able to integrate lo cal level assessments (e.g., logging 
concession; political jurisdiction) an d to work up the spatial hierarchy. 
 ¾ A regionally differentiated appro ach is needed.  Application of these definitions should 
reflect the ecological and socio-cu ltural diversity of the systems we seek to protect while also 
being unified under the same ecological and co nservation biology components and principles. 
 ¾ Global and regional map-based contextual informa tion needs to be generated for the forested 
regions of the world in order to assu re scientific rigor and consistency. 
 ¾ A number of important ecological thresholds for each forest type and region must be 
determined and applied consistently.  ¾ Science-based conservation planning  is essential to articulating a strategy to attain ecological 
sustainability of forests.  To be effective, conservation plans must account for the relationship over time and space between forest protection, restorat ion, and industrial use.  It is  also important to note that 
effective conservation planning needs to be syst ematic, meaning it needs to be: (1) data-driven, 
(2) target-directed,
 (3) efficient, (4) explicit, transparen t, and repeatable, and (5) flexible.97 
 ¾ Certification or other planning processes shoul d not delay Endangered Forest protection and 
special management.  ¾ The topic of ecosystem services needs to be ex amined and integrated into the identification 
and mapping of Endangered Forests. 
 The focus of this document has been on the eco logical components of Endangered Forests.  
However, one remaining important topic not fully addressed is that of ecosystem services.  As 
described earlier in this document, ecosystem serv ices can be categorized into four major types – 
Supporting, Provisioning, Regulator y, and Cultural.  Two of these (Provisioning and Cultural) 
pertain exclusively to services provided to hum ans by nature, and while it is important to 
understand the limits to which natural systems can be  pushed and still maintain these services, it 
has little bearing on the identification and mapping  of Endangered Forests as it is being applied 
here.  The identification of fo rests that should be protected because of their importance in 
providing services to humans can be assessed analytically to a de gree, but an equally important 
aspect of that determination will require sign ificant input from many groups and individuals. 
 The remaining two ecosystem service categor ies (Supporting and Regulatory), are equally 
important to both wild nature and humans, and it is  primarily in these two service areas that more 
work is needed to determine how they might  influence the identific ation and mapping of 
Endangered Forests.  Determining which forests ar e critically important in terms of ecosystem 
                                                      
97 Cowling, R.M., et al.  1999.  From representation to persistence: requirements for a sustainable system of 
conservation areas in the species-rich Me diterranean-climate desert of southern Africa.  Diversity & Distributions 
5(1-2):51-71. 

 
 
 29functions such as nutrient re gulation, local climate regulati on, carbon sequestration, water 
purification, and hydrologic regimes is far more challenging than the nine ecological components 
presented in this document, but that does not mean these are unimportant.    
8.
  CONCLUSION  
 
This document was written to describe the scie ntific foundation for the concept of Endangered 
Forests and how it might be incorporated in identifying and mapping which of the world’s 
remaining forests should be protected as pa rt of a larger conservation strategy.   
 The technical planning issues surrounding this is sue are numerous and complex and a measure of 
regional flexibility wi ll undoubtedly be required to make meaningful progress on the ground.  
However, since global socio-economic forces ar e now driving the impacts on forests, it is 
extremely beneficial to address the technical asp ects of planning for ecologi cal sustainability of 
the world’s forests by embracing an overarching c onceptual framework that clearly articulates 
the ecological values that need to be actively addressed.  It is the intention of the authors this remains a “living” document, and incorporates advances in 
our understanding of forests and what is requi red to safeguard their ecological values.  
Conservation science, analytical methods, and data collection strategi es are continuously 
evolving and improving over time, and all advances made must be integrat ed as needed.  The 
important outstanding question of how to prac tically integrate the two ecosystem service 
categories described elsewhere in this document will have to be considered in future revisions.  
The authors recognize the need to periodically update and revise th is document in order to reflect 
new information and other advances.   
 

 
 
 30APPENDIX A  GLOSSARY OF TERMS  
 
Adaptive Radiation:   the evolution of a species into ma ny species that occupy diverse ways of 
life within the same geographical range.98   
 Alpha/Beta/Gamma Diversity: Alpha  diversity  - the number of species within a single local 
habitat or patch. Beta diversity  - turnover of species  between local habitats or patches. Gamma  
diversity - large area consisting of a numb er of habitats or patches.
99 
 
Biodiversity Hotspots: regions that harbor a great diversity of endemic species and, at the same 
time, have been significantly imp acted and altered by human activities.100 
 Conservation Area Design : A conservation planning tool at multiple spatial scales that allows 
for the creation and exploration of land management scenarios relative to the following four 
goals   -Represent all native ecosystem types acr oss their natural range of variation. 
-Maintain viable populations of all native sp ecies in natural patte rns of abundance and 
distribution. -Maintain ecological and e volutionary processes. 
-Ensure long-term and short-term re silience to environmental change.
101 
 Degraded Forest:  forest suffering from the loss of nativ e species and processes due to human 
activities such that only  certain components of the original biodiversity persist, often including 
significantly altered communities.
102 
 Ecoregion:  a large area of land or water that contai ns a geographically dis tinct assemblage of 
natural communities that (a) share a large majority of their species and ecological dynamics, (b) 
share similar environmental conditio ns, and (c) interact ecologically in ways that are critical for 
their long-term persistence.
103 
 
Ethnolinguistic Center:   geographic origins of the world’s peoples (particularly the world’s 
indigenous, tribal and traditional peoples) diffe rentiated by a unique language and culture.  
 
Focal Species:  consistent with the concept of  umbrella species, a specie s or suite of species that 
can be used to develop explicit guidelines for determining the composition, quantity, and 
                                                      
98 Wilson, E.O.  1992.  The Diversity of Life.  Belknap Press, Cambridge, MA. 
99 Whittaker, RH.  1969.  New concepts of kingdoms or or ganisms: Evolutionary relations are better represented by 
new classifications than by the traditional two king doms.  Science.  1969 Jan 10, 163(863):150-160. 
100 Conservation International.  2003.  Biodiversity Hotspots: What are hotspots?  Available at: 
http://www.biodiversityhotspots.org/xp/Hotspots/hotspotsScience/  (May 2004). 
101 Noss, R.F. and A. Cooperrider.  1994.  Saving Nature’s Legacy: Protecting and Restoring Biodiversity.  Island 
Press, Washington, DC. 
102 Ricketts, T., et al.  1999.  Terre strial Ecoregions of North America.   World Wildlife Fund – United States and 
Canada.  Island Press, Washington, D.C. 
103 Olson, D.M., et al.  2001.  Terrest rial ecoregions of the world: a new ma p of life on Earth.  Bioscience  
51(11):933-938. 

 
 
 31configuration of habitat patches at the landscape scale, which falls into one of four categories: 
area-limited species, resource - limited species, dispersal-limited species, or process-limited 
species.104   
 Fragmentation:  the breaking up of a habitat, ecosystem or landscape into smaller, disconnected 
pieces.
105 Although natural disturbances fragment the landscape, human activiti es are also agents 
of fragmentation and are most important in the conservation pl anning context.  Agents of 
fragmentation include roads, cl eared lands, changes in land use,  urbanization and other human 
developments.  Frontier Forest: large, relatively intact forest ecosystems.  A frontier forest  must – (1) be 
primarily forested; (2) be large enough to support viable  populations of species associated with 
that forest type; (3) have its structure and composition are determ ined mainly by natural events; 
(4) contain primarily native species; and (5) be relatively unmanaged by humans.
106 
 
Gap Dynamics: a particular type of forest  disturbance that is characterized by small- or micro-
scale disturbance of the mature forest canopy.  Tr ees die standing, snap off, or are blown to the 
ground, creating a “hole” in the canopy.  The deat h of a single stem or a few stems releases 
available growing space.  In time, this gr owing space is occupied by tree regeneration.107 
 High Conservation Value Forest:  forest identified under Principl e 9 of the Forest Stewardship 
Council.
 They are: 
a) forest areas containing gl obally, regionally or na tionally significant  concentrations of 
biodiversity values (e.g. endemism , endangered species, refugia); and/or large landscape level 
forests, contained within, or containing the manage ment unit, where viable populations of most if 
not all naturally occurr ing species exist in na tural patterns of dist ribution and abundance  
b) forest areas that are in  or contain rare, threatened  or endangered ecosystems  
c) forest areas that provide ba sic services of nature in cri tical situations (e.g. watershed 
protection, erosion control)  d) forest areas fundamental to meeting basi c needs of local communities (e.g. subsistence, 
health) and/or critical to local communities’ traditional cultural  identity (areas of cultural, 
ecological, economic or religious significance identified in cooperation with such local 
communities).
108 
 
Home Range: the area in which an indivi dual animal normally lives.  
 
                                                      
104 Lambeck, R.J.  1997.  Focal species: A multi-species umbrella for nature conservation.  Conservation Biology 
11(4):849-856. 
105 Turner, M.G., et al.  2001.  Landscape Ecology in Theory and Practice: Pattern and 
Process.  Springer-Verlag, New York, NY. 
106 Bryant, D.  1997.  The Last Frontier Forests: Ecosystems and Economies on the Edge.  World Resources 
Institute, Washington, D.C.  Available for purchase at: http://forests.wri.org//pubs_de scription.cfm?PubID=2619  
(April 2004). 
107 McCarthy, John.  2001.  Gap dynamics of forest trees: A review with particular attention to boreal forests.  
Environmental Review  9:1-59. 
108 Jennings, S., et al.  2004.  The High Conservation Value Fo rest Toolkit.  Edition 1, 2003. Proforest.  Available at: 
www.fscoax.org/principal.htm (April 2004). 

 
 
 32Intact Forest Landscapes:  contiguous mosaics of naturally occurring ecosystems in a forest 
ecozone, essentially undisturbed by significant hu man influence and sufficiently large enough to 
be resilient to edge effects and to su rvive most natural disturbance events.109 
 
Keystone Species: a species whose presence or activities supp ort a large number of other species 
in the community (e.g., primary cavity nester s, herbivorous ins ects that outbreak).110 
 
Landscape Linkage: large, regional connections between  habitat blocks (“core areas”) 
meant to facilitate animal movement and othe r essential flows between  different sections 
of a landscape.111 These linkages are not necessarily constr icted, but are essential to maintaining 
connectivity function in the ecoregion. 
 
Minimum Dynamic Area:  the area necessary to ensure surviv al or recolonization of disturbed 
sites.112 
 Natural Disturbance Regime: the historic patterns (frequency a nd extent) of fire, insects, wind, 
landslides and other natural processes in an area. 
 
Natural (Ecological) Resilience:  the amount of change a system  can undergo and still remain (1) 
within the same state or domain  of attraction, (2) capable of se lf-organization, and (3) adaptable 
to changing conditions.
113 
 Precautionary Principle  or Precautionary Approach : a response to uncertainty, in the face of 
risks to health or the environment.  In general,  it involves acting to avoid serious or irreversible 
potential harm, despite lack of sc ientific certainty as to the lik elihood, magnitude, or causation of 
that harm.
114 
 Representation:   with reference to protected areas sy stems, representation refers to the 
protection of the full range of biodiversity of a given biogeographic unit within a system of 
protected areas (Ricketts et al. 1999).
115  To be ecologically effective,  representation must be 
achieved in all ecosystems at all ecological spatial scales. 
 
Roadless Block:  that area bounded by a road, using the edge  of the physical change that creates 
the road or the edge of the right-of-way, othe r ownership, or water, as  a boundary. Minimum size 
of roadless blocks in forests depends on forest ty pe.  For example, in North America, a useful 
                                                      
109 Lee, P., et al.  2003.  Canada’s large intact forest land scapes.  Global Forest Watch Canada.  Edmonton, Alberta.  
Available at: www.globalfores twatch.ca  (Aril 2005). 
110 Hannon, S.J. and C. McCallum.  Using the focal species  approach for conserving biodiversity in landscapes 
managed for forestry.  Sustainable Forest Management Network Synthesis Paper, Alberta. 
111 Soulé, M.E., and J. Terborgh.  1999.  Conserving nature at regional and continental scales - a scientific program 
for North America.  Bi oScience  49:809-817. 
112 Pickett, S.T.A. and J.N. Thompson.  1978.  Patch dynamics and the design of nature reserves.  Biological 
Conservation  13:27-37. 
113 Holling, C.S.  1973.  Resilience and stability of ecologi cal systems.  Annual Review of Ecological Systematics  
4:1-23. 
114 Precautionary Principle Project,  2003.  See www.pprinciple.net/the_precautionary_principle.html  (May 2004).   
115 Ricketts T.H., et al.  1999.  Terrestrial Ecoregions of North America:  A Conservation Assessment.  Island Press, 
Washington, D.C. 

 
 
 33roadless block definition is a 2,000 ha or larger  forested block that ha s less than 0.5 miles of 
unpaved road per square mile, and no paved roads.116  
 
Umbrella Species: a large, charismatic species (e.g., the Fl orida panther). When the habitat for 
such a species is protected, many other species will be protected as well. 
 
 
APPENDIX B M APS 
  
MAP 1.   Frontier Forests as mapped by Bryant et al. 1997.  
 
MAP 2.   Intact forest landscapes for the boreal zone according to Global Forest Watch [Intact 
blocks - dark green = mature forest; light green  = young forest/burned; ye llow = non-forest/beige 
= non-intact boreal forest; gray non-boreal forest]. 
 MAP 3.  Conservation International’s 25 Global Biodiversity Hotspots. 
 MAP 4.  Biologically outstanding forest ecoregi ons as determined by World Wildlife Fund. 
 
 
                                                      
116 Noss, R.F.  1992.  The wildlands project land conservation strategy.  Wild Earth (Special Issue) (Based on grizzly 
and elk habitat suitability.). 

 
 
 34
MAP 1 .  Frontier Forests as mapped by Bryant et al. 1997. 

 
 
 35
MAP 2 .  Intact forest landscapes for the boreal zone according to Global Forest Watch [Intact blocks - dark green = 
mature forest; light green = young forest/burned; yellow = non-forest/beige = non-intact  boreal forest; gray non-
boreal forest ]. 

 
 
 3618. Mountains of S. Central China
19. Succulent Karoo
20. Sundaland
21. Southwest Australia
22. Tropical Andes
23. Guinean Forests of West Africa
24. Wallacea
25. Western Ghats & Sri Lanka1. Atlantic Forest
2. California Floristic Province
3. Cape Floristic Region
4. Caribbean
5. Caucasus
6. Central Chile
7. Brazilian Cerrado
8. Choco-Darien-Western Ecuador9. Eastern Arc Mountains & Coastal Forests
10. Indo-Burma11. Madagascar & Indian Ocean Islands
12. Mediterranean Basin
13. Mesoamerica14. New Caledonia15. New Zealand16. Philippines17. Polynesia & Micronesia
source: Conservation International The 25 Global 
Biodiv ersity 
Hots p ots
17
14
152118
10
16
20
2425
11
31995
12
232
134
8
22
67
117
MAP 3 .  Conservation International’s 25 Global Biodiversity Hotspots. 

 
 
 37 
MAP 4.  Biologically outstanding forest ecoregi ons as determined by World Wildlife Fund.