# Archivo original: energy-r-evolution-2010-execu.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:41:17 -03 2025

report 2010 usa energy scenario introduction & executive summary ener gy 
[r]evolution 
ASUSTAINABLE ENERGY OUTLOOK 
EUROPEAN RENEWABLE 
ENERGY COUNCIL 


image THE INDIGENOUS NENETS PEOPLE MOVE EVERY 3 OR 4 DAYS SO THAT THEIR REINDEER DO NOT OVER GRAZE THE GROUND AND THEY DO NOT OVER FISH THE LAKES. 
THE YAMAL PENINSULA IS UNDER HEAVY THREAT FROM GLOBAL WARMING AS TEMPERATURES INCREASE AND RUSSIA’S ANCIENT PERMAFROST MELTS. 
2partners Greenpeace International,
European Renewable 
Energy Council (EREC)
date June 2010 project manager & lead author 
Sven Teske, Greenpeace International
EREC Arthouros Zervos, 
Christine Lins, Josche Muth 
Greenpeace International
Sven Teske research & co-authors DLR,
Institute of Technical
Thermodynamics, Department of 
Systems Analysis and Technology 
Assessment, Stuttgart, Germany: Dr.
Wolfram Krewitt (†),Dr. Thomas 
Pregger, Dr. Sonja Simon, Dr. Tobias 
Naegler. DLR, Institute of Vehicle 

© GREENPEACE/WILL ROSE 
For further information about the global, regional and national scenarios please visit the energy [r]evolution website: www.energyblueprint.info/
Published by Greenpeace International and EREC. (GPI reference number JN 330). Printed on 100% post consumer recycled chlorine-free paper.“will we look into the eyes 
of our children and confes s
that we had the opportunity,
but lacked the courage? 
that we had the technology,
but lacked the vision?” 
3Concepts, Stuttgart, Germany: Dr.
Stephan Schmid Ecofys BV, Utrecht,
The Netherlands: Wina Graus, Eliane 
Blomen. Greenhouse Development 
Rights (Chapter 2.3) EcoEquity, Paul
Baer, Assistant Professor, School of 
Public Policy, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, USA regional partners: 
USA WorldWatch Institute/Sunna 
Institute: Janet Sawin, Freyr 
Sverrisson; GP USA: Gabriel
Wisniewski, Damon Moglen, Kyle Ash editor Crispin Aubrey 
printing PrimaveraQuint, the 
Netherlands, www.primaveraquint.nl
design & layout one hemisphere ,
Sweden, www.onehemisphere.se 
contact sven.teske@greenpeace.org,
lins@erec.org 

ANDASOL 1 SOLAR POWER STATION SUPPLIES UP TO 200,000 PEOPLE WITH CLIMATE-FRIENDLY ELECTRICITY AND SAVES ABOUT 149,000 TONNES OF CARBON DIOXIDE PER YEAR 
COMPARED WITH A MODERN COAL POWER PLANT.As I write, oil from a 
deepwater BP well is 
washing up on the sandy 
beaches and marshes of the 
Gulf Coast. At the same 
time, families in West 
Virginia are mourning the 
loved ones they lost in an 
explosion at a Massey 
Energy mine that claimed 
29 lives—the worst mining 
disaster in the US in a 
generation. Sadly, these 
inestimable tragedies are 
only the recent 
headline-getters.Every day, millions of people 
whose stories you won’t hear are 
suffering the direct effects of our 
addiction to fossil fuels. Asthma,
cancer, mutilated ecosystems,
devastated communities—these 
are the hidden costs of our 
backward energy system, and 
we’re paying those costs right 
now, whether we know it or not.
Unfortunately, the worst is yet to 
come. According to the Nobel- 
prize winning Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, we 
must peak global warming 
pollution by 2015 and nearly 
eliminate it by mid-century. foreword 
4contents foreword 4
introduction 6
executive summary 8climate protection & 
energy policy 14 
implementing the 
energy [r]evolution 18 nuclear power & climate 
protection 30 
the energy [r]evolution 35 1
23
4

© GREENPEACE/MARKEL REDONDO If we fail to do so, we risk crossing tipping points in the climate system 
that could bring about devastating droughts, floods, sea level rise,
storms, and wildfires. We are altering the fundamental systems that 
make our planet habitable. We can’t politick our way out of this reality.
Rhetoric won’t keep our cities from flooding or ecosystems from 
collapsing. We must decide that enough is enough, and we must take 
real, bold, immediate action.
We are lucky, in the face of these grim realities, that we have the ability 
to save ourselves and preserve a livable planet for our children and 
grandchildren. Using technologies that already exist today—from wind 
turbines to super-efficient appliances to electric cars--we can continue to 
grow our economies while reversing the deep damage that fossil fuels 
have done. By taking simple steps like retrofitting our buildings to make 
them efficient, we can create millions of jobs and save millions of 
dollars. By investing in massive renewable energy and efficiency projects 
we can provide ourselves with energy security and ensure our leadership 
role in a new global economy. We can continue to thrive, without risking 
disasters like the Gulf oil spill or the catastrophe promised by unchecked 
climate change. This Energy [R]evolution is our roadmap.Industry lobbyists and their PR people would have us believe that 
these things aren’t possible. They’ve spent millions in campaign 
contributions and advertising to spin the idea that fossil fuels and 
nuclear power are a necessary part of our economic success. But 
you must ignore the politicians that parrot their talking points and 
the attractive ads, because it is a lie. When our leaders in 
government find the courage to force polluters to account for the 
true cost of fossil fuels, and find the wisdom to invest in solutions 
like renewables and efficiency, that lie will be exposed.
We cannot survive without an energy revolution. The keys to our 
future have been in the wrong hands for too long, and it will take 
all our strength to take them back. I hope you will join us.
Phil Radford 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
GREENPEACE USA 
JUNE 2010 
5scenarios for a future 
energy supply 44 
key results of the global
energy [r]evolution 
scenario 58 energy resources 
& security of supply 68 
energy technologies 88 policy 
recommendations 99 
glossary & appendix 105 5
67 9
10 8

image A WORKER ENTERS A TURBINE TOWER FOR MAINTENANCE AT DABANCHENG WIND FARM. CHINA’S BEST WIND RESOURCES ARE MADE POSSIBLE BY THE NATURAL BREACH 
IN TIANSHAN (TIAN MOUNTAIN). 
© GP/HU WEI “FOR THE SAKE OF A SOUND ENVIRONMENT, POLITICAL STABILITY AND THRIVING ECONOMIES, NOW IS THE TIME TO COMMIT 
TO A TRULY SECURE AND SUSTAINABLE ENERGY FUTURE.” introduction 
Access to energy is of strategic importance for every country in the 
world. Over the past few years oil prices have gone up and down 
like a rollercoaster, jumping to a record high in July 2008 of 
$147.27 and then falling back again to $33.87 in December. Even 
so, over the whole of 2009 the average oil price was still between 
$60 and $80 per barrel. At the same time, with gas prices in 
Europe rising in line with the price of oil, the impact on both the 
heating and power sectors has been huge. 
Security of energy supply is not only influenced by the cost of fuels,
however, but by their long term physical availability. Countries 
without their own fossil fuel supplies have increasingly shown interest 
in renewable energy sources, not only because of the price stability 
this brings but because they are indigenous and locally produced. 
Renewable energy technologies produce little or no greenhouse 
gases and rely on virtually inexhaustible natural elements for their 
'fuel'. Some of these technologies are already competitive. The wind 
power industry, for example, has continued its explosive growth in 
the face of a global recession and a financial crisis and is a 
testament to the inherent attractiveness of renewable technology. In 
2009 the total level of annual investment in clean energy was $145 
billion, only a 6.5% drop from the record previous year, while the 
global wind power market grew by an annual 41.5%. In the US Energy policy has a dramatic impact across the social, political and 
economic spectrum. Governments and businesses must focus on the fact 
that energy is the lifeblood of the economy. For scientists, the crucial
matter is the threat of climate change brought about by burning fossil
fuels. NGO’s concentrate on the environmental and social impacts, and 
economists on the potential of a shift in the way our energy is 
produced. For engineers, the task is developing new technologies to 
supply and consume energy in a smarter way. But at the end of the day,
we are all consumers and we all must deal with the full reality of our 
energy system—from volatile prices to oil spills. Access to sufficient 
energy is vital to making our economies work but at the same time, our 
demand for energy has become the main source of the greenhouse gas 
emissions that put our climate at risk. Something needs to change.
While the last climate change summit in Copenhagen failed to produce 
an agreement, international negotiations to address the issue remain 
high on the political agenda. At the same time, highly volatile fossil
fuel prices are creating more and more uncertainty for the global
economy, creatingan indirect incentive for investing in renewable 
energy technologies, which are now booming. Against this backdrop,
the third edition of the Energy [R]evolution analysis takes a deep 
plunge into what’s possible in terms of energy supply strategies for the 
future and how to develop a sustainable energy and climate policy. WORLD ENERGY [R]EVOLUTION 
A SUSTAINABLE ENERGY OUTLOOK 
6

Christine Lins 
SECRETARY GENERAL 
EUROPEAN RENEWABLE 
ENERGY COUNCIL (EREC) 
JUNE 2010 Sven Teske 
CLIMATE & ENERGY UNIT 
GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL 
The advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario has changed five 
parameters compared to the basic version. These mean that the 
economic lifetime of coal power stations has been reduced from 40 
to 20 years, the growth rate of renewables has taken the advanced 
projections of the renewable industry into account, the use of 
electric drives in the transport sector will take off ten years earlier,
the expansion of smart grids will happen quicker, and last but not 
least, the expansion of fossil fuel based energy will stop after 2015. 
A drastic reduction in CO 2levels and a share of over 80% 
renewables in the world energy supply are both possible goals by 
2050. Of course this will be a technical challenge, but the main 
obstacle is political. We need to kick start the Energy [R]evolution 
with long lasting reliable policy decisions within the next few years. It 
took more than a decade to make politicians aware of the climate 
crisis; we do not have another decade to agree on the changes needed 
in the energy sector. Greenpeace and the renewables industry present 
the Energy [R]evolution scenario as a practical but ambitious 
blueprint. For the sake of a sound environment, political stability and 
thriving economies, now is the time to commit to a truly secure and 
sustainable energy future – a future built on energy efficiency and 
renewable energy, economic development and the creation of millions 
of new jobs for the next generation.image NORTH HOYLE WIND FARM, 
UK’S FIRST WIND FARM IN THE IRISH 
SEA WHICH WILL SUPPLY 50,000 HOMES 
WITH POWER.
© ANTHONY UPTON 2003 
alone, the wind industry grew by nearly 40%. The renewable energy 
industry now employs around two million people worldwide and has 
become a major feature of national industrial development plans.
In the US, wind already employs more people than coal.
Meanwhile, the economics of renewables are expected to further 
improve as they develop technically, and as the price of fossil fuels 
continues to rise and as their saving of carbon dioxide emissions is 
given a monetary value. These cost comparisons, already favorable 
to renewables, don’t even account for the massive externalized costs 
of fossil fuels such as the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.
Despite the small drop in fossil fuel emissions in the industrialized 
world as a result of the economic crisis, globally the level of energy 
related carbon dioxide continues to grow. This means that a 
recovered economy will result in increasing CO 2emissions once 
again, further contributing to the greenhouse gases which threaten 
our planet. A shift in energy policy is needed so that a growing 
economy and reduced CO 2emissions can go hand in hand. The 
Energy [R]evolution analysis shows how this is possible.
Although the Copenhagen climate change conference at the end of 
2009 was a huge disappointment, it should not lead to a feeling 
that nothing can happen. A change in energy policy has to be 
connected to a change of climate policy. The United Nations 
(UNFCCC) climate talks therefore still remain central to the 
survival of our planet and a global regime for CO 2reduction.
Placing a price on carbon, as well as a long term agreement on CO 2
reduction, are both of vital importance for the uptake of renewables 
and energy efficiency. The achievement of a new ‘fair, ambitious and 
legally binding’ (FAB) deal relies fundamentally on legally binding 
emissions reduction obligations, on common guidelines for 
accounting rules, on a compliance regime and on agreed carbon 
trading mechanisms. 
energy [r]evolution 2010 
This is the third edition of the global Energy [R]evolution scenario 
since the first one was published in January 2007, each analysis 
deeper than the last. In the second edition we introduced specific 
research for the transport sector and an investigation of the 
pathway to future investment in renewable energies. Since then we 
have published country-specific scenarios for over 30 countries and 
regions, added a study of the employment implications of the 
scenarios and a detailed examination of how the grid network needs 
to be improved and adapted. 
This new edition has broken fresh ground again. The 2010 Energy 
[R]evolution not only includes the financial analysis and 
employment calculations in parallel with the basic projections, we 
have also added a second, more ambitious Energy [R]evolution 
scenario. This was considered vital because rapid improvements in 
climate science made it clear during 2009 that a global 50% 
reduction in energy related CO 2emissions by 2050 might not be 
enough to keep the global mean temperature rise below +2°C. An 
even greater reduction may be needed if runaway climate change is 
to be avoided. 
7

8WORLD ENERGY [R]EVOLUTION 
A SUSTAINABLE ENERGY OUTLOOK 
The threat of climate change, caused by rising global temperatures, is 
the most significant environmental challenge facing the world at the 
beginning of the 21st century. It has major implications for the world’s 
social and economic stability, its natural resources and in particular,
the way we produce our energy. The Copenhagen Accord, a political
declaration agreed by many key countries at the climate change 
summit in December 2009, has the stated aim of keeping the increase 
in global temperatures to below 2°C, and then considering a 1.5°C 
limit by 2015. However, the national emissions reduction pledges 
submitted by various countries to the United Nations coordinating 
body, the UNFCCC, in the first half of 2010 are likely to lead to a 
world with global emissions of between 47.9 and 53.6 gigatons of 
carbon dioxide equivalents per year by 2020. This is about 10–20% 
higher than today’s levels. In the worst case, the Copenhagen Accord 
pledges could even permit emission allowances to exceed a ‘business as 
usual’ projection.1In order to avoid the most catastrophic impacts of 
climate change, the global temperature increase must be kept as far 
below 2°C as possible. This is still possible, but time is running out. To 
stay within this limit, global greenhouse gas emissions will need to 
peak by 2015 and decline rapidly after that, reaching as close to zero 
as possible by the middle of the 21st century. a safe level of warming? 
Keeping the global temperature increase to 2°C is often referred to as 
a ‘safe level’ of warming, but this does not reflect the reality of the 
latest science. This shows that a warming of 2°C above pre-industrial
levels would pose unacceptable risks to many of the world’s key 
natural and human systems.2Even with a 1.5°C warming, increases in 
drought, heat waves and floods, along with other adverse impacts such 
as increased water stress for up to 1.7 billion people, wildfire 
frequency and flood risks, are projected in many regions. Neither does 
staying below 2°C rule out large scale disasters such as melting ice 
sheets. Partial de-glaciation of the Greenland ice sheet, and possibly 
the West Antarctic ice sheet, could even occur from additional
warming within a range of 0.8 – 3.8°C above current levels.3If rising 
temperatures are to be kept within acceptable limits then we need to 
significantly reduce our greenhouse gas emissions. This makes both 
environmental and economic sense. The main greenhouse gas is carbon 
dioxide ( CO 2) produced by using fossil fuels for energy and transport.
executive summary 
“AT THE CORE OF THE ENERGY [R]EVOLUTION WILL BE A CHANGE IN THE WAY THAT ENERGY IS PRODUCED, DISTRIBUTED AND CONSUMED.” 
© GREENPEACE/MARKEL REDONDO 
image THE PS10 CONCENTRATING SOLAR THERMAL POWER PLANT IN SEVILLA, SPAIN. THE 11 MEGAWATT SOLAR POWER TOWER PRODUCES ELECTRICITY WITH 624 LARGE MOVABLE MIRRORS 
CALLED HELIOSTATS. THE SOLAR RADIATION, MIRROR DESIGN PLANT IS CAPABLE OF PRODUCING 23 GWH OF ELECTRICITY WHICH IS ENOUGH TO SUPPLY POWER TO A POPULATION OF 10,000. 
references 
1 COPENHAGEN ACCORD PLEDGES ARE PALTRY-JOERI ROGELJ, MALTE MEINSHAUSEN, APRIL 2010.
2 W. L. HARE. A SAFE LANDING FOR THE CLIMATE. STATE OF THE WORLD. WORLDWATCH 
INSTITUTE. 2009.

9climate change and security of supply 
Spurred by recent rapidly fluctuating oil prices, the issue of security of 
supply – both in terms of access to supplies and financial stability - is 
now at the top of the energy policy agenda. One reason for these price 
fluctuations is the fact that supplies of all proven resources of fossil fuels 
– oil, gas and coal – are becoming scarcer and more expensive to 
produce. So-called ‘non-conventional’ resources such as shale oil have 
even in some cases become economic, with devastating consequences for 
the local environment. What is certain is that the days of 'cheap oil' are 
coming to an end. Uranium, the fuel for nuclear power, is also a finite 
resource. By contrast, the reserves of renewable energy that are 
technically accessible globally are large enough to provide about six 
times more power than the world currently consumes - forever.
Renewable energy technologies vary widely in their technical and 
economic maturity, but there are a range of sources which offer 
increasingly attractive options. These include wind, biomass,
photovoltaics, solar thermal, geothermal, ocean and hydroelectric power.
Their common feature is that they produce little or no greenhouse gases,
and rely on virtually inexhaustible natural elements for their 'fuel'. Some 
of these technologies are already competitive. The wind power industry,
for example, continued its explosive growth in the face of a global
recession and a financial crisis in 2008 and 2009 and is a testament to 
the inherent attractiveness of renewable technology. 
Last year (2009) Bloomberg New Energy Finance reported the total
level of annual investment in clean energy as $145 billion, only a 6.5% 
drop from the record previous year. The global wind industry defied the 
economic downturn and saw its annual market grow by 41.5% over 
2008, and total global wind power capacity increase by 31.7% to 158 
GW at the end of 2009.4More grid-connected solar PV capacity was 
added worldwide than in the boom year of 2008. And the economics of 
renewables will further improve as they develop technically, as the price 
of fossil fuels continues to rise and as their saving of carbon dioxide 
emissions is given a monetary value. 
At the same time there is enormous potential for reducing our 
consumption of energy, and still continuing to provide the same level of 
energy services. This study details a series of energy efficiency measures 
which together can substantially reduce demand across industry, homes,
business and services.
In contrast to the explosive growth and promise of renewables and 
efficiency, nuclear energy is a relatively minor industry with major 
problems. The average age of operating commercial nuclear reactors is 
23 years, so more power stations are being shut down than started. In 
2008, world nuclear production fell by 2 % compared to 2006, and the 
number of operating reactors as of January 2010 was 436, eight less 
than at the historical peak of 2002. Although nuclear power produces 
little carbon dioxide, there are multiple threats to people and the 
environment from its operations. These include the risks and 
environmental damage from uranium mining, processing and transport,
the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation, the unsolved problem of 
nuclear waste and the potential hazard of a serious accident. As a 
result, nuclear power is discounted in this analysis.the energy [r]evolution 
The threat of climate change demands nothing short of an Energy 
Revolution--a transformation that has already started, as renewable 
energy markets exhibit huge and steady growth. In the first global
edition of the Energy [R]evolution, published in January 2007, we 
projected a global installed renewable capacity of 156 GW by 
2010. At the end of 2009, 158 GW has been installed. More needs 
to be done, however. At the core of this revolution will be a change 
in the way that energy is produced, distributed and consumed. The 
five key principles behind this shift will be to: 
the five key principles behind this shift will be to: 
•Implement renewable solutions, especially through decentralized 
energy systems 
•Respect the natural limits of the environment 
•Phase out dirty, unsustainable energy sources 
•Create greater equity in the use of resources 
•Decouple economic growth from the consumption of fossil fuels 
Decentralized energy systems, where power and heat are produced 
close to the point of final use, will avoid the current waste of energy 
during conversion and distribution. Investments in ‘climate 
infrastructure’ such as smart interactive grids, as well as super grids 
to transport large quantities of offshore wind and concentrating solar 
power, are essential. Building up clusters of renewable micro grids,
especially for people living in remote areas, will be a central tool in 
providing sustainable electricity to the almost two billion people 
around the world for whom access to electricity is presently denied. 
greenhouse development rights 
Although the Energy Revolution envisages a clear technological
pathway, it is only likely to be turned into reality if its 
corresponding investment costs are shared fairly under some kind 
of global climate regime. To demonstrate one such possibility, we 
have utilized the Greenhouse Development Rights framework,
designed by EcoEquity and the Stockholm Environment Institute,
as a way of evening up the inherently unequal abilities of countries 
to respond to the climate crisis in their energy polices. 
The Greenhouse Development Rights (GDR) framework calculates 
national shares of global greenhouse gas obligations based on a 
combination of responsibility (contribution to climate change) and 
capacity (ability to pay). Crucially, GDRs take inequality within 
countries into account and calculate national obligations on the basis 
of the estimated capacity and responsibility of individuals. Individuals 
references 
3 JOEL B. SMITH, STEPHEN H. SCHNEIDER, MICHAEL OPPENHEIMER, GARY W. YOHE, WILLIAM 
HARE, MICHAEL D. MASTRANDREA, ANAND PATWARDHAN, IAN BURTON, JAN CORFEE-MORLOT,
CHRIS H. D. MAGADZA, HANS-MARTIN FÜSSEL, A. BARRIE PITTOCK, ATIQ RAHMAN, AVELINO 
SUAREZ, AND JEAN-PASCAL VAN YPERSELE: ASSESSING DANGEROUS CLIMATE CHANGE 
THROUGH AN UPDATE OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE (IPCC) 
“REASONS FOR CONCERN”. PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES.
PUBLISHED ONLINE BEFORE PRINT FEBRUARY 26, 2009, DOI: 10.1073/PNAS.0812355106. THE 
ARTICLE IS FREELY AVAILABLE AT: HTTP://WWW.PNAS.ORG/CONTENT/EARLY/2009/02/25/
0812355106.FULL.PDF A COPY OF THE GRAPH CAN BE FOUND ON APPENDIX 1.
4 GLOBAL WIND 2009 REPORT, GWEC, MARCH 2010, S. SAWYER, A. ZERVOS.
© KATE DAVISON/GP image WELDER WORKING AT VESTAS 
WIND TURBINE FACTORY,
CAMPBELLTOWN, SCOTLAND.

with incomes below a ‘development threshold’ – specified in the default 
case as $7,500 per capita annual income, PPP adjusted – are 
exempted from climate-related obligations. Individuals with incomes 
above that level are expected to contribute to the costs of global
climate policy in proportion to their capacity (amount of income over 
the threshold) and responsibility (cumulative CO 2emissions). 
The result, of these calculations is that rich countries like the United 
States, which is also responsible for a large proportion of global
greenhouse gas emissions, will contribute much more towards the costs of 
implementing global climate policies (such as increasing the proportion of 
renewables) than a country like India. Based on a ‘Responsibility and 
Capacity Indicator’, the US, accounting for 36.8% of the world’s 
responsibility for climate change, will in turn be responsible for funding 
36.3% of the required global emissions reductions.
The GDR framework therefore represents a good mechanism for 
helping developing countries to leapfrog over fossil fuel dependence 
and into a sustainable energy supply, with the help of industrialized 
countries--while maintaining economic growth and the need to satisfy 
their growing energy needs. Greenpeace has taken this concept on 
board as a means of achieving equity within the climate debate and as 
a practical solution to kick-starting the renewable energy market in 
developing countries.
methodology and assumptions 
Three global scenarios up to the year 2050 are outlined in this 
report: a Reference scenario, an Energy [R]evolution scenario with 
a target to reduce energy related CO 2emissions by 50%, from their 
1990 levels, and an advanced Energy [R]evolution version which 
envisages a fall of 82% in CO 2by 2050. 
The Reference Scenario is based on the reference scenario in the 
International Energy Agency’s 2009 World Energy Outlook (WEO 
2009) analysis, extrapolated forward from 2030. Compared to the 
previous (2007) IEA projections, WEO 2009 assumes a slightly 
lower average annual growth rate of world Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) of 3.1%, instead of 3.6%, over the period 2007-2030. At 
the same time, it expects final energy consumption in 2030 to be 
6%% lower than in the 2007 report. China and India are expected 
to grow faster than other regions, followed by the Other Developing 
Asia group of countries, Africa and the Transition Economies 
(mainly the former Soviet Union). The OECD share of global
purchasing power parity (PPP) adjusted GDP will decrease from 
55% in 2007 to 29% by 2050.
The Energy [R]evolution Scenario has a key target for the 
reduction of worldwide carbon dioxide emissions down to a level of 
around 10 Gigatons per year by 2050. A second objective is the 
global phasing out of nuclear energy. To achieve these goals the 
scenario is characterized by significant efforts to fully exploit the 
large potential for energy efficiency. At the same time, all cost- 
effective renewable energy sources are used for heat and electricity 
generation, as well as the production of bio fuels. The general
framework parameters for population and GDP growth remain 
unchanged from the Reference scenario.
The Advanced Energy [R]evolution Scenario takes a much more 
radical approach to the climate crisis facing the world. In order to pull the emergency brake on global emissions it therefore assumes 
much shorter technical lifetimes for coal-fired power plants - 20 
years instead of 40 years. This reduces global CO 2emissions even 
faster and takes the latest evidence of greater climate sensitivity 
into account. To fill the resulting gap, the annual growth rates of 
renewable energy sources, especially solar photovoltaics, wind and 
concentrating solar power plants, have therefore been increased.
Apart from that, the advanced scenario takes on board all the 
general framework parameters of population and economic growth 
from the basic version, as well as most of the energy efficiency 
roadmap. In the transport sector, however, there is 56% lower final
energy demand due to a combination of simply less driving and 
instead increase use of public transport and a faster uptake of 
efficient combustion vehicles and – after 2025 – a larger share of 
electric vehicles. 
Within the heating sector there is a faster expansion of CHP in the 
industry sector, more electricity for process heat and a faster 
growth of solar and geothermal heating systems. Combined with a 
larger share of electric drives in the transport sector, this results in 
a higher overall demand for power. Even so, the overall global
electricity demand in the advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario is 
still lower than in the Reference scenario. 
In the advanced scenario the latest market development projections of 
the renewable industry 5have been calculated for all sectors (see Chapter 
5, Table 5.13: Annual growth rates of renewable energy technologies).
The speedier uptake of electric vehicles, combined with the faster 
implementation of smart grids and expanding super grids (about ten 
years ahead of the basic version) allows a higher share of fluctuating 
renewable power generation (photovoltaic and wind). The threshold of a 
40% proportion of renewables in global primary energy supply is 
therefore passed just after 2030 (also ten years ahead). By contrast, the 
quantity of biomass and large hydro power remain the same in both 
Energy [R]evolution scenarios, for sustainability reasons. 
towards a renewable future 
Today, renewable energy sources account for 5.4% of the USA ´s
primary energy demand. Biomass, which is mostly used in the heat sector,
is the main source. The share of renewable energies for electricity 
generation is 8.6%, while their contribution to heat supply is around 
11.6% (to a large extent accounted for by traditional uses such as 
collected firewood). About 80% of the primary energy supply today still
comes from fossil fuels. Both Energy [R]evolution Scenarios describe 
development pathways which turn the present situation into a sustainable 
energy supply, with the advanced version achieving the urgently needed 
CO 2reduction target more than a decade earlier than the basic scenario. 
The following summary shows the results of the advanced 
Energy [R]evolution scenario, which will be achieved through 
the following measures: 
•Exploitation of existing large energy efficiency potentials will
ensure that final energy demand decreases significantly - from the 
current 66,935 PJ/a (2007) to 46,897 PJ/a in 2050, compared 
to 72,483 PJ/a in the Reference scenario. This dramatic 
reduction is a crucial prerequisite for achieving a significant 
10 WORLD ENERGY [R]EVOLUTION 
A SUSTAINABLE ENERGY OUTLOOK 
references 
5 SEE EREC, RE-THINKING 2050, GWEC, EPIA ET AL. “The long term scenario has been developed 
further towards a complete phasing out of 
fossil fuels in the second half of this century.” 

11 
 © GP/ALBERTO CESAR ARAUJO image THOUSANDS OF FISH DIE AT THE 
DRY RIVER BED OF MANAQUIRI LAKE,
150 KILOMETERS FROM AMAZONAS 
STATE CAPITOL MANAUS, BRAZIL.
share of renewable energy sources in the overall energy supply 
system, compensating for the phasing out of nuclear energy and 
reducing the consumption of fossil fuels.
•More electric drives are used in the transport sector and hydrogen 
produced by electrolysis from excess renewable electricity plays a 
much bigger role in the advanced than in the basic scenario. After 
2020, the final energy share of electric vehicles on the road 
increases to 8.6% and by 2050 to over 91%. More public 
transport systems also use electricity, as well as there being a 
greater shift in transporting freight from road to rail.
•The increased use of combined heat and power generation (CHP) also 
improves the supply system’s energy conversion efficiency, increasingly 
using natural gas and biomass. In the long term, the decreasing 
demand for heat and the large potential for producing heat directly 
from renewable energy sources limits the further expansion of CHP.
•The electricity sector will be the pioneer of renewable energy 
utilization. By 2050, around 98% of electricity will be produced 
from renewable sources. A capacity of 2,533 GW will produce 
6,446 TWh/a renewable electricity in 2050. A significant share of 
the fluctuating power generation from wind and solar photovoltaic 
will be used to supply electricity to vehicle batteries and produce 
hydrogen as a secondary fuel in transport and industry. By using 
load management strategies, excess electricity generation will be 
reduced and more balancing power made available.
•In the heat supply sector, the contribution of renewables will
increase to 98% by 2050. Fossil fuels will be increasingly 
replaced by more efficient modern technologies, in particular 
biomass, solar collectors and geothermal. Geothermal heat pumps 
and, in the world’s sunbelt regions, concentrating solar power, will
play a growing part in industrial heat production.
•In the transport sector the existing large efficiency potentials will
be exploited by a modal shift from road to rail and by using much 
lighter and smaller vehicles. As biomass is mainly committed to 
stationary applications, the production of bio fuels is limited by 
the availability of sustainable raw materials. Electric vehicles,
powered by renewable energy sources, will play an increasingly 
important role from 2020 onwards.
•By 2050, 87.4% of primary energy demand will be covered by 
renewable energy sources.
To achieve an economically attractive growth of renewable energy 
sources, a balanced and timely mobilisation of all technologies is of 
great importance. Such mobilisation depends on technical potentials,
actual costs, cost reduction potentials and technical maturity. Climate 
infrastructure such as district heating systems, smart- and supergrids 
for renewable power generation as well as more R&D in storage 
technologies for electricity are from great importance to turn this 
scenario into reality. The successful implementation of smart grids is 
vital for the advanced Energy [R]evolution from 2020 onwards.
It is also important to highlight that in the advanced Energy 
[R]evolution scenario the majority of remaining coal power plants – 
which will be replaced 20 years before the end of their technical
lifetime – are in China and India. This means that in practice all coal
power plants built between 2005 and 2020 will be replaced by renewable energy sources from 2040 onwards. To support the building 
of capacity in developing countries significant new public financing,
especially from industrialized countries, will be needed. It is vital that 
specific funding mechanisms such as the “Greenhouse Development 
Rights” (GDR) and “Feed-in tariff” schemes (see chapter 2) are 
developed under the international climate negotiations that can assist 
the transfer of financial support to climate change mitigation,
including technology transfer. 
future costs 
Renewable energy will initially cost more to implement than existing 
fuels. The slightly higher electricity generation costs under the advanced 
Energy [R]evolution scenario will be compensated for, however, by 
reduced demand for fuels in other sectors such as heating and 
transport. Assuming average costs of 3 cents/kWh for implementing 
energy efficiency measures, the additional cost for electricity supply 
under the advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario will amount to a 
maximum of $42 billion/a in 2030. These additional costs, which 
represent society’s investment in an environmentally benign, safe and 
economic energy supply, continue to decrease after 2030. By 2050 the 
annual costs of electricity supply will be $183 billion/a below those in 
the Reference scenario. It is assumed that average crude oil prices will
increase from $97 per barrel in 2008 to $130 per barrel in 2020, and 
continue to rise to $150 per barrel in 2050. Natural gas import prices 
are expected to increase by a factor of four between 2008 and 2050,
while coal prices will continue to rise, reaching $172 per tonne in 
2050. A CO 2‘price adder’ is applied, which rises from $20 per ton of 
CO 2in 2020 to $50 per ton in 2050. 
future investment 
It would require until 2030 $5.1 trillion in investment for the advanced 
Energy [R]evolution scenario to become reality - approximately 160% 
higher than in the Reference scenario ($2.0 trillion). Until 2050 
investments sum up to $8.4 trillion in the advanced scenario compared 
to $3.2 trillion in the reference case. Under the advanced scenario,
however, the world shifts about 80% of investment towards renewables 
and cogeneration; by 2050 the fossil fuel share of power sector 
investment would be focused mainly on combined heat and power and 
efficient gas-fired power plants. The average annual investment in the 
power sector under the advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario between 
2007 and 2050 would be approximately $196 billion. 
Because renewable energy has no fuel costs (except biomass),
however, the fuel cost savings in the advanced Energy [R]evolution 
scenario reach a total of $1.3 trillion, or $55 billion per year until
2030 and a total of $6.3 trillion, or $146 billion per year until 2050.
This means that under the Reference scenario the additional costs for 
fossil fuels from 2007 until the year 2050 are as high as $6.3 trillion,
which is significantly higher than the entire additional investment in 
renewable and cogeneration capacity required to implement the 
advanced scenario. These renewable energy sources would then go on to 
produce electricity without any further fuel costs beyond 2050, while 
the costs for coal and gas will continue to be a burden on national
economies. Part of this money could be used to cover stranded 
investments in fossil-fuelled power stations in developing countries.

future global employment 
Worldwide, we would see more direct jobs created in the energy 
sector if we shifted to either of the Energy [R]evolutions. The 
Energy [R]evolution scenarios lead to more energy sector jobs in 
USA at every stage of the projection.
•There are 1.1 million energy sector jobs in the Energy 
[R]evolution scenario and 1.4 in the advanced version by 2015,
compared to 0.47 million in the Reference scenario.
•By 2020 job numbers reach 1.17 million in the Energy 
[R]evolution scenario (1.34 million in the advanced version),
twice as much as in the Reference scenario. 
•By 2030 job numbers in the renewable energy sector reach 834,000 
in the Energy [R]evolution scenario, 1.1 million in the advanced 
version) and reach only 231,000 in the Reference scenario.
development of CO 2emissions 
While US emissions of CO 2will decrease by 4% under the Reference 
scenario, under the Energy [R]evolution scenario they will decrease 
from 5,742 million tons in 2007 to 728 million tons in 2050, 86% 
below 1990 levels. Annual per capita emissions will drop from 
18.6 tons/capita to 1.8 tons/capita. In spite of the phasing out of 
nuclear energy and a growing electricity demand, CO 2emissions will
decrease enormously in the electricity sector. In the long run efficiency 
gains and the increased use of renewable electric vehicles, as well as a 
sharp expansion in public transport, will even reduce CO 2emissions in 
the transport sector. With a share of 48% of total emissions in 2050,
the transport sector will reduce significantly but remain the largest 
source of CO 2emissions - followed by industry and power generation.The advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario reduces energy related 
CO2 emissions over a period ten to 15 years faster than the basic 
scenario, leading to 5.9 t per capita by 2030 and 0.3 t by 2050.
policy changes 
To make the Energy [R]evolution real and to avoid dangerous 
climate change, Greenpeace and EREC demand that the following 
policies and actions are implemented in the energy sector: 
1.Phase out all subsidies for fossil fuels and nuclear energy.
2.Internalize the external (social and environmental) costs of 
energy production through emissions trading and regulation. 
3.Mandate strict efficiency standards for all energy consuming 
appliances, buildings and vehicles.
4.Establish legally binding targets for renewable energy and 
combined heat and power generation.
5.Reform the electricity markets by guaranteeing priority access to 
the grid for renewable power generators. 
6.Provide defined and stable returns for investors, with programs 
like feed-in tariffs.
7.Implement better labelling and disclosure mechanisms to provide 
more environmental product information.
8.Increase research and development budgets for renewable energy 
and energy efficiency.
12 WORLD ENERGY [R]EVOLUTION 
A SUSTAINABLE ENERGY OUTLOOK 
figure 0.1:development of primary energy consumption under the three scenarios 
(‘EFFICIENCY’ = REDUCTION COMPARED TO THE REFERENCE SCENARIO) 
PJ/a 020,00040,00060,00080,000100,000120,000
REF E[R]
2007adv 
E[R]REF E[R]
2015adv 
E[R]REF E[R]
2020adv 
E[R]REF E[R]
2030adv 
E[R]REF E[R]
2040adv 
E[R]REF E[R]
2050adv 
E[R]•‘EFFICIENCY’•OCEAN ENERGY •GEOTHERMAL •SOLAR •BIOMASS •WIND •HYDRO •NATURAL GAS •OIL •COAL •NUCLEAR “Worldwide we would see more direct jobs created in the 
energy sector if we shift to either of the Energy [R]evolution 
scenarios than if we continue business as usual.” 

2010 2050 2045 2040 2035 2030 2025 2020 2015 
13 
 © PAUL LANGROCK/ZENIT/GP image CONSTRUCTION OF THE OFFSHORE 
WINDFARM AT MIDDELGRUNDEN NEAR 
COPENHAGEN, DENMARK.
table 0.1:energy [r]evolution: summary for policy makers 
WHO 
UNFCCC 
UNFCCC 
UNFCCC 
UNFCCC 
UNFCCC 
USA 
G8 
G8 
G8 
National Governments 
National Governments 
National Governments 
National Governments 
G20 
UNFCCC 
UNFCCC 
UNFCCC 
National Governments 
G8 + G77 
Utilities & RE Industry 
National Governments 
Gov & Grid Operator 
RE - Industry 
Utilities 
Utilities 
RE Industry 
National Governments 
RE Industry 
Cusumer Product Dev.
IT Industry 
Industry + Gov.
Gov. + Logistic Industry 
Regional Governments 
Car-Industry POLICY 
Climate 
• Peak global temperature rise well below 2°C 
• Reduce ghg emissions by 40% by 2020 (as compared to 1990) in developed countries 
• Reduce ghg emissions by 15 to 30% of projected growth by 2020 in developing countries 
• Achieve zero deforestation globally by 2020 
• Agree a legally binding global climate deal as soon as possible 
Energy 
• USA: binding target of at least 20% renewable energy in primary energy consumption by 2020 
• G8: min 20% renewable energy by 2020 
• No new construction permits for new coal power plants in Annex 1 countries by 2012 
• Priority access to the grid for renewables 
• Establish efficiency targets and strict standards for electric applications 
• Strict efficiency target for vehicles: 80g CO 2/km by 2020 
• Build regulations with mandatory renewable energy shares (e.g. solar collectors) 
• Co-generation law for industry and district heating support program 
Finance 
• Phase-out subsidies for fossil and nuclear fuels 
• Put in place a Climate Fund under the auspices of the UNFCCC 
• Provide at least 140 billion USD/year to the Climate Fund by 2020 
• Ensure priority access to the fund for vulnerable countries and communities 
• Establish feed-in law for renewable power generation in Annex 1 countries 
• Establish feed-in law with funding from Annex 1 countries for dev. countries 
ENERGY [R]EVOLUTION RESULTS 
Renewables & Supply 
Global Renewable Power Generation 
• Shares (max = adv. ER - Min = ER): 30% / 50% /75% / over 90% 
• Implementation of Smart Grids ( Policy /Planning /Construction )
• Smart Grids interconnection to Super Grids ( Policy /Planning /Construction )
• Renewables cost competive (max = worst case - min = best case) 
• Phase out of coal power plants in OECD countries 
• Phase out of nuclear power plants in OECD countries 
Global Renewable Heat supply shares 
• Shares (max = adv. ER - Min = ER): 30% / 50% / 75% / over 90% 
• Implementation of district heating ( Policy /Planning /Construction )
• Renewables cost competive (max = worst case - min = best case) 
Global Renewable Final Energy shares 
• Shares (max = adv. ER - Min = ER): 30% / 50% / 75% / over 90% 
• Consumer and business (Other Sectors) 
• Industry 
• Transport 
• Total Final Energy 
Efficiency & Demand 
Global Statonary Energy Use 
• Efficiency standards reduce OECD household demand to 550 kWh/a per person 
• Power demand for IT equipment stablized and start to decrease 
• National energy intensity drops to 3 MJ/$GDP (Japan ’s level today) 
Global Transport Development 
• Shift fright from road to rail and where possible from aviation to ships 
• Shift towards more public transport 
• Efficient cars become mainstream 
Energy Related CO 2Emissions 
• Global CO 2reductions (min = adv. ER - Max = ER): Emission peak /-30% / -50% / -80% 
• Annex 1 CO 2reductions (min = adv. ER - Max = ER): Emission peak / -30% / -50% / -80% 
• Non Annex 1 CO 2reductions (min = adv. ER - Max = ER): Emission peak / -30% / -50% / -80% emissions final energy heating power mechanisms targets targets transport consumer 

1climate protection and energy policy 
GLOBAL THE KYOTO PROTOCOL 
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY POLICY RENEWABLE ENERGY TARGETS 
DEMANDS FOR THE ENERGY SECTOR 
“never before has 
humanity been forced 
to grapple with 
such an immense 
environmental crisis.” 
GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL 
CLIMATE CAMPAIGN 
14 
image THE LOCAL ALASKAN TELEVISION STATION 
BROADCASTS A WARNING FOR HIGH TIDES AND 
EROSION ALONG THE SEASIDE DURING A 2006 
OCTOBER STORM WHICH IMPACTS ON THE VILLAGE 
OF SHISHMAREF. © GP/ROBERT KNOTH 

“climate change has 
moved from being a 
predominantly physical
phenomenon to being a 
social one” (hulme, 2009).” climate protection |CLIMATE CHANGE EFFECTS 1
This is a summary of some likely effects if we allow 
current trends to continue: 
Likely effects of small to moderate warming 
•Sea level rise due to melting glaciers and the thermal expansion 
of the oceans as global temperature increases. Massive releases 
of greenhouse gases from melting permafrost and dying forests. 
•A greater risk of more extreme weather events such as 
heatwaves, droughts and floods. Already, the global incidence 
of drought has doubled over the past 30 years. 
•Severe regional impacts. In Europe, river flooding will increase,
as well as coastal flooding, erosion and wetland loss. Flooding 
will also severely affect low-lying areas in developing countries 
such as Bangladesh and South China.
•Natural systems, including glaciers, coral reefs, mangroves, alpine 
ecosystems, boreal forests, tropical forests, prairie wetlands and 
native grasslands will be severely threatened. 
•Increased risk of species extinction and biodiversity loss. 
The greatest impacts will be on poorer countries in sub-Saharan 
Africa, South Asia, Southeast Asia and Andean South America as 
well as small islands least able to protect themselves from 
increasing droughts, rising sea levels, the spread of disease and 
decline in agricultural production. 
longer term catastrophic effects Warming from emissions may 
trigger the irreversible meltdown of the Greenland ice sheet, adding 
up to seven metres of sea level rise over several centuries. New 
evidence shows that the rate of ice discharge from parts of the 
Antarctic mean it is also at risk of meltdown. Slowing, shifting or 
shutting down of the Atlantic Gulf Stream current will have 
dramatic effects in Europe, and disrupt the global ocean circulation 
system. Large releases of methane from melting permafrost and 
from the oceans will lead to rapid increases of the gas in the 
atmosphere, and consequent warming. image WANG WAN YI, AGE 76, ADJUSTS THE SUNLIGHT 
POINT ON A SOLAR DEVICE USED TO BOIL HIS KETTLE.
HE LIVES WITH HIS WIFE IN ONE ROOM CARVED OUT 
OF THE SANDSTONE, A TYPICAL DWELLING FOR LOCAL 
PEOPLE IN THE REGION. DROUGHT IS ONE OF THE MOST 
HARMFUL NATURAL HAZARDS IN NORTHWEST CHINA.
CLIMATE CHANGE HAS A SIGNIFICANT IMPACT ON 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT AND ECONOMY.
© GP/JOHN NOVIS 
The greenhouse effect is the process by which the atmosphere traps 
some of the sun’s energy, warming the earth and moderating our 
climate. A human-driven increase in ‘greenhouse gases’ has 
enhanced this effect artificially, raising global temperatures and 
disrupting our climate. These greenhouse gases include carbon 
dioxide, produced by burning fossil fuels and through deforestation,
methane, released from agriculture, animals and landfill sites, and 
nitrous oxide, resulting from agricultural production, plus a variety 
of industrial chemicals. 
Every day we damage our climate by using fossil fuels (oil, coal and 
gas) for energy and transport. As a result, climate change is already 
impacting on our lives, and is expected to destroy the livelihoods of 
many people in the developing world, as well as ecosystems and 
species, in the coming decades. We therefore need to significantly 
reduce our greenhouse gas emissions. This makes both 
environmental and economic sense. 
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the 
United Nations forum for established scientific opinionon climate 
change, the world’s temperature could potentially increase over the 
next hundred years by up to 6.4° Celsius. This is much faster than 
anything experienced so far in human history. The goal of climate 
policy should be to avoid dangerous climate change, which is being 
translated in limiting global mean temperature rise, as compared to 
pre-industrial levels, well below 2°C above, or even below 1.5°C.
Above these tresholds, we will reach dangerous tipping points and 
damage to ecosystems and disruption to the climate system 
increases dramatically. We have very little time within which we can 
change our energy system to meet these targets. This means that 
global emissions will have to peak and start to decline by 2015.
Climate change is already harming people and ecosystems. Its 
reality can be seen in disintegrating polar ice, thawing permafrost,
dying coral reefs, rising sea levels and fatal heat waves. It is not 
only scientists that are witnessing these changes. From the Inuit in 
the far north to islanders near the Equator, people are already 
struggling with the impacts of climate change. An average global
warming of 1.5°C threatens millions of people with an increased 
risk of hunger, malaria, flooding and water shortages. Never before 
has humanity been forced to grapple with such an immense 
environmental crisis. If we do not take urgent and immediate action 
to stop global warming, the damage could become irreversible. 
This can only happen through a rapid reduction in the emission 
of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.
15 

16 WORLD ENERGY [R]EVOLUTION 
A SUSTAINABLE ENERGY OUTLOOK 
the kyoto protocol
Recognising these threats, the signatories to the 1992 UN 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) agreed the 
Kyoto Protocol in 1997. The Protocol finally entered into force in 
early 2005 and its 190 member countries meet annually to 
negotiate further refinement and development of the agreement.
Only one major industrialised nation, the United States, has not 
ratified Kyoto. 
The Kyoto Protocol commits the signatories from developed 
countries to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by 5.2% from 
their 1990 level by the target period of 2008-2012. This has in 
turn resulted in the adoption of a series of regional and national
reduction targets. In the European Union, for instance, the 
commitment is to an overall reduction of 8%. In order to help 
reach this target, the EU has also agreed a target to increase its 
proportion of renewable energy from 6% to 12% by 2010. 
At present, the 193 members of the UNFCCC are negotiating a new 
climate change agreement that should enable all countries to 
continue contributing to ambitious and fair emission reductions.
Unfortunately the ambition to reach such an agreement in 
Copenhagen failed and governments will continue negotiating in 
2010 and possibly beyond to reach a new fair, ambitous and legally 
binding deal. Such a deal will need to ensure industrialized 
countries reduce their emissions on average by at least 40% by 
2020, as compared to 1990 emissions. They will further need to 
provide at least $US 140 billion a year to developing countries to 
enable them to adapt to climate change, to protect their forests and 
to achieve the energy revolution. Developing countries should 
reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by 15 to 30% as compared 
to the projected growth of their emissions by 2020. 
This new FAB deal will need to incoporate the Kyoto Protocol’s 
architecture. This relies fundamentally on legally binding emissions 
reduction obligations. To achieve these targets, carbon is turned into 
a commodity which can be traded. The aim is to encourage the 
most economically efficient emissions reductions, in turn leveraging 
the necessary investment in clean technology from the private 
sector to drive a revolution in energy supply. 
After Copenhagen, governments need to increase their ambitions to 
reduce emissions and need to even more invest in making the 
energy revolution happening. Greenpeace believes that it is feasible 
to reach a FAB deal in Cancun at the end of this year, if their 
would be sufficient political will to conclude such an agreement.
That political will seems to be absent at the moment, but even if a 
FAB deal could not be finalised in COP16, due to lack of ambition 
and commitment of some countries, major parts of the deal must 
be put in place in Cancun, specifically those related to long term 
finance commitments, forest protection and overall ambition of 
emission reductions, so that by the Environment and Development 
Summit in Brazil in 2012 we can celebrate a deal that keeps the 
world well below 2 degrees warming with good certainty.international energy policy 
At present, renewable energy generators have to compete with old 
nuclear and fossil fuel power stations which produce electricity at 
marginal costs because consumers and taxpayers have already paid 
the interest and depreciation on the original investments. Political
action is needed to overcome these distortions and create a level
playing field for renewable energy technologies to compete.
At a time when governments around the world are in the process of 
liberalising their electricity markets, the increasing competitiveness of 
renewable energy should lead to higher demand. Without political
support, however, renewable energy remains at a disadvantage,
marginalised by distortions in the world’s electricity markets created 
by decades of massive financial, political and structural support to 
conventional technologies. Developing renewables will therefore 
require strong political and economic efforts, especially through laws 
that guarantee stable tariffs over a period of up to 20 years.
Renewable energy will also contribute to sustainable economic 
growth, high quality jobs, technology development, global
competitiveness and industrial and research leadership.
renewable energy targets 
In recent years, in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as well
as increase energy security, a growing number of countries have 
established targets for renewable energy. These are either expressed 
in terms of installed capacity or as a percentage of energy 
consumption. These targets have served as important catalysts for 
increasing the share of renewable energy throughout the world. 
A time period of just a few years is not long enough in the 
electricity sector, however, where the investment horizon can be up 
to 40 years. Renewable energy targets therefore need to have short,
medium and long term steps and must be legally binding in order to 
be effective. They should also be supported by mechanisms such as 
feed-in tariffs for renewable electricity generation. In order for the 
proportion of renewable energy to increase significantly, targets 
must be set in accordance with the local potential for each 
technology (wind, solar, biomass etc) and be complemented by 
policies that develop the skills and manufacturing bases to deliver 
the agreed quantity of renewable energy. 
In recent years the wind and solar power industries have shown 
that it is possible to maintain a growth rate of 30 to 35% in the 
renewables sector. In conjunction with the European Photovoltaic 
Industry Association 6, the European Solar Thermal Power Industry 
Association 7and the Global Wind Energy Council8, the European 
Renewable Energy Council and Greenpeace have documented the 
development of those industries from 1990 onwards and outlined a 
prognosis for growth up to 2020 and 2040. 1climate protection |KYOTO PROTOCOL 
references 
6 ‘SOLARGENERATION IV’, SEPTEMBER 2009.
7 GLOBAL CONCENTRATED SOLAR POWER OUTLOOK – WHY RENEWABLES ARE HOT! MAY,
2009.
8 ‘GLOBAL WIND ENERGY OUTLOOK 2008’, OCTOBER 2008.

17 demands for the energy sector 
Greenpeace and the renewables industry have a clear 
agenda for the policy changes which need to be made 
to encourage a shift to renewable sources. 
The main demands are:
1.Phase out all subsidies for fossil fuels and nuclear energy. 
2.Internalise external (social and environmental) costs through 
‘cap and trade’ emissions trading.
3.Mandate strict efficiency standards for all energy consuming 
appliances, buildings and vehicles.
4.Establish legally binding targets for renewable energy 
and combined heat and power generation.
5.Reform the electricity markets by guaranteeing priority access 
to the grid for renewable power generators. 
6.Provide defined and stable returns for investors, for example 
through feed-in tariff payments.
7.Implement better labelling and disclosure mechanisms to provide 
more environmental product information.
8.Increase research and development budgets for renewable energy 
and energy efficiency 
Conventional energy sources receive an estimated $250-300 billion 9
in subsidies per year worldwide, resulting in heavily distorted markets.
Subsidies artificially reduce the price of power, keep renewable energy 
out of the market place and prop up non-competitive technologies 
and fuels. Eliminating direct and indirect subsidies to fossil fuels and 
nuclear power would help move us towards a level playing field across 
the energy sector. Renewable energy would not need special provisions 
if markets factored in the cost of climate damage from greenhouse 
gas pollution. Subsidies to polluting technologies are perverse in that 
they are economically as well as environmentally detrimental.
Removing subsidies from conventional electricity would not only save 
taxpayers’ money. It would also dramatically reduce the need for 
renewable energy support.
© GP/PETER CATON image A PRAWN SEED FARM ON 
MAINLAND INDIA’S SUNDARBANS COAST 
LIES FLOODED AFTER CYCLONE AILA.
INUNDATING AND DESTROYING NEARBY 
ROADS AND HOUSES WITH SALT WATER.1climate protection |DEMANDS FOR THE ENERGY SECTOR 
references 
9 WORLD ENERGY ASSESSMENT: ENERGY AND THE CHALLENGE OF SUSTAINABILITY’,
UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME, 2000.
© GP/PETER CATON 
© GP/STEVE MORGAN 
© GP/PETER CATON 
© GP/STEVE MORGAN 
© GP/JOHN NOVIS 
images 1.AN AERIAL VIEW OF PERMAFROST TUNDRA IN THE YAMAL PENINSULA. THE 
ENTIRE REGION IS UNDER HEAVY THREAT FROM GLOBAL WARMING AS TEMPERATURES 
INCREASE AND RUSSIA’S ANCIENT PERMAFROST MELTS. 2. SOVARANI KOYAL LIVES IN 
SATJELLIA ISLAND AND IS ONE OF THE MANY PEOPLE AFFECTED BY SEA LEVEL RISE: 
“NOWADAYS, HEAVY FLOODS ARE GOING ON HERE. THE WATER LEVEL IS INCREASING 
AND THE TEMPERATURE TOO. WE CANNOT LIVE HERE, THE HEAT IS BECOMING 
UNBEARABLE. WE HAVE RECEIVED A PLASTIC SHEET AND HAVE COVERED OUR HOME 
WITH IT. DURING THE COMING MONSOON WE SHALL WRAP OUR BODIES IN THE PLASTIC 
TO STAY DRY. WE HAVE ONLY A FEW GOATS BUT WE DO NOT KNOW WHERE THEY ARE. WE 
ALSO HAVE TWO CHILDREN AND WE CANNOT MANAGE TO FEED THEM.” 3. WANG WAN YI,
AGE 76, SITS INSIDE HIS HOME WHERE HE LIVES WITH HIS WIFE IN ONE ROOM CARVED 
OUT OF THE SANDSTONE, A TYPICAL DWELLING FOR LOCAL PEOPLE IN THE REGION.
DROUGHT IS ONE OF THE MOST HARMFUL NATURAL HAZARDS IN NORTHWEST CHINA.
CLIMATE CHANGE HAS A SIGNIFICANT IMPACT ON CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT AND 
ECONOMY. 4. INDIGENOUS NENETS PEOPLE WITH THEIR REINDEER. THE NENETS PEOPLE 
MOVE EVERY 3 OR 4 DAYS SO THAT THEIR HERDS DO NOT OVER GRAZE THE GROUND. THE 
ENTIRE REGION AND ITS INHABITANTS ARE UNDER HEAVY THREAT FROM GLOBAL 
WARMING AS TEMPERATURES INCREASE AND RUSSIA’S ANCIENT PERMAFROST MELTS.
5. A BOY HOLDS HIS MOTHER’S HANDS WHILST IN A QUEUE FOR EMERGENCY RELIEF 
SUPPLY. SCIENTISTS ESTIMATE THAT OVER 70,000 PEOPLE, LIVING EFFECTIVELY ON THE 
FRONT LINE OF CLIMATE CHANGE, WILL BE DISPLACED FROM THE SUNDARBANS DUE TO 
SEA LEVEL RISE BY THE YEAR 2030.1
32
45
“If we do not take urgent 
and immediate action to 
protect the climate the 
damage could become 
irreversible.” 





Greenpeace is a global organisation that uses non-violent direct 
action to tackle the most crucial threats to our planet’s biodiversity 
and environment. Greenpeace is a non-profit organisation, present 
in 40 countries across Europe, the Americas, Africa, Asia and the 
Pacific. It speaks for 2.8 million supporters worldwide, and inspires 
many millions more to take action every day. To maintain its 
independence, Greenpeace does not accept donations from 
governments or corporations but relies on contributions 
from individual supporters and foundation grants.
Greenpeace has been campaigning against environmental
degradation since 1971 when a small boat of volunteers and 
journalists sailed into Amchitka, an area west of Alaska, where 
the US Government was conducting underground nuclear tests. 
This tradition of ‘bearing witness’ in a non-violent manner continues 
today, and ships are an important part of all its campaign work.
Greenpeace International 
Ottho Heldringstraat 5, 1066 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
t +31 20 718 2000  f +31 20 718 2002 
sven.teske@greenpeace.org 
www.greenpeace.org european renewable energy council - [ EREC] 
Created in April 2000, the European Renewable Energy Council
(EREC) is the umbrella organisation of the European renewable 
energy industry, trade and research associations active in the 
sectors of bioenergy, geothermal, ocean, small hydro power, solar 
electricity, solar thermal and wind energy. EREC thus represents the 
European renewable energy industry with an annual turnover of 
€70 billion and employing 550,000 people.
EREC is composed of the following non-profit associations and 
federations: AEBIOM (European Biomass Association); EGEC 
(European Geothermal Energy Council); EPIA (European Photovoltaic 
Industry Association); ESHA (European Small Hydro power 
Association); ESTIF (European Solar Thermal Industry Federation); 
EUBIA (European Biomass Industry Association); EWEA (European 
Wind Energy Association); EUREC Agency (European Association of 
Renewable Energy Research Centers); EREF (European Renewable 
Energies Federation); EU-OEA (European Ocean Energy Association); 
ESTELA (European Solar Thermal Electricity Association).
EREC European Renewable Energy Council 
Renewable Energy House, 63-67 rue d’Arlon, 
B-1040 Brussels, Belgium 
t +32 2 546 1933  f+32 2 546 1934 
erec@erec.org  www.erec.org ener gy 
[r]evolution 
© GREENPEACE/NICK COBBING 
image ICE MELTING ON A BERG ON THE GREENLANDIC COAST. GREENPEACE AND AN INDEPENDENT NASA-FUNDED SCIENTIST COMPLETED MEASUREMENTS OF MELT LAKES ON 
THE GREENLAND ICE SHEET THAT SHOW ITS VULNERABILITY TO WARMING TEMPERATURES. front cover images WIND TURBINE FARM IN CALIFORNIA. ©
PHOTOQUEST/DREAMSTIME.© IMDAN/DREAMSTIME. © PHOTOQUEST/DREAMSTIME.