# Archivo original: finding-chemo-toxic-children.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:10 -03 2025

CORPORATE CRIMESCORPORATE CRIMESGREENPEACE GREENPEACE 
INVESTIGATINVESTIGATIONSIONS
Toxic Textiles Toxic Textiles 
By DisneyBy Disney
Disney used 
to be MAGIC,
now it’s TOXIC!  AUTHORS: HENRIK PEDERSEN & JACOB HARTMANN 
LAYOUT: KARIN BRODÉN   
ILLUSTRATIONS: CARL QUIST MØLLER
Brussels, April 2004 
ISBN number: 90-73361-83-4 
Printed on chlorine-free paperToxic Childrenswear By Disney“The Walt Disney Company is always
concerned with quality and  safety”
LETTER TO GREENPEACE 28. OCTOBER 2003

GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS2CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Summary –GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS
–Report –
INTRODUCTION
Although the widespread presence of
hazardous man-made chemicals in theenvironment is increasingly being docu-mented, few people are aware thatmany of these same chemicals are foundin children’s clothes. Greenpeace under-took this investigation as part of its cam-paign to show how dangerous chemi-cals are out of control, turning up inhouse dust, in household products,food, rain water, in our clothes……andultimately in our bodies.
1
Before a garment reaches the shops,
it has been through many processingsteps that contribute to its overall chemi-cal footprint and the final chemicalresidues remaining in the finished prod-uct. Manufacture of fibres and yarn, pre-treatment, dyeing, printing, aftercareand preservation all involve the use ofchemicals, including inevitable directreleases to the environment during man-ufacture and the potential for long-termdispersive releases of chemicals from thefinished textiles during wear, launderingand final disposal. 
Chemically processed textiles
inevitably contribute to our overall expo-sure to chemicals from consumer prod-ucts, as well as providing a more directroute of chemical exposure through con-tact with the skin. Of course, whilst it hasnot been conclusively proven that suchexposure is causing adverse health effects,given the hazards associated with thechemicals in question, there is absolutelyno reason for complacence. 
To date, the issue of chemical expo-
sure in consumer products has generallybeen poorly investigated and improperlyassessed. It is vital that consumer productsshould be safe to use and are free from
hazardous chemicals. So far, there is noguarantee that this is the case and grow-ing evidence to the contrary. In effect, theconsumer currently has no right to knowwhich products contain hazardous addi-tives or contaminants and no way to
make informed decisions to minimiseor avoid their exposure to hazardouschemicals.
TESTING OF 
DISNEY CHILDRENSWEAR
In late 2003, Greenpeace bought a range
of Disney childrenswear, including t-shirts, vests, pyjamas, rainwear and under-wear, from 19 countries around theworld, including Europe, Asia, North andSouth America and New Zealand. Theprinted sections of the garments bearingthe Disney logo or a Disney trademarkedcharacter were analysed for substanceswhich may be capable of causing repro-ductive and immune system disorders,hormone mimicking or even cancer in avariety of living organisms (see Annex A).
1  See Campaigns, Toxics at: http://www.greenpeace.org.uk/EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report shows that chemicals that may present a long-term hazard to
human health are present in Disney childrenswear. Disney garments, includingT-shirts, pyjamas and underwear, were bought in retail outlets in 19 countries
around the world and the printed logo sections analysed for a number ofchemicals by the Danish independent laboratory Eurofins. 
The results show clear differences in the chemical content of the finished gar-
ments. The bad news is that most prints contained high levels of one or other ofthe hazardous chemicals. The good news is that some Disney prints have beenproduced without using certain of these hazardous chemicals. This provides astrong indication that, if Disney cared about chemical contaminants in their chil-drenswear, hazardous substances could be substituted or simply avoided.
Greenpeace has urged Disney to take responsibility for avoiding or substituting
harmful chemicals in their products. When licensing their logo and charactersfor use on their products, Disney should demand that their licensees implementa chemical policy that protects children’s health. Disney reacted by stating thattheir products are in line with the law, and therefore took no further action.
While voluntary initiatives to phase out hazardous substances by retailers such
as H&M are welcome and show that chemical substitution is possible, the reac-tion by Disney demonstrates that only legislation can ensure that these chemi-cals are not allowed to be produced and used. For this reason, Greenpeacedemands that the global Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutantsand the European Union’s chemical policy reform embrace the principle ofmandatory substitution, which requires replacing the use of hazardous chemi-cals with safer alternatives. TOXIC CHILDRENSWEAR BY DISNEY
– A WORLDWIDE INVESTIGATION OF HAZARDOUS
CHEMICALS IN DISNEY CLOTHES
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS3Toxic chemicals 
in childrenswear?

4  Dalgaard et al. 2001; EC 2002a; Harreus et al. 2002; Kergosien and Rice 1998; Nielsen et al. 2001; ATSDR 2000; 
USDHHS 2000; IARC 1994; IARC 1995ently hazardous.4A comparison of the
chemical content of various printed sec-tions of the fabrics reveals that similarproducts contain vastly differentamounts of hazardous chemicals.  
1. PHTHALATES
Although all the printed sections of the
fabrics contain phthalates, the amountsvary enormously. The printed section ofthe Danish Tigger vesthas a total phthalate con-tent of 1 .4 mg/kg, whilethe Slovak Tigger bib sample contains200,000 mg/kg total phthalates – morethan 20% by weight of the sample. TheDutch Donald Duck T-shirt print con-tained 170,036 mg/kg total phthalates –more than 17% by weight of the sample.This suggests that the garments may havebeen printed with PVC-based plastisolprints. Whilst the prints on garmentsfrom Belgium, Canada, Norway, China,Spain and USA contained high levels ofphthalates, at between 42 and 101 g/kgor 4% - 10% by weight (Eurofins, 2003),by comparison 6 other prints containedless than 0. 1 gram of phthalates/kg. 
Really necessary?
Substitution of PVC plastisol printing withnon-PVC alternatives is undoubtedly the sim-plest way to avoid the use of phthalates in chil-dren’s clothing. In 2002, global clothes retailerHennes & Mauritz entirely substituted PVCand PVC prints for all their applications,amply showing that there is positive solutionto the current “laissez faire” chemical policy ofDisney. The low levels of phthalates in theH&M-purchased vest from Denmark indicatephthalate contamination from e.g. carry-over
of processing chemicals rather than deliberateaddition of phthalates to the clothing, as theselower concentrations would be unlikely toconfer any significant plasticizing effect.Marks & Spencer is currently phasing out theuse of PVC, phthalates and alkylphenolethoxylates: by autumn 2003, 70% of childrenswear with printed motifs was freeof these substances, and by autumn 2004, all
childrenswear with prints is to be free of thesesubstances. 
2. ALKYLPH ENOL ETHOXYLATES
(APES)
This chemical group includes: nonylphe-
nol ethoxylates (NPEs) and octylpheno-lethoxylates (OPEs). They were found inall the Disney products tested, in levelsranging from 34. 1 mg/kg in the PrincessT-shirt from Canada to 1 ,700 mg/kg in
the Austrian Minnie Mouse pyjamas. CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Report –
The independent Danish laboratory,
Eurofins2, conducted the chemical
analy ses on behalf of Greenpeace. 
THE SUBSTANCES THAT GREENPEACE
ASKED EUROFINS TO LOOK FOR WERE:
1. Phthalates – toxic and widely used
for plasticizing (softening) PVC. PVCprints are one of the uses of phthalate-plasticized PVC that could lead tolong periods of direct skin contact inchildren, plus the potential for inhala-
tion and even ingestion of additionalquantities (Lewis et al. 1994)
3.  The EU
has classified two types of phthalates –DEHP and DBP – as ‘toxic to repro-duction’ (EU 2003a).
2. Alkylphenol ethoxylates – including
octyl and nonyl phenolethoxylates.Alkylphenol ethoxylates (APEs) areused in industrial detergents, thoughthese chemicals, and the relatedalkylphenols, have many other com-mercial applications. Alkylphenols,which are also formed through the envi-ronmental degradation of their ethoxy-lates, are best known for their hor-mone-disrupting properties, which canlead to altered sexual development insome organisms (Jobling et al. 1995). 
3. Organotins – toxic and used as sta-
bilisers in PVC. Textiles containingpolymer parts, like T-shirts with prints,can contain organotin compoundssuch as butyl- and octyltin compounds.Approximately 15,000 tonnes of organ-otins were used in PVC in Europe in1995. (Ortepa, 2000) Organotins have
been shown to have immunotoxic anddevelopmental properties in mammals(Kergosien and Rice 1998).4. 
Lead – toxic and used in colours and
as a stabiliser in PVC. In 2002, stabiliserusage was reported as 120,000tonnes/year (ENDS 2002). Theimpacts of lead on the developing nerv-ous system of children are of extremeconcern, and can result in a permanentlowering of IQ (Nielsen et al. 2001).
5. Cadmium – toxic and used as pigment
and a stabiliser. Recent data derivedfrom cadmium flows in the EU foraround the year 2000 indicate that 300-350 tonnes of cadmium were used inpigments and 150 tonnes in stabilisersper year (EC 2002). The InternationalAgency for Research on Cancer andthe US Department of Health andHuman Services both classify cadmiumand cadmium compounds as carcino-genic to humans (USDHHS 2000 andIARC 1994).
6. Formaldehyde – toxic and used for
pre-shrinkage treatment and fixation ofdyes & pigments. The InternationalAgency for Research on Cancer hasclassified formaldehyde as a probablecarcinogen in humans (IARC 1995).
DIVERSE RESULTS
Eighteen of the products tested were
Disney prints applied to woven fabric,such as T-shirts, pyjamas and underwear.The results show that these Disneyprints contain chemicals that are inher-
2  Eurofins Danmark A/S, Smedeskovvej 38 DK-8464 Galten. Website: www.eurofins.dk 
3  The draft EU Risk Assessment Report for the phthalate DEHP recognises the significance of dermal and inhalation exposure
routes for DEHP from toys and childcare articles, especially in children, Document R042 0109 env hh 0-3 and 4-6 at:http://ecb.jrc.it/existing-chemicals/ 
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS5CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Report –
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS4Disney used to be fun 
– now it turns out 
to be TOXICWe know that
these chemicalsare toxic. So why areDisney usingthem when theycan be avoided?


of the products tested did not have levels
above the detection limit.
Really necessary?
The presence of cadmium in textiles is unac-ceptable. The Danish EPA (2000) suggests thathigh levels of cadmium in textiles are proba-bly caused by cadmium used as PVC stabiliseror (less likely) as pigmentation. Given thatPVC print can be readily substituted and thefact that cadmium is not found in all samples,demonstrates that materials or process substi-tution can avoid the presence of cadmium. 
6. FORMALDEHYDE
Formaldehyde was found in 8 of the 15
products tested for this chemical, in levelsranging from 23 mg/kg in the PrincessAriel T-shirt bought in Argentina to 1 , 100mg/kg in the Finding Nemo T-shirtbought in the UK. Really necessary?
The fact that formaldehyde is not detected inhalf of the garments is a strong indication thatthis toxic chemical is not an essential compo-nent of finished garments. Formaldehydemight have been eliminated by usingformaldehyde-free processes, or by effectivewashing processes that remove the chemical.In the latter case, only consumer exposure iseliminated, but environmental and occupa-tional health problems remain.
A nineteenth sample
A nineteenth sample tested by Eurofins
was a German Winnie the Pooh PVC rain-coat - the only non-textile to be analysed.This contains an astounding 320,000mg/kg total phthalates, or 32% by weightof the raincoat! The PVC raincoat alsocontained 1 , 129 micrograms/kg organo-tins, indicating the use of organotin as aPVC stabiliser.
CHEMICALS OUT OF CONTROL 
IN DISNEY CLOTHES
These results show that chemicals which,
due to their intrinsic properties, maypresent a long-term hazard to humanhealth and the environment are presentin Disney garments. While we cannotknow how much their presence inclothes contributes to overall exposure,it should not be assumed that there willbe no adverse effects. 
Moreover, it would appear that many
of the chemicals identified in this studyare likely to be present as a result of the
use of PVC plastisol printing tech-
niques which, through comparison
of products, prove to be by no
means essential.  Such prints
may be relatively cheap toCORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Report –
Really necessary?
Marks & Spencer is currently phasing out theuse of PVC, phthalates and alkylphenolethoxylates. By autumn 2004, their target is tophase out the use of these substances in alltheir childrenswear bearing printed motifs.Hennes & Mauritz are to investigate the useof these substances to try to find candidatesfor substitution (Hennes & Mauritz 2004).The Danish EPA (2000) has recommendednonylphenolethoxylates for substitution orfor their use to be limited to an absoluteminimum, stating that: “for all uses and inall circumstances it is possible to find suit-able alternatives”.   
3. ORGANOTINS
Of the 16 products tested for organotins,
7 did not have levels above the detectionlimit. However the Dutch Donald DuckT-shirt contained 47 4 microg/kg total
organotins, indicating the use of organo-tin as a PVC stabiliser.
Really necessary?
The fact that organotins were not present atlevels above detection limits in some of thegarments analysed suggests that the sub-stance is not necessary or that alternativesubstances are available to perform the samefunction, either in processing or in the finalproduct, such that the presence of organotincompounds in finished garments could beavoided entirely. 4. LEAD
Lead was found in all of the Disney prod-
ucts sampled, ranging from 0. 14 mg/kg to2,600 mg/kg in a Canadian Princess T-shirt and 76 mg/kg of lead in the BelgianMickey Mouse T-shirt.
Really necessary?
The presence of lead is unacceptable andaccording to clothes retailer Hennes &Mauritz (2004), the low levels are probablydue to contamination, since there is no reasonto add lead to the production process. TheDanish EPA (2000) similarly concludes that:
“low level concentrations are likely to beimpurities in colours” and that: “the big pro-ducers have all developed special metal-freecolour and pigmentation series”. Alternativesto lead stabilisers are also available e.g. calcium-zinc based or organic stabilisers (ENDS2003). Lead stabilisers are already phased outin Sweden, and Denmark recently imposed awide-ranging ban on the import, marketingand manufacture of lead and products con-taining lead (MEE 2000), making theCanadian Disney Princess T-shirt illegal onthe Danish market.
5. CADMIUM
Cadmium was identified in 14 of the 18
Disney products tested, at levels rangingfrom 0.0069 mg/kg in the Finding NemoT-shirt bought in the UK to 38 mg/kg in
the Belgian Mickey Mouse T-shirt. Five
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS7CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Report –
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS6Wow! If Buzz Lightyear  from the Philippines can
be formaldehyde-free - why is poor Nemo from the
UK drowning in this nasty chemical?
Organotins are hazardous! 
What did the Dutch Donald
Duck do to deserve so much,
when it can’t even be detected
in the Danish Disney Tigger?Not fair! The Canadian Princess
is so toxic, that she’d be illegal
in Denmark

CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Report –
28th October 2003,  Disney confirms
that they react only to legislation, stating:
“We take all comments on this subject
seriously and constantly review our poli-cies and procedures to make certain thatthey continue to be in full conformity
with all relevant legislation.”
GREENPEACE DEMANDS: 
CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY
Common to all the clothes tested by
Eurofins on behalf of Greenpeace arethat they are Disney merchandise withDisney prints and motifs. Disney placesstrict conditions on the use of its copy-right characters, including the design anduse of colours. It should also ensure haz-ardous chemicals are not used in prod-ucts it licences or produces. 
When licensing their logo and charac-
ters for use on their products, Disneyshould demand that their licensees avoidthe use of hazardous substances or substi-tute them with safer alternatives. Anexamination of Disney’s code of conduct
6
reveals that Disney indeed exerts a lot ofcontrol over their licensees, so thereshould be no excuse for not makingdemands of their licensees on clean pro-duction standards.
While such voluntary initiatives to
phase out hazardous substances by retail-ers are to be welcomed and show thatchemical substitution can not only beachieved, but insisted upon, the inactionby Disney, and its response toGreenpeace’s enquiries, shows that onlylegislation can ensure that these chemi-cals are not allowed to be used in theproduction of garments. GREENPEAC E DEMANDS:
MANDATORY CHEMICALSUBSTITUTION
As this report shows, existing legislation
on chemicals fails to prohibit the use ofhazardous chemicals in consumer prod-ucts. This policy failure is beingaddressed in two political forums. 
Globally, the 2001 Stockholm Convention
seeks to ban the production and use of
12 identified persistent organic pollutants
(POPs), the “ dirty dozen”. They include10 intentionally produced chemicals,
such as pesticides and PCBs, and two by-products: cancer-causing dioxins andfurans, released from industries that usechlorine and from waste incinerators thatburn products containing chlorine.
The Stockholm Convention serves two
main objectives:- incorporating additional chemicals
and groups of chemicals with POPscharacteristics under the remit of theConvention.
- banning or phasing out POPs by identi-
fying environmentally safer alternatives.
6  See Disney’s code of conduct at: http://disney.go.com/corporate/compliance/code.htmlCORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Report –
apply in complex and attractive designs,
but other printing techniques that do notrely on the use of phthalates, alkylphenolethoxylates and other hazardous chemi-cals are widely available. Much of thechemical exposure which could resultfrom the wearing and laundering of manyof the Disney garments analysed in thisstudy can be avoided entirely by themandatory substitution of hazardouschemicals where they are unnecessary.Greenpeace believes that Disney, who ismarketing garments for children, shouldnot disregard the fact that hazardouschemicals are being used in the produc-tion of garments. 
EVIDENCE OF SUBS TITUTION
The results show that some of the prints
have been produced without using certainhazardous chemicals. 
The good news is that these chemi-
cals are not necessary and it is possible tomake a printed T-shirt without them.Clearly, some manufacturers have avoid-ed the use of hazardous chemicals orhave substituted them with safer alterna-tives. An important player in reducing the
presence of hazardous chemicals is theretailer. The Danish Tigger vest wasbought at Hennes & Mauritz (H&M), a global clothes retailer which in 2002decided to substitute PVC and PVCprints in all their products. This explainsthe low or non-detectable levels of PVCadditives in the Tigger vest, bought at anH&M outlet in Denmark. 
The bad news is that most prints con-
tained high levels of one or other of thehazardous chemicals. Clearly, if Disney isconcerned about the chemical contami-nants in its products, it would impose ontheir licensees a chemical policy whichprotects children. 
LEGAL POLLUTION
Existing legislation on chemicals fails to
prohibit the use of hazardous chemicalsin consumer products. The high levels ofone or other of the hazardous chemicalsfound in Disney childrenswear are legallyallowed. Until chemicals legislation isreformed to make the use of harmfulchemicals in the production of consumergoods illegal, corporations should takeresponsibility for avoiding or substitutingharmful chemicals in their products.Companies like Marks & Spencer andHennes & Mauritz are actively promotingand implementing substitution. 
Despite enquiries by Greenpeace, in
letters from Greenpeace UK to Disneydated 18th February 2003, 16th May2003, 20th October and 31st October2003
5, Disney have so far not shown any
interest in phasing out and substitutinghazardous chemicals in their products.Indeed, in a letter to Greenpeace dated
5  Letter from Disney Managing Director UK dated 28th October 2003, to Mark Strutt at Greenpeace UK
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS9
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS8Hmmm! Doesn’t it make
sense for Disney to withdrawthese toxic products?)  WHAT IS THE SUBSTITUTION PRINCIPLE? 
The Principle of Substitution states that haz-
ardous chemicals should be systematicallysubstituted by less hazardous 
alternatives or preferably 
alternatives for which no hazards can be identified.


However, if REACH is to provide an
effective means of protection againstharmful chemicals, authorisation shouldnever be given for the continued use of ahazardous chemical where a viable, saferalternative exists. This is the principle ofmandatory substitution . If this principle
is enshrined in EU law we will havetaken a giant step towards ridding ourenvironment, our homes and our lives ofchemicals that can enter our bodies andlinger there, threatening us with cancer,genetic damage or any of the othereffects we know they can cause. Untilthis happens, consumers are at themercy of the chemical producers andindustrial users of chemicals.
Clearly, companies are responding to
increasing consumer awareness of syn-thetic chemicals in products and somehave policies in place to phase out certainharmful chemicals and substitute themwith safer alternatives. Disney and othercompanies should follow their lead.However, for ‘mandatory substitution’ tobecome comprehensive, institutionalisedand embedded in business decisions,requires legislation. The globalStockholm Convention and the
European reform of chemicals policy,
REACH , should provide the legally-
bind ing structures on which to build a
toxic-free future.
******
Data on the hazard, use, environmentaldistribution and body burden for the indi-vidual substances are given in Annex A. 
Full details on sampling methodology
and results are available in Annex B. 
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS11CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Report –
The success of the Stockholm
Convention in protecting human healthand the environment from hazardouschemicals will depend on the activeimplementation of these broad objec-tives. By May 2006, parties to theStockholm Convention have to draw upaction plans on measures to identify,characterise and minimise with a view toeliminating releases of POPs. Article 5 ofthe Stockholm Convention requires that:
“The action plan shall promote the develop-
ment and, where it deems appropriate,require the use of substitute or modifiedmaterials, products and processes to preventthe formation and release of the chemicalslisted in Annex C”
7
One measure of the effectiveness of the
Convention will be the rate at which newPOPs - besides the ‘ dirty dozen’ - are iden-tified for phase out. Another indicatorwill be the effort put into finding safersubstitutes and the adoption of existingalternatives and substitutes where theyalready exist. 
In 1998, the European Community
embarked on an ambitious programme toreform European chemical regulations.The proposed reform is to be based on asystem of 
Registration, Evaluation and
Authorisation of CHemicals, known as
REACH . Although the framework of
REACH and the mechanism – authorisa-
tion – is there, as it stands the draft legis-lation continues with the regulatory para-digm of ‘ adequate control’ for chemicalsof very high concern. The principle of‘adequate control’ is not one that should
be applied to persistent, bio-accumulativesubstances, because their intrinsic proper-ties make exposure virtually impossible to
control. Even small doses from diversesources lead to significant accumulationof these chemicals in the food chain andconsequently in humans.
The EU is in the process of ratifying
the Stockholm Convention on POPs. Itsees the proposed REACH regulation as
“an appropriate instrument by which to
implement the necessary control meas-ures on production, placing on the mar-ket and use of the listed substances andthe control measures on existing andnew chemicals and pesticides exhibitingpersistent organic pollutants character-istics.” (EU 2004) 
10CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Report –
7  http://www.pops.int/documents/convtext/convtext_en.pdf
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONSRECOMMENDED GREENPEACE
REPORTS:
“Chemical legacy – Contamination of 
the child”, October 2003
“Consuming Chemicals – hazardous 
chemicals in house dust, May 2003”
“Safer Chemicals within Reach – Using the
Substitution Principle to drive GreenChemistry, Oct 2003”
All available at www.greenpeace.orgSubstitution is the
solution to pollution
******

DISNEY CHARACTER, 
GARMENT TYPE AND COUNTRY OF PURCHASE RETAILERSUM ALL 
PHTHALATES
mg/kg SUM OF ALKYL-
PHENOL ETHOXY-LATES
mg/kg SUM OF 
ORGANO-TINS 
microg/kg 
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS12 12LEAD 
mg/kg CADMIUM 
mg/kg FORMALDEHYDE 
mg/kg SUMMARY OF ANALYTICAL RESULTS FOR KEY CHEMICAL GROUPS IN DISNEY CLOTHES
Note: The concentrations
given are per unit mass of the printed sections of the garments only, not per unitmass of the entire garment. 
Note: Retailers handling these
products should also be urgedto review their own policies,and encouraged to insist onclean production standards, inthe same way Hennes &Mauritz and Marks & Spencer,for example, are doing.
nd means less than the limit
of detection
* means not analysed due to
lack of sampleTigger vest, H&M 1.4 620 nd 0.23 nd 32
Denmark
Mickey Mouse T-shirt, Carrefour 101,150.8 264.3 4 76 38 nd
Belgium
Princess, T-shirt, Wall Mart 96,050.6 34.1 14 2,600 0.1 nd
Canada
Donald Duck T-shirt, C&A 170,036 1,220 474 1.3 nd nd
Netherlands
Minnie Mouse T-shirt, El Corte Ingles S.A 57,129.1 122 8 1.4 0.017 nd
Spain 
Finding Nemo T-shirt, Disney store 791.6 1,045 nd 0.21 0.0069 1,100
UK London
Mickey Mouse T-shirt, Disney Store 42,913 49 12 0.14 0.018 nd
USA 
Tigger baby bib Tesco 200,000 1,153 nd 0.2 0.018 25
Slovakia 
Snow White T-shirt, Farmers Trading Co. 17.9 440 36 0.21 nd 90
New Zealand 
Minnie Mouse pyjamas, C&A 73.1 1,700 nd 0.41 0.02 *
Austria
Finding Nemo T-shirt, Marks & Spencer 7 ,770 1,190 nd 0.42 0.014 86
Turkey
Mickey Mouse underwear, Fru Lyng 92,729 * * 0.22 0.018 *
Norway
Treasure Planet pyjamas, Woolworth 12 357 nd 0.14 nd 100
Mexico
Snow White underwear, Disney Store 1,838 * * 1.3 0.017 *
France
Buzz Lightyear vest, Disney outlet 12 548 34 3.2 0.015 nd
Philippines in SM dept store
Princess Ariel T-shirt, Produced for 2,303.7 640 8 0.73 nd 23
Argentina Rolfy S.A. Bajo
Mickey Mouse sweatshirt, Constant Gain 87,340 83 nd 8.3 0.011 nd
China International Ltd.
Snow White T-Shirt, Disney outlet at 41.6 1,390 50 0.45 0.015 230
Thailand Emporium Shopping Mall, 
Bangkok
Winnie the Pooh PVC raincoat, ToysRUS, 320,000 73.2 1,129 0.33 0.0073 nd
Germany Hamburg-Eidelstedt 

FRANCE
DISNEY CLOTHES SAMPLED 
and the country of purchase
DENMARK BELGIUM CANADA
U.K. US SLOV AKIA
NORWAYNETHE RLANDS SPAIN GERMANY
NEW ZEALAND AUSTRIA TURKEY
PHILIP INES ARGENTINA THAILAND
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS15 14MEXICO
 CHINA

CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex A –
16CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex A –
DBP , BBP , DEHP , DINP , DIDP and DEP .
(For full results see Annex B)
DEHP is still the most widely used
phthalate in Europe. DEHP constitutesabout 30% of the market for plasticizersin Western Europe (EC, 2004). It is aknown reproductive toxin, interferingwith testes development in mammals(Part et al. 2002), and is classified in theEU as “toxic to reproduction” (EU2003a). Similarly, DBP (dibutyl phthalate)is classified in the EU as “toxic to repro-duction” (EU 2003a). Very recentresearch suggests possible effects onhuman sperm development for a break-down product of DEP , diethyl phthalate(Duty et al. 2003), widely used in cosmet-ics and perfumes and, until now, consid-ered to be of relatively little toxicologicalsignificance. 
Substantial concerns exist among sci-
entists with regard to the toxicity ofphthalates to wildlife and humans,although the precise mechanisms and lev-els of toxicity vary from one compoundto another. In many cases, it is themetabolites of the phthalates which areresponsible for the greatest toxicity(Dalgaard et al. 2001 and Ema, M. &Miyawaki, E. 2002). With respect tohumans, although substantial exposurecan occur through contaminated food(the CSTEE has also highlighted con-cerns relating to secondary poisoning,i.e. the build up of phthalates throughthe food chain), direct exposure tophthalates from consumer productsand/or medical devices is likely to bevery significant. Perhaps the best-knownexample is the exposure of children tophthalates used in soft PVC teething toys(Stringer et al. 2000), now subject toemergency controls within Europe (see Existing Controls). Phthalates & body burden 
Because of their extensive use in building
materials and household products, phtha-lates are common contaminants in indoorair (Otake et al. 2001 , Wilson et al. 2001).They have also been reported as substan-tial components of house dust, in somecases at more than 1 part per thousand(1g/kg) of the total mass of dust (Butteand Heinzow 2002; Santillo et al. 2003). 
Several recent studies have reported
the presence of phthalates and their pri-mary metabolites in the human body(Colon et al. 2000, Blount et al. 2000).Metabolites of phthalates in the urine indi-cate a wide exposure of humans to phtha-lates (Barr et al., 2003; CDC, 2003; Kochet al., 2003).  A study on premature breastdevelopment (thelarche) in female chil-dren, aged 6 months to 8 years, foundphthalate esters in 68% of serum samplesfrom the thelarche patients. The phthalateesters DEHP and DBP, with the most com-mon commercial uses, were detected inthe highest concentrations. For those sam-ples with high concentrations of DEHP,one of the major DEHP metabolites,mono(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (MEHP),was also detected. DEHP was detected inonly 14% of the control samples, and thenonly in lower concentrations. 
Animal studies show that phthalates
cross the placenta and pass into breastmilk (Dostal et al. 1987; Parmar et al.1985; Srivastava et al. 1989); therefore,
phthalates can be passed onto developingfoetuses and newborn children via theirmothers. Additionally, children seem tobe more exposed to phthalates thanadults. In the US CDC study, of the sevenurine phthalate metabolites tested, thehighest levels of metabolites for DEHP ,DBP and monobenzylphthalates werefound in the youngest age group tested:6 - 11-year-old children (CDC 2003).RESULTS AND CHEMICAL HAZARDS
Annex A provides a comprehensive dis-
cussion of the study results, including fur-ther information on the different phtha-lates, organotins and other substancesthat have been found in Disney chil-drenswear. The results, common uses ofthese chemicals, their environmentaleffects, effects on human health and,where available, body burdens in adultsand children are discussed. Finally, exist-ing regulations and controls on the tar-geted substances are outlined.
For the full results obtained by the Eurofins
laboratory, see Annex B.
1. PHTHALATES 
Phthalates were found in all
19 of the Disney garments
analysed in this study. Thelevels, expressed as mgphthalate per kg of printedsection of garment, variedbetween 1 .4 mg/kg in theTigger vest from Denmarkand 200,000 mg/kg in theSlovak Tigger bib. 
The highest level of
phthalates was 320,000mg/kg found in a PVCWinnie the Pooh rain jacket
bought in Germany, whichdiffered from the other products, which
were all woven textiles with printedmotifs. 
Analysis of results
The results showed great differences inthe type and amounts of chemicals foundin the samples. The dominant phthalatesfound in this investigation were DEHP(di-ethylhexyl phthalate), BBP (benzyl-butyl phthalate), DINP (diisononyl phtha-late) and DHP (diheptyl phthalate).Other unidentified phthalates were foundin the garment from USA. Some printedsections of the clothes contained veryhigh amounts of phthalates, e.g. samplesfrom Belgium and Slovakia. These gar-ments are probably printed with the PVC-based plastisol prints. 
Hazards of Phthalates 
PVC prints are one of the uses of phtha-late-plasticized PVC that could lead tolong periods of direct skin contact in chil-dren, plus the potential for inhalation andeven ingestion of additional quantities.They are a large group of chemicals. Thephthalates examined in this study include:
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS17
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONSANNEX A
12 3 4 5 6 7 891 0 1 1 1 2 1 31 41 5 1 6 1 92 02 1mg/kg 
= 0.001g/kg = 1 ppm PHTHALATES
mg/kg 
Phthalates in clothes find their way to the
environment when the consumers wash theirclothes. Phthalates are washed out and enterthe environment via water treatment plants orvia sewage sludge (Danish EPA 1998).Phthalates have long been recognised as oneof the most abundant and widespread man-made environmental contaminants, resulting inwidespread and continuous exposure tophthalates. Phthalates are relatively persistent,especially in soils and sediments.  Directexposure to phthalates in textiles can occurduring normal wear. Disney character, 
garment type and Phthalatescountry of purchase mg/kg
1. Tigger vest, Denmark 1.4
2.  Mickey Mouse T-shirt, Belgium 101,150.83.  Princess, T-shirt, Canada 96,050.64.  Donald Duck T-shirt, Netherlands 170,0365.  Minnie Mouse T-shirt, Spain 57,129.16.  Winnie the Pooh PVC-raincoat, 
Germany 320,000
7. Finding Nemo T-shirt, UK 791.6
8.  Mickey Mouse T-shirt, USA 42,9139.  Tigger baby bib, Slovakia 200,00010. Snow White T-shirt, New Zealand 17.9
11. Minnie Mouse pyjamas, Austria 73.1
12. Finding Nemo T-shirt, Turkey 7 ,770
13. Mickey Mouse underwear, Norway 92,729
14. Treasure Planet pyjamas, Mexico 12
15. Snow White underwear, France 1,838
16. Buzz Lightyear vest, Philippines 12
19. Princess Ariel T-shirt, Argentina 2,303.7
20. Mickey Mouse sweatshirt, China 87,340
21. Snow White T-Shirt, Thailand 41.6SAMPLE

18CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex A –CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex A –
from 1 .2 - 650 mg/kg, giving a sum of
alkylphenol ethoxylates in Disney tex-tile prints of 34. 1-1 ,700 mg/kg(Eurofins 2003).
Analysis of results
The wide range of concentrations showsthat it is possible to produce textile printscontaining levels of OPEs in the lowmg/kg (ppm) range. The levels of NPEswere higher, with a maximum of 1 ,700mg/kg (0. 17% by weight of the printedtextile area). In some of the garments, thelevels of NPEs were lower, at between 49and 83 mg/kg. Given the toxicity of thesecompounds and their breakdown prod-ucts, possible sources of NPEs and OPEsin finished textiles clearly require urgentinvestigation, with a view to their elimina-tion from the final products and theprocesses used in textile manufacture. 
Hazards of Alkylphenols and theirethoxylates
Alkylphenol ethoxylates (APEs) are prob-
ably best known for their use in industrialdetergents, though these chemicals, andthe related alkylphenols (which were notquantified in this study), have many othercommercial applications.
The main hazards associated with
APEs result from their partial degradationto shorter-chain ethoxylates and to theparent alkylphenols (APs) themselves (i.e.nonylphenol and octylphe-
nol), both of which are per-sistent, bio-accumulative andtoxic to aquatic organisms.The EU risk assessment fornonylphenol (NP) identifiedsignificant risks from manycurrent uses of NPEs, thatincluded risks to the aquaticenvironment, to soil and tohigher organisms throughsecondary poisoning (i.e.resulting from the accumu-lation of NP in food (EC2002a). 
The most widely recognised hazard
associated with both NPs and octylphe-nols (OPs), is undoubtedly their estro-genic activity, i.e. their ability to mimicnatural estrogen hormones. This canlead to altered sexual development insome organisms, most notably the femi-nisation of fish (Jobling et al. 1995,1996), a factor thought to have con-
tributed significantly to the widespreadchanges in fish sexual development andfertility in UK rivers. Jobling et al.(2002) and Atienzar et al. (2002) recent-ly described direct effects of NPs onDNA structure and function in barnaclelarvae, a mechanism that may be respon-sible for the hormone disruption effectsseen in whole organisms.
Hazards to human health remain
unclear, although recent studies havehighlighted concerns directly relevant tohumans. For example, Chitra et al.(2002), and Adeoya- Osiguwa et al.(2003), describe effects on mammaliansperm function, while DNA damage inhuman lymphocytes has also recentlybeen documented (Harreus et al. 2002).Uses of phthalates 
Phthalates have a wide range of applica-
tions, although by far their greatest use isas plasticizing (softening) additives in flex-ible PVC. They are produced in very largequantities; for example, in Europe,almost 1 million tons is produced peryear (CSTEE 2001a). 
Environmental distribution 
of phthalates 
The use of phthalates results in large-scale
losses to the environment (both indoorsand outdoors) during the lifetime ofproducts, and again following disposal,amounting to thousands of tons per yearacross the EU (CSTEE 2001a). Phthalatesin garments find their way into the envi-ronment during laundering when therinse water enters the environment viawater treatment plants or via sewagesludge (Danish EPA 1998). As a conse-quence, phthalates have long been recog-nised as one of the most abundant andubiquitous man-made environmental con-taminants (Mayer et al. 1972) and ourexposure to phthalates is therefore wide-spread and continuous. Although somedegradation is possible, phthalates areconsidered to be relatively persistent,especially in soils and sediments. Theyalso have an inherent ability to accumu-late in biological tissues, although contin-uous exposure undoubtedly contributesto tissue levels. Risk assessments, con-ducted under the EU system, have docu-mented the widespread distribution ofphthalates in all environmental compart-ments (e.g. see CSTEE 2001b,c). 
Existing controls 
At present, there are few controls on the
marketing and use of phthalates, despitetheir toxicity, the volumes used and theirpropensity to leach out of products
throughout their lifetime. Of the controlswhich do exist, probably the best knownis the EU-wide emergency ban on the useof six phthalates in children’s toysdesigned to be chewed - first agreed in1999 and regularly renewed since then
(EU 2003b). While this ban addressedone important exposure route (via toys),exposure from other consumer products,as well as exposure via PVC medicaldevices, remains unaddressed.
Following the conclusion of the EU
risk assessment for DEHP , there are pro-posals for a ban on uses in certain med-ical devices and tight restrictions forother applications, though these remainunder discussion at EU level. No formalproposals have yet been made for theother phthalates undergoing assessmentwithin the EU. 
In 1998, the Ministerial Meeting of
OSPAR agreed on the target of cessationof discharges, emissions and losses of allhazardous substances to the marine envi-ronment by 2020 – the “ one generation”cessation target. The phthalates DBP andDEHP were on the first list of chemicalsfor priority action towards this target(OSPAR 1998). DEHP is also proposedas a “priority hazardous substance” underthe EU Water Framework Directive (EU2001), such that action to prevent releas-es to water within 20 years will berequired throughout Europe, though adecision on this classification remainsunder consideration.
2. ALKYLPH ENOL ETHOXYLATES
Alkylphenol ethoxylates were present in
all the Disney clothes tested (17).Nonylphenol ethoxylates (NPEs) werefound at levels ranging from 31 to 1 ,200mg/kg printed textile section, octylphe-nol ethoxylates (OPEs) at levels ranging
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS19
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS12 3 4 5 6 7 891 01 11 21 3 1 41 5 1 61 92 0 2 1mg/kg 
= 0.001g/kg = 1 ppm ALKYLPHENOL 
ETHOXYLATES
MG/KG Disney character, Alkylphenol 
garment type and ethoxylatescountry of purchase mg/kg
1.  Tigger vest, Denmark 620
2.  Mickey Mouse T-shirt, Belgium 264.33.  Princess, T-shirt, Canada 34.14.  Donald Duck T-shirt, Netherlands 1,2205.  Minnie Mouse T-shirt, Spain 1226.  Winnie the Pooh PVC-raincoat, Germany 73.27.  Finding Nemo T-shirt, UK 1,045
8.  Mickey Mouse T-shirt, USA 499.  Tigger baby bib, Slovakia 1,15310. Snow White T-shirt, New Zealand 440
11. Minnie Mouse pyjamas, Austria 1,700
12. Finding Nemo T-shirt, Turkey 1,190
13. Mickey Mouse underwear, Norway *
14. Treasure Planet pyjamas, Mexico 357
15. Snow White underwear, France *
16. Buzz Lightyear vest, Philippines 548
19. Princess Ariel T-shirt, Argentina 640
20. Mickey Mouse sweatshirt, China 83
21. Snow White T-Shirt, Thailand 1,390SAMPLE

20CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex A –CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex A –
Since then, NP has been included as a
“priority hazardous substance” under the
EU Water Framework Directive, suchthat action to prevent releases to waterwithin 20 years will be required through-out Europe (EU 2001). A decision on theprioritisation of OP/OPEs under theDirective remains under consideration. 
Already, however, the widely recog-
nised environmental hazards presentedby AP/APEs have led to some restrictionson use. As noted earlier, the risk assess-ment conducted under the EU systemconcluded that, for NPs, there is a needfor further risk reduction in some areas,although proposals for restrictions onmarketing and use of NP and its deriva-tives remain under discussion. At thesame time, very little information existsregarding the ongoing uses of NPs, OPsand their derivatives in consumer prod-ucts and, as a consequence, our directexposure to them.
3. ORGANOTINS
Organotins were present in 10 of the
17 Disney products tested for this
chemical group, in concentrations rang-ing from 4 to 47 4 µg/kg (microgram/kg)in printed sections of the woven garments.
The highest concentration - 1 , 129
µg/kg - was found in a Winnie the PoohPVC raincoat, indicating use of organotinas a PVC stabiliser. Analysis of results 
Samples from Belgium, Spain, New
Zealand, the Philippines, Argentina,Thailand, USA and Canada contained4 - 50 µg total organotins per kg of print-
ed textile area.  Higher concentrations,474 - 1 , 129 µg/kg, were found in theDutch and the German Disney prints.Monobutyltin (MBT) and dibutyltin (DBT)were the substances most frequently found
and at the highest concentrations of allorganotin compounds measured. TheGerman sample contained greateramounts of mono-octyltin (MOT) anddioctyltin (DOT). Tributyltin (TBT)concentrations ranged from 4 - 12 µg/kg,
possibly reflecting TBT contamination ofother organotin compound preparationsused in the textile production process.
Hazards of Organotins 
Organotins are used as stabilisers in PVC.Textiles containing polymer parts, like 
T-shirts with prints, can contain organo-
tin compounds such as butyl- and octyltincompounds. 
Organotins are known to
be toxic at relatively low lev-els of exposure not only tomarine invertebrates but alsoto mammals. In marineinvertebrates, TBT is gener-ally more toxic than DBT,which is in turn more toxicthan MBT (Cima et al.1996). However, this is by
no means always the case, asDBT is more toxic than TBTto certain enzyme systems(Bouchard et al. 1999, Al-Ghais et al. 2000).
The widespread use of
tributyl tin (TBT) in antifouling paints onships, combined with the relative persist-Alkylphenols & body burden 
There are only a few studies on levels of
human contamination by alkylphenols,but those that have been performed clear-ly show that children are contaminatedbefore and after birth. (Guenther et al.2002, Takada et al. 1999) Nonylphenolhas been detected in human umbilicalcords (Takada et al. 1999), confirmingthat it crosses the placenta from the con-taminated mother to the growing foetus.The authors stressed the importance offurther studies using larger numbers ofumbilical cords, and analyses of maternaland cord blood to estimate the fractionof contaminants passing from the bloodto the foetus. Nonylphenol also contami-nates breast milk (Guenther et al. 2002).
Uses of alkylphenols and their 
ethoxylates
Alkylphenols (APs) are non-halogenatedchemicals manufactured almost exclusive-ly to produce alkylphenol ethoxylates(APEs), a group of non-ionic surfactants.The most widely used APEs are ethoxy-lates of nonylphenol (NPEs) and, to alesser extent, octylphenol (OPEs). NPEshave been used as surfactants, emulsifiers,dispersants and/or wetting agents in avariety of industrial and consumer appli-cations. Of the 77 ,000 tonnes used inWestern Europe in 1997, the share of tex-
tile finishers was 10 % (OSPAR 2001).APEs are found in industrial detergents,such as for wool washing and metal fin-ishing; industrial processes such as emul-sion polymerisation, leather and textilefinishers and even the spermicidal lubri-cant nonoxynol-9. Outside Europe, APEsmay also be used in many domestic prod-ucts, such as in liquid clothes detergentsin the USA. Once released to the environ-ment, APEs can degrade back to APs,
which are persistent, bioaccumulativeand toxic to aquatic life.
Environmental distribution of alkyl-phenols and their ethoxylates
Nonylphenol and its derivatives are
widely distributed in fresh and marinewaters and in particular, in sediments, inwhich these persistent compounds accu-mulate. Because of releases to waste-water, APEs and APs are also commoncomponents of sewage sludge, includingsludge applied to land (Danish EPA1998). Research into levels in wildlife
remains very limited, although therehave been reports of significant levels infish and aquatic birds downstream fromsites of manufacture and/or use ofAPEs. Both NP and OP are known toaccumulate in the tissues of fish andother organisms (OSPAR 2001 , EC2002a). Recent research demonstratedthe widespread presence of NP in a vari-ety of foods in Germany (Guenther et al.2002), although the consequences forhuman exposure have yet to be fully eval-uated. The extent and consequences ofdirect exposure from use in consumerproducts are poorly described, althoughboth NP and OP residues have recentlybeen reported as contaminants in housedust (Butte and Heinzow 2002 andSantillo et al.2003)
Existing controls 
In 1998, the Ministerial Meeting of
OSPAR agreed on the target of cessationof discharges, emissions and losses of allhazardous substances to the marine envi-ronment by 2020 - the “ one generation”cessation target. NP/NPEs were includedon the first list of chemicals for priorityaction towards this target (OSPAR 1998). 
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS21
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONSDisney character, 
garment type and Organotinscountry of purchase µg/kg
1.  Tigger vest, Denmark nd
2.  Mickey Mouse T-shirt, Belgium 43.  Princess, T-shirt, Canada 144.  Donald Duck T-shirt, Netherlands 4745.  Minnie Mouse T-shirt, Spain 86.  Winnie the Pooh PVC-raincoat, Germany 1,1297.  Finding Nemo T-shirt, UK nd
8.  Mickey Mouse T-shirt, USA 129.  Tigger baby bib, Slovakia nd10. Snow White T-shirt, New Zealand 36
11. Minnie Mouse pyjamas, Austria nd
12. Finding Nemo T-shirt, Turkey nd
13. Mickey Mouse underwear, Norway *
14. Treasure Planet pyjamas, Mexico nd
15. Snow White underwear, France *
16. Buzz Lightyear vest, Philippines 34
19. Princess Ariel T-shirt, Argentina 8
20. Mickey Mouse sweatshirt, China nd
21. Snow White T-Shirt, Thailand 5012 3 4 5 6 7 891 0 1 1 1 2 1 31 41 5 1 6 1 92 02 1ORGANOTINS
µg/kg 
SAMPLE

22CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex A –CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex A –
toys) PVC products and in certain glass
coating applications (Matthews 1996).PVC represents about two-thirds of theglobal consumption of these compounds(Sadiki and Williams 1999), which cancomprise up to 2% by weight of the fin-ished product. According to industry fig-ures (Ortepa 2004), approximately15,000 tons of organotins were used in
PVC production in Europe in 1995. 
Environmental distribution of organotins 
Much of the research describing the envi-
ronmental distribution of organotin com-pounds has, understandably, focused onthe spread of TBT and its breakdownproducts (including DBT) in the marineenvironment. The global use of TBTantifouling paints has resulted in contami-nation on a global scale. The relative per-sistence of butyl tins, combined with theiraffinity for biological tissues, has led totheir widespread occurrence in fish, seals,whales and dolphins in all major sea areas(Kannan et al. 1996; Iwata et al. 1995;Ariese et al. 1998). 
Much less information is available
concerning the distribution of organotinsin other environmental compartments. Inone of the few studies which have beenconducted, Takahashi et al. (1999) report-ed the presence of butyltin residues in thelivers of monkeys and other mammals inJapan, as well as in human livers, and sug-gested that uses in consumer productsmay represent an important exposureroute. The presence of organotin com-pounds in a wide range of constructionand consumer products, especially PVCproducts, has already been highlighted. Ithas also been recognised for some timethat butyltin plasticizer can migrate from
such products during normal use (Sadikiand Williams 1999, Santillo et al. 2003). 
Existing controls 
To date, legislative controls on organotin
compounds have focused primarily onTBT in antifouling paints. A series ofnational bans on its use on small vessels,starting in France and the UK, was fol-lowed by an EU wide ban on vessels lessthan 25m in length in 1991 . (Evans 2000)More recently, the InternationalMaritime Organisation (IMO) agreed ona global phase-out of all TBT applications(from January 2003) and TBT presenceon ships (from 2008) under itsConvention on Harmful Anti-foulingSystems (Imo 2004). The first of thesedeadlines has recently been transposedinto EU law (EU 2002a). TBT substancesare also “priority hazardous substances”under the EU Water FrameworkDirective (EU 2001), such that action toprevent releases to water within 20 yearswill be required throughout Europe. 
At the same time, and despite the tox-
icity to mammals noted above, TBT con-tinues to be used as an additive in someconsumer products, as do uses of otherbutyltins and octyltins. Organotin com-pounds must not be used for certain tex-tiles to qualify for an “ eco-label” withinthe EU (EU 2002b). Otherwise, there areno restrictions on use, unless the treatedmaterials or products are used in contactwith water. This is despite the fact thatTBT is classified under the EU’s labellingDirective as “harmful in contact withskin, toxic if swallowed, irritating to theeyes and skin” and as presenting a “ dan-ence of butyl tins and their affinity for
biological tissues, has led to their wide-spread occurrence in fish, seals, whalesand dolphins in all major sea areas(Kannan et al. 1996 Iwata et al. 1995,Ariese et al. 1998). Of the few studieswhich have been conducted in terrestrialsystems, Takahashi et al. (1999) reportedthe presence of butyltin residues in the liv-ers of monkeys and other mammals inJapan, as well as in human livers, and sug-gested that uses in consumer productsmay represent an important exposureroute. 
Organotins have been demonstrated
to have immunotoxic and teratogenic(developmental) properties also in mam-malian systems (Kergosien and Rice1998), with DBT again frequently appear-
ing more toxic than TBT (De Santiagoand Aguilar-Santelises 1999). DBT is neu-rotoxic to mammalian brain cells (Eskes etal. 1999). Ema et al. (1996, 1997) demon-strated the importance of the precise tim-ing of exposure to DBT in induction ofdefects in developing rat embryos. Veryrecently, Kumasaka et al. (2002) havedescribed toxic effects on testes develop-ment in mice.
Estimates of the significance of
human exposure to organotins from con-sumption of contaminated seafood havetaken the potential immunotoxicity ofthese compounds to humans as an effectparameter (Belfroid et al. 2000). Whileseafood probably remains the predomi-nant source of organotin exposure formany consumers, exposure to consumerproducts that contain them or to dusts inthe home may also be significant.
Organotins and body burden 
Although organotins, particularly TBT,have been found in a wide range of mol-luscs, fish, marine birds, marine mam-
mals, and freshwater birds (IPCS, 1999),aside from a few reports, levels of con-tamination in humans are largelyunknown. Takahashi et al. (1999) foundbutyltins in human male livers in concen-trations ranging from 59 - 96 ng/g (withan average of 79% present as TBT).Recently Lo et al (2003) found TPT inhuman blood in concentrations rangingfrom 0. 17 – 0.67 mg/L. There are noreadily available reports on child con-tamination.
Uses of Organotin compounds
There are three major applications for
organotin compounds:
1. TBT in anti-fouling paints for ships,
which, as a result of its widespreaduse, has led to changes in sexualdevelopment in marine snails;
2. Triphenyltin (TPT) as a pesticide,
and 
3. Butyl- and octyltin compounds as
plasticizer in polymers. 
Many textile products containing poly-
mer parts, like T-shirts with prints, sani-tary bandages, plasters and diapers, cancontain organotin compounds (GaikemaF.J. et al 1999). In some cases, organotin
compounds are used as fungicides on tex-tiles that are exposed to extreme weatherconditions, such as canvas or in sportsgear. Although antifouling paints accountfor the majority of TBT used, this com-pound is also used as an antifungal agentin some consumer products, includingcertain carpets, textiles and PVC (vinyl)flooring (Allsopp et al. 2000, 2001). Mostabundant in consumer products, howev-er, are MBT and DBT, used as heat sta-bilisers in rigid (pipes, panels) and soft(wall-coverings, furnishings, flooring,
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS23
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS

24CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex A –CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex A –
above 10 micrograms per decilitre.
(USDHSS 2003). These decreases showthat public health efforts to reduce chil-dren’s exposure to lead are improving thesituation. However, children’s exposureto lead in homes containing lead-basedpaint and lead-contaminated dust is still aserious public health concern.
Uses of lead 
Lead and its compounds have many
applications. Every year, many tons oflead is used in products such as batteries,in alloys, for lead keels (sailboats), ammu-nition, in additives to gasoline and in pig-ments. Lead is also used as a stabiliser inPVC. In 2002, lead usage was reported as120,000 tonnes/year, and making up 87%
of the PVC stabiliser market in WesternEurope. (ENDS 2002) 
Environmental distribution of lead 
When lead is released into the environ-ment it has a long residence time, com-pared with most pollutants, and tends toaccumulate in soils and sediments(ATSDR 2000, Alloway 1990). Lead isan element and therefore cannot be
destroyed, only converted from one formto another. 
Existing Controls
In the EU, industry has a voluntary agree-ment to phase out lead stabilisers; 15% by2005, 50% by 2010, 100% by 2015. Leadstabilisers have already been phased outin Sweden. Denmark recently imposed awide-ranging ban on the import, market-ing and manufacture of lead and prod-ucts containing lead (MEE 2000).
Alternatives are available; e.g. 
calcium-zinc based or organic stabilisers
(ENDS 2003). 5. CADMIUM
Cadmium was identified in
14 of the 19 garments tested
for this toxic metal at con-centrations ranging from0.0069 – 38 mg/kg of print-ed textile section. The T-shirt print from Belgium hasa significantly higher con-tent - 38 mg/kg -  than thoseof the other garments.
HAZARDS OF CADMIUM
Cadmium is a heavy metal
which is highly toxic toplants, animals and humans,having no known biochemi-cal function (ATSDR 2000, WHO 1992).It is toxic at very low levels of exposure,
and has both acute and chronic effectson health and the environment.
Cadmium is persistent in the envi-
ronment, with a residence half-life of 10-30 years. In aquatic environments, how-ever, cadmium compounds can be moremobile than most other metals (ATSDR2000). When present in bio-availableforms, cadmium is able to bio-accumu-late in many aquatic and terrestrialorganisms. Cadmium especially accumu-lates in the kidneys and kidney damageis probably the critical effect (NordicCouncil of Ministers 2003).ger of serious damage to health by pro-
longed exposure through inhalation orif swallowed” . 
In 2001 , Germany notified the
European Commission of its intention tointroduce stricter controls on organotins,including controls on use in consumerproducts. However, the proposed con-trols were rejected by the Commission as“inadmissible” (EC 2002). In 1998, theMinisterial Meeting of OSPAR agreed onthe target of cessation of discharges,emissions and losses of all hazardous sub-stances to the marine environment by2020 - the “ one generation” cessation tar-get - and included organotin compoundson the first list of chemicals for priorityaction towards this target (OSPAR 1998).Initially, OSPAR’s action focused on theachievement of the IMO Convention on
Harmful Anti-foulingSystems (OSPAR 2000). In2001 , OSPAR began to con-sider the scope for action onother uses and other organ-otin compounds besidesTBT, including the wide-spread use of butyltin sta-bilisers, though so far, no fur-ther measures are proposed.
4. LEAD 
Lead is present in all the
clothes tested (19), in levelsranging from 0. 14 to 2,600mg/kg. Most of the printsanalysed exhibited concentrations
towards the lower end of this range (i.e.<10 mg/kg). However, samples fromBelgium and Canada contained lead at76 and 2,600 mg/kg respectively.
Hazards of Lead 
Exposure to this toxic heavy metal can
cause a range of effects includinganaemia and harm to the nervous andreproductive systems and the kidneys.The toxic effects of lead are the same,irrespective of whether it is ingested orinhaled. The impacts of lead upon thedeveloping nervous system of childrenare of extreme concern, since a perma-nent lowering of IQ can result. (Nielsenet al. 2001; ATSDR 2000, Bernard et al.1995, Goyer 1993) A growing body of evi-
dence suggests that there may be no levelof lead in blood that does not induce atoxic effect. The developing central nerv-ous system is considered particularly vul-nerable (ATSDR 2000, Goyer 1993). Thesubstance has no known biological func-tion and is highly toxic to plants, animalsand humans (Danish EPA 1998).
Lead & body burden 
Since 1976, the US Centres for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) have beenmeasuring levels of lead in children’sblood as part of a large national survey.The survey shows that for children of 1-5years old, lead levels were 2.23 micro-grams per decilitre for the period 1999-2000. Fortunately blood lead levels aregoing down: during the period 1991-1994,4.4% of 1-5 year olds had more than 10micrograms of lead per decilitre of blood;in the period 1999-2000, 2.2% of childrenin this age group had lead levels that were
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS25
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONSDisney character, 
garment type and Leadcountry of purchase mg/kg
1.  Tigger vest, Denmark 0.23
2.  Mickey Mouse T-shirt, Belgium 763.  Princess, T-shirt, Canada 2,6004.  Donald Duck T-shirt, Netherlands 1.35.  Minnie Mouse T-shirt, Spain 1.46.  Winnie the Pooh PVC-raincoat, 
Germany 0.33
7.  Finding Nemo T-shirt, UK 0.21
8.  Mickey Mouse T-shirt, USA 0.149.  Tigger baby bib, Slovakia 0.210. Snow White T-shirt, New Zealand 0.21
11. Minnie Mouse pyjamas, Austria 0.41
12. Finding Nemo T-shirt, Turkey 0.42
13. Mickey Mouse underwear, Norway 0.22
14. Treasure Planet pyjamas, Mexico 0.14
15. Snow White underwear, France 1.3
16. Buzz Lightyear vest, Philippines 3.2
19. Princess Ariel T-shirt, Argentina 0.73
20. Mickey Mouse sweatshirt, China 8.3
21. Snow White T-Shirt, Thailand 0.45
12 3 4 5 6 7 891 01 11 21 3 1 41 5 1 61 92 0 2 1LEAD
MG/KG Disney character, garment type and Cadmiumcountry of purchase mg/kg
1.  Tigger vest, Denmark nd
2.  Mickey Mouse T-shirt, Belgium 383.  Princess, T-shirt, Canada 0.14.  Donald Duck T-shirt, Netherlands nd5.  Minnie Mouse T-shirt, Spain 0.017
6.  Winnie the Pooh PVC-raincoat, Germany 0.0073
7.  Finding Nemo T-shirt, UK 0.0069
8.  Mickey Mouse T-shirt, USA 0.0189.  Tigger baby bib, Slovakia 0.01810. Snow White T-shirt, New Zealand nd
11. Minnie Mouse pyjamas, Austria 0.02
12. Finding Nemo T-shirt, Turkey 0.014
13. Mickey Mouse underwear, Norway 0.018
14. Treasure Planet pyjamas, Mexico nd
15. Snow White underwear, France 0.017
16. Buzz Lightyear vest, Philippines 0.015
19. Princess Ariel T-shirt, Argentina nd
20. Mickey Mouse sweatshirt, China 0.011
21. Snow White T-Shirt, Thailand 0.01512 3 4 5 6 7 891 01 11 21 3 1 41 5 1 61 92 0 2 1ACADMIUM
MG/KG ND = LESS THAN THE
LIMIT OF DETECTION
SAMPLE
SAMPLE

26CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex A –CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex A –
Accumulation of cadmium in the
food chain has important implications forhuman exposure (ATSDR 2000). TheInternational Agency for Research onCancer (IARC) and the US Departmentof Health and Human Services both clas-sify cadmium and cadmium compoundsas carcinogenic to humans (USDHHS2000 and IARC 1994). 
Other targets of cadmium toxicity are
the bones, where cadmium accumulationcan result in osteoporosis, or osteomala-cia (softening of the bones) (WHO 1992,ATSDR 2000). In addition, cadmium
appears to play a role in the developmentof hypertension (high blood pressure)and heart disease (ATSDR 2000, Goyer1996 and Elinder & Jarup 1996).  
Cadmium & body burden
Since 1976, US Centres for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) havebeen measuring levels of cadmium in chil-dren’s blood as part of a national survey.Blood cadmium levels for children 1-11years old are not reported since the pro-portion of results below limit of detec-tion was too high to provide a valid result.2135 persons in the age 12-19 had an aver-
age of 0,333 micrograms per decilitre ofblood. 4200 persons in the age 20 yearsand older have an average of 0,468 micro-grams of cadmium per litre of blood(USDHSS 2003). 
Uses of cadmium
Cadmium and its compounds are alsoused in metal plating, in pigments forglasses and plastics, as a stabiliser inpolyvinyl chloride (PVC), and as a com-ponent of various alloys (ATSDR 2000,Nordic Council of Ministers 2003).Cadmium compounds are used as stabil-ising agents in PVC, to provide long-term
weathering, heat and UV resistance toprolong the life of a product. (OSPAR2002). Recent data derived from cadmi-um flows in the EU for around the year2000 indicate that 300-350 tonnes of cad-mium were used in pigments and 150tonnes in stabilisers per year (EC 2002).
Environmental distribution 
of cadmium
Accumulation of cadmium in the food
chain has important implications forhuman exposure (ATSDR 2000) and TheInternational Agency for Research onCancer (IARC) and the US Departmentof Health and Human Services both cate-gorise cadmium and cadmium com-pounds as carcinogenic to humans (USD-HHS 2000 and IARC 1994). Waste dis-posal is expected to be a major anthro-pogenic source of cadmium releases tothe environment. The most effectivemeans of reducing the cadmium contentof waste flows is to remove it from thegoods which will in due course becomewaste (OSPAR 2000).
In 1998, the Ministerial Meeting of
OSPAR agreed on the target of cessationof discharges, emissions and losses of allhazardous substances to the marine envi-ronment by 2020 - the one generationcessation target - and included cadmiumcompounds on the first list of chemicalsfor priority action towards this target(OSPAR 1998).
A number of EC directives restrict
the marketing of products containingcadmium. The use of cadmium and its
compounds is prohibited for product sur-face treatment, as well as for colouring orplastic stabiliser agents in a wide range ofproducts (including PVC) where the cad-
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS27
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONSmium content exceeds 0.01 %, with some
exceptions for safety reasons (Directive76/769/EEC, as amended by Directive
91/338/EEC).
Furthermore, batteries and accumu-
lators containing more than 0.025 %cadmium by weight or more than 0.4 %lead by weight are also prohibited underEC Directive 91/157/EEC. The currentrevision of the EU battery waste direc-tive is looking to tackle hazardous mate-rials in batteries, including cadmium,lead and mercury.
The EU Directives on End-of-Life
Vehicles (Directive 2000/53/EC) and
Waste from Electrical and Electronic
Equipment/Restriction of HazardousSubstances (Directives 2002/96/ECand 2002/95/EC respectively) ban theuse of lead, cadmium and other sub-stances in new cars and electronics,with some exemptions.
National legislation of some member
states places more stringent restrictionson the use of cadmium in products. InSweden, cadmium is in principle only per-mitted for use in certain batteries. Bansexist for its use in surface treatment, asstabiliser and colouring agent. Productsthat have been surface-treated with cad-mium are not allowed to be imported.Common consumer batteries must notcontain more than 0.025 % cadmium byweight. (Förordning (1998:944) om för-bud m.m. i vissa fall i samband medhantering, införsel och utförsel avkemiska produkter. 1998-06-25, SwedishGovernment) Denmark has similarly wideranging restrictions on the use of cadmi-um in surface treatments, and as stabiliserand colouring agents above 0.0075 % byweight, and in batteries and accumulatorsabove 0.025 % by weight. (Statutoryorder No. 1199 af 23/12/1992)6. FORMALDEHYDE 
Formaldehyde was found in
8 of the 16 Disney productstested for this chemical. Thelevels vary from 23 – 1100mg/kg of printed textilearea (i.e. a maximum of0. 11% by weight of printedmotif section). 
The highest value of
1,100 mg/kg of formalde-
hyde was found in a textilesample from the UK.
Hazards of Formaldehyde 
Formaldehyde can enter the
body through skin and byeye contact, inhalation and digestion.Although it does not accumulate in thebody, acute exposure can cause variouseffects, such as allergic asthma in sensitiveindividuals. Formaldehyde is a relativelystrong contact allergen, prompting con-tact allergy in humans who have been incontact with products that contain lessthan 1 % formaldehyde (Danish EPA2004). The substance is acutely toxic andis suspected of causing cancer (DanishEPA, 2001). The International Agency forResearch on Cancer (IARC) has conclud-ed that there is sufficient evidence for car-cinogenicity in experimental animals andhas classified formaldehyde as a probableDisney character, 
garment type and Formaldehydecountry of purchase mg/kg
1.  Tigger vest, Denmark 322.  Mickey Mouse T-shirt, Belgium nd3.  Princess, T-shirt, Canada nd4.  Donald Duck T-shirt, Netherlands nd5.  Minnie Mouse T-shirt, Spain nd6.  Winnie the Pooh PVC-raincoat, Germanynd7.  Finding Nemo T-shirt, UK 1,100
8.  Mickey Mouse T-shirt, USA nd9.  Tigger baby bib, Slovakia 2510. Snow White T-shirt, New Zealand 90
11. Minnie Mouse pyjamas, Austria *
12. Finding Nemo T-shirt, Turkey 86
13. Mickey Mouse underwear, Norway *
14. Treasure Planet pyjamas, Mexico 100
15. Snow White underwear, France *
16. Buzz Lightyear vest, Philippines nd
19. Princess Ariel T-shirt, Argentina 23
20. Mickey Mouse sweatshirt, China nd
21. Snow White T-Shirt, Thailand 2300501001 000
12 3 4 5 6 7 891 01 11 21 3 1 41 5 1 61 92 0 2 1FORMALDEHYDE
MG/KG ND = LESS THAN THE
LIMIT OF DETECTION
SAMPLE

were cut into pieces of 3-4 mm and
mixed thoroughly. Part samples of themixed sample were taken as representa-tive as possible for the following analyses.
DETERMINATION OF PHTHALATES
Dichloromethane was added to the sam-
ple, shaken for 2 hours, and left to standat room temperature for 16 hours. A partsample of the extract was analysed direct-ly at combined gas chromatography andmass spectrometry (GC/MS). The quan-tification is performed using externalstandards where possible.
PHTHALATES:
Uncertainty: 10-15%RSD
The limit of detection: 1-10 mg/kg
Determination of alkylphenol ethoxylates
The sample is extracted with methanol
and an aqueous ammonium acetate solu-tion. The extract is analysed with com-bined high performance liquid chro-matography and mass spectrometry withpositive mode electro spray ionization(LC/MS). The analyses include the octyl-and nonylphenol ethoxylates from 3 to 15ethoxy groups. The analyses are per-formed as true double determinations. 
Uncertainty: 10-15%RSD
The limit of detection: 0.2 mg/kg
DETERMINATION OF ORGANIC TIN 
COMPOUNDS
The sample is extracted with acetic acid
in methanol. After filtration and additionof an aqueous media, the tin compoundsare derivatised with sodium tetraethylbo-rate, and transferred to n-pentane by themeans of extractive derivatisation. Thepentane phase is added isooctane, con-
centrated and analysed with combinedgas chromatography and mass spectrom-etry (GC/MS) at selective ion monitoringof the specified tin organic compounds.The content is quantified versus relevantstandards. 
Uncertainty: 10-15%RSD
The limit of detection:
Monobutyltin (MBT): 0.005 mg/kg
Dibutyltin (DBT): 0.003 mg/kg
Tributyltin (TBT): 0.002 mg/kg
Triphenyltin: 0.005 mg/kg
Monooctyltin: 0.010 mg/kg
Dioctyltin: 0.005 mg/kg
Tricyclohexyltin: 0.010 mg/kg 
DETERMINATION OF FORMALDE-
HYDE
The sample is extracted with deminer-
alised water. Accordingly the formalde-hyde reacts with Hantzsch-reagent duringformation of 3,5-diacetyl-1 ,4-dihydro-lutidin that is quantified spectro-photometrically.
Uncertainty: 10-15%RSD
The limit of detection: 20 mg/kg 
Determination of cadmium and lead
The sample is digested using nitric acid.
The extract is filtered and the dissolvedamounts of specified metals are deter-mined with combined InductivelyCoupled Plasma and mass detection(ICP/MS).
LEAD:
Uncertainty: 10%RSD
The limit of detection: 0.05 mg/kg 
CADMI UM:
Uncertainty: 10%RSD
The limit of detection: 0.005 mg/kg
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS29CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex B –
SAMPLE MATERIAL
On 2 December 2003, the Eurofins labo-
ratory (Smedeskovvej 38, DK-8464Galten) received 17 samples of Disneyclothing. An additional two samples weredelivered on 3 and 4 December 2003. Onreceipt the samples were identified withcontinuous numbers from 1 to 16 andfrom 19 to 21 . The samples were stored atroom temperature until analysis. Thesam ple preparation and analysis were
carried out during the period 4 – 23
December 2003.ANALYTICAL METHODS
SAMPLE PREPARATION
The print was cut out as a right-angled
square from every piece of textile. Sincethe thickness of the textiles and the printswere different, the weight/area ratio wasdetermined for all samples. The samples
28CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– Annex A –
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONScarcinogen in humans (IARC 1995).
Uses of formaldehyde
In textiles, formaldehyde is used to pro-
duce easy-care textiles and for fixation ofcolours. Cross-linking agents used in tex-tile printing are also possibly diffusesources of formaldehyde release (DanishEPA 2004a). Formaldehyde is used in vari-ous steps in textile production. Due to itsvolatility, formaldehyde can be trans-ferred readily from treated to previouslyuntreated garments. 
Environmental distribution and 
hazards of formaldehyde 
Formaldehyde is very biodegradable and
hence the potential for accumulation inaquatic organisms is considered to below. Data of effects to aquatic organisms,
obtained from the IUCLID register, arein the range 2 mg/L (Daphnia magna, 48h) to 7 4 mg/l (Scenedesmus quadricau-da, 8 d) (Danish EPA, 2001). 
Existing controls
Formaldehyde is listed as a dangerous sub-
stance, in annex 1 of Council Directive67/548/EEC. Here formaldehyde is clas-sified as toxic, R23/24/25 (by inhalation,in contact with skin and if swallowed),corrosive, R34 (causes burns), Carc3, R40(possible risk of irreversible effects) andR43 (may cause sensitization by skin con-tact) (Danish EPA 2001).
ANNEX B******
So what chemicals did the
independent DanishLabora tory Eurofins find?

31EUROFINS ANALYTICAL RESULTS SUM OTHE RS U M  ALL SUM OF
SUBSTANCE: DBP BBP DEHP DINP DHP # DIDP DEPP HTHALATES PHTHALATES OPE NPE PHENOLS
UNIT: mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg
SAM PLE DISNEY CHARACTER, GARMENT TYPE 
AND COUNTRY OF PURCHASE 
1T igger vest, Denmark nd nd 1.4 nd nd nd nd nd 1.4 200 420 620
2 Mickey Mouse T-shirt, Belgium 46 4.8 99,000 nd nd 2100 nd nd 101,150.8 4.3 260 264,3
3 Princess, T-shirt, Canada 1.6 49 96,000 nd nd nd nd nd 96,050.6 3.1 31 34,1
4 Donald Duck T-shirt, Netherlands nd 36 170,000 nd nd nd nd nd 170,036 510 710 1,220
5 Minnie Mouse T-shirt, Spain 5.3 400 220 53,000 3,500 nd 3.8 nd 57,129.1 29 93 122
6W innie the Pooh PVC raincoat, Germany nd nd nd 320,000 nd nd nd nd 320,000 1.2 72 73.2
7 Finding Nemo T-shirt, UK 1.6 380 410 nd nd nd nd nd 791.6 45 1,000 1,045
8 Mickey Mouse T-shirt, USA 13 5,900 nd nd nd nd nd 37,000 42,913 32 17 49
9T igger baby bib, Slovakia nd nd nd 200,000 nd nd nd nd 200,000 53 1,100 1,153
10 Snow White T-shirt, New Zealand 3.6 6.4 7.9 Nd nd nd nd nd 17.9 340 100 440
11 Minnie Mouse pyjamas, Austria 64 nd 9.1 nd nd nd nd nd 73.1 500 1,200 1,700
12 Finding Nemo T-shirt, Turkey Nd 290 180 7,300 nd nd nd nd 7 ,770 650 540 1,190
13 Mickey Mouse underwear, Norway 41 1,600 88 69,000 22,000 nd nd nd 92,729 * * *
14 Treasure Planet pyjamas, Mexico nd nd 12 nd nd nd nd nd 12 37 320 357
15 Snow White underwear, France 770 nd 68 1,000 nd nd nd nd 1,838 * * *
16 Buzz Lightyear vest, Philippines nd nd 12 nd nd nd nd nd 12 58 490 548
19 Princess Ariel T-shirt, Argentina 3.7 nd 2,300 nd nd nd nd nd 2,303.7 220 420 640
20 Mickey Mouse sweatshirt, China 440 22,000 2,900 19,000 43,000 nd nd nd 87,340 3.0 80 83
21 Snow White T-Shirt, Thailand 32 4.9 4.7 nd nd nd nd nd 41.6 500 890 1,390
No. of positive samples 12 11 16 7 3 1 1 1 19 17 17
No. of not detected 7 8 3 12 16 18 18 18 0 0 0nd means less than the limit of detection* means not analysed due to lack of sample# means calculated using diisononylphthalate as external standard
EUROFINS ANALYTICAL RESULTS SUM OF
SUBSTANCE MBT DBT TBT TPT MOT TEBT DOT TCHT ORGANOTIN CADMIUM LEAD FORMALDEHYDE
UNIT microg/kg microg/kg microg/kg microg/kg microg/kgmicrog/kg microg/kg microg/kg microg/kg mg/kg mg/kg mg/kg
SAM PLE DISNEY CHARACTER, GARMENT TYPE 
AND COUNTRY OF PURCHASE 
1T igger vest, Denmark nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd 0.23 32
2 Mickey Mouse T-shirt, Belgium nd nd 4 nd nd nd nd nd 4 38 76 Nd
3 Princess, T-shirt, Canada nd nd nd nd nd nd 14 nd 14 0.1 2,600 Nd
4 Donald Duck T-shirt, Netherlands 100 370 4 nd nd nd nd nd 474 nd 1.3 Nd
5 Minnie Mouse T-shirt, Spain nd 8 nd nd nd nd nd nd 8 0.017 1.4 Nd
6W innie the Pooh PVC raincoat, Germany 19 100 nd nd 170 nd 840 nd 1,129 0.0073 0.33 Nd
7 Finding Nemo T-shirt, UK nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd 0.0069 0.21 1,100
8 Mickey Mouse T-shirt, USA 7 5 nd nd nd nd nd nd 12 0.018 0.14 nd
9T igger baby bib, Slovakia nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd 0.018 0.2 25
10 Snow White T-shirt, New Zealand 13 23 nd nd nd nd nd nd 36 nd 0.21 90
11 Minnie Mouse pyjamas, Austria nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd 0.02 0.41 *
12 Finding Nemo T-shirt, Turkey nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd 0.014 0.42 86
13 Mickey Mouse underwear, Norway * * * * * * * * * 0.018 0.22 *
14 Treasure Planet pyjamas, Mexico nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd 0.14 100
15 Snow White underwear, France * * * * * * * * * 0.017 1.3 *
16 Buzz Lightyear vest, Philippines 23 11 nd nd nd nd nd nd 34 0.015 3.2 nd
19 Princess Ariel T-shirt, Argentina 5 3 nd nd nd nd nd nd 8 nd 0.73 23
20 Mickey Mouse sweatshirt, China nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd 0.011 8.3 nd
21 Snow White T-Shirt, Thailand 21 17 12 nd nd nd nd nd 50 0.015 0.45 230
No. of positive samples 7 8 3 0 1 0 2 0 10 14 19 8
No. of not detected 10 9 14 17 16 17 15 17 7 5 0 8nd means less than the limit of detection* means not analysed due to lack of sample
30
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS

CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– References –
32CORPOR ATE CRIME  IDISNEY TEXTILES 
– References –
EU (2003b) Commission Decision 2003/819/EC of 19 November 2003 amending Decision
1999/815/EC concerning measures prohibiting the placing on the market of toys and childcare
articles intended to be placed in the mouth by children under three years of age made of soft PVCcontaining certain phthalates. Official Journal of the European Union L 308, 25.11.2003: 23-24
EU (2004) Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on Persistent Organic
Pollutants and amending Directive 79/117/EEC, February 2004, Preamble (6)
Eurofins (2003) Analytical report; Testing of textile with prints (Disney products), December
2003.
Evans, S.M. (2000) Marine antifoulants. In: C. Sheppard [Ed.], Seas at the Millenium: An
Environmental Evaluation, Volume III: Global Issues and Processes, Elsevier Science Ltd, Oxford,ISBN: 0-08-043207-7, Chapter 124: 247-256
EWG 2004. Accessed jan 2004 at; http://www.ewg.org/reports/bodyburden/table_exposures.phpFörordning (1998:944) om förbud m.m. i vissa fall i samband med hantering, införsel och
utförsel av kemiska produkter.1998-06-25, Swedish Government
Gaikema F.J., Alberts P.J. Gaschromatografische bepaling van residuen van organotinverbindingen
in textielproducten. De Ware(n)-Chemicus 1999, 23-33.
Goyer, R.A. (1993) Lead toxicity: current concerns. Environmental Health Perspectives 100: 
177-187
Goyer 1996. Goyer, R.A. (1996) Toxic effects of metals. In Casarett & Doull’s Toxicology. 
The Basic Science of Poisons, Fifth Edition, Klaassen, C.D. [Ed]. McGraw-Hill Health Professions
Division, ISBN 0071054766
Guenther, K., Heinke, V., Thiele, B., Kleist, E., Prast, H. & Raecker, T. (2002) Endocrine disrupting
nonylphenols are ubiquitous in food. Environmental Science and Technology 36(8): 1676-1680
Hennes & Mauritz 2004: Email communication from Ingrid Schullstrom, environment manager, H&M Stockholm, 22 January 2004.  Harreus, U.A., Wallner, B.C., Kastenbauer, E.R. & Kleinsasser, N.H. (2002) Genotoxicity and 
cytotoxicity of 4-nonylphenol ethoxylate on lymphocytes as assessed by the COMET assay.International Journal of Environmental Analytical Chemistry 82(6): 395-401
IARC (1994) Cadmium and certain cadmium compounds.  In International Agency for Research
on Cancer (IARC) monograph; Beryllium, Cadmium, Mercury, and Exposures in the GlassManufacturing. IARC  monograph, Vol. 58. ISBN 92 832 1258 4
IARC (1995) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Volume 62,
Wood dust and Formaldehyde, ISBN 92 832 1262 2: 405 pp.
IARC (2004): Website accessed Jan 2004 at: 
http://www.inchem.org/documents/iarc/vol62/formal.html
IMO 2004. Accessed Feb. 2004 at: http://www.imo.org/home.asp
IPCS (1999). Tributyltin oxide. International Programme on Chemical Safety Concise
International Chem ical Assessment Document: 14. Accessed Sept 2003 at:
http://www.inchem.org/documents/cicads/cicads/cicad14.htm#PartNumber:14
Iwata, H., Tanabe, S., Mizuno, T. and Tatsukawa, R. (1995) High accumulation of toxic butyltins 
in marine mammals from Japanese coastal waters. Environmental Science and Technology 29:2959-2962.
Jackson, A. P., and Alloway, B. J. (1992) The transfer of cadmium from agricultural soils to 
the human food chain. In ‘Biogeochemistry of Trace Metals’ (Ed. D. C. Adriano.) pp. 109-58.Publ:  Lewis, USA. ISBN 087371 5233
Jobling, S., Coey, S., Whitmore, J.G., Kime,D.E., van Look, K.J.W., McAllister, B.G., Beresford, N.,
Henshaw, A.C., Brighty, G., Tyler, C.R. & Sumpter, J.P. (2002) Wild intersex roach (Rutilus rutilus)have reduced fertility. Biology of Reproduction 67(2): 515- 524
Jobling, S., Reynolds, White, R., Parker, M.G. & Sumpter, J.P. (1995) A variety of environmentally
persistent chemicals, including some phthalate  lasticizers, are weakly oestrogenic. EnvironmentalHealth Perspectives 103(6): 582-587
Jobling, S., Sheahan, D., Osborne, J.A., Matthiessen, P. & Sumpter, J.P. (1996) Inhibition of 
testicular growth in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) exposed to estrogenic alkylphenolicchemicals. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 15(2): 194-202
Kannan, K., Corsolini, S., Focardi, S., Tanabe, S. & Tatsukawa, R. (1996) Accumulation pattern
of butyltin compounds in dolphin, tuna and shark collected from Italian coastal waters.Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 31: 19-23
Kergosien D.H. and Rice C.D. (1998).Macrophage secretory function is enhanced by low doses
of tributyltin-oxide (TBTO), but not tributyltin-chloride (TBTCl). Arc. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 34:223-228
Koch HM, Drexler H, Angerer J (2003). An estimation of the daily intake of di(2-ethylhexyl)
phthalate (DEHP) and other phthalates in the general population. Int J Hyg Environ Health;206(2):77–83.
Kumasaka, K., Miyazawa, M., Fujimaka, T., Tao, H., Ramaswamy, B.R., Nakazawa, H., Makino, 
T. & Satoh, S. (2002) Toxicity of the tributyltin compound on the testis in premature mice.
Journal of Reproduction and Development 48(6): 591-597
Lewis, R.G., Fortmann, R.C. & Camann, D.E. (1994) Evaluation of methods for monitoring the
potential exposure of small children to pesticides in the residential environment. Archives ofEnvironmental Contamination and Toxicology 26: 37-46Lo S, Allera A, Albers P, Heimbrecht J, Jantzen E, Klingmuller D, Steckelbroeck S (2003).
Dithioerythritol (DTE) prevents inhibitory effects of triphenyltin (TPT) on the key enzymes ofthe human sex steroid hormone metabolism. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol; 84(5):569–76.
Loo TW, Clarke DM (1998). Nonylphenol ethoxylates, but not nonylphenol, are substrates of the
human multidrug resistance P-glycoprotein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun; 247(2):478–80.
Matthews, G. (1996) PVC: production, properties and uses. Publ: The Institute of Materials,
London., ISBN 0 9017 16 59 6, 379pp.
Mayer, F.L., Stalling, D.L. & Johnson, J.L. (1972) Phthalate esters as environmental contaminants.
Nature 238: 411-413
MEE (2000) Statutory order on prohibition of import, marketing and manufacture of lead and
products containing lead, Number 1012.  Ministry of Environment and Energy (MEE), DanishEnvironmental Protection Agency.  Available at;  http://www.mst.dk/rules/02030000.htm
Nielsen, E., Thorup, I., Schnipper, A., Hass, U., Meyer, O., Ladefoged, O., Larsen, J.C., Ostergaard, 
G & Larsen, P.L. (2001) Children and the unborn child. Publ: Danish Environmental ProtectionAgency, Miljoproject No. 589, 117pp.
Nordic Council of Ministers 2003. Cadmium Review, January 2003.Nriagu, J.O. (1988) A silent epidemic of environmental metal poisoning. Environmental Pollution
50: 139-161
Ortepa 2004. Accessed jan 2004 at: http://www.ortepa.org/stabilisers/pages/markets.htmOSPAR (1998) OSPAR Strategy with Regard to Hazardous Substances, OSPAR Convention for
the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic, OSPAR 98/14/1 Annex 34
OSPAR (2000) OSPAR Background Document on Organic Tin Compounds, OSPAR Priority
Substances Series, OSPAR Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of theNorth-East Atlantic, OSPAR Commission, London, ISBN 0- 946956-56-1: 16pp.
OSPAR (2001) Nonylphenol/nonylphenolethoxylates, OSPAR Priority Subtances Series, OSPAR
Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic, OSPARCommission, London, ISBN 0- 946956-79-0: 18 pp.
OSPAR (2002) OSPAR Background Document on Cadmium, OSPAR Priority Substances Series,
OSPAR Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic,OSPAR Commission, London, ISBN 0-946956-93-6: 56pp.
Otake, T., Yoshinaga, J. & Yanagisawa, Y. (2001) Analysis of organic esters of plasticizer in indoor
air by GC-MS and GCFPD. Environmental Science and Technology 35(15): 3099-3102
Park, J.D., Habeebu, S.S.M. & Klaassen, C.D. (2002) Testicular toxicity of di-(2-ethylhexyl)
phthalate in young Sprague-Dawley rats. Toxicology 171: 105-115
Parmar D, Srivastava SP, Srivastava SP, Seth PK (1985). Hepatic mixed function oxidases and
cytochrome P-450 contents in rat pups exposed to di-(2- ethylhexyl)phthalate through mother’smilk. Drug Metab Dispos;13(3):368–70.
Pirkle, J.L., Kaufman, R.B., Brody, D.J., Hickman, T., Gunter, E.W. & Paschal, D.C. (1998) Exposure
of the U.S. population to lead, 1991-1994. Environmental Health Perspectives 106(11): 745-750
Sadiki, A.-I. & Williams, D.T. (1999) A study on organotin levels in Canadian drinking water 
distributed through PVC pipes. Chemosphere 38(7): 1541-1548
Santillo D, Labunska I, Davidson H, Johnston P, Strutt M and Knowles O. Consuming Chemicals,
Greenpeace Research Laboratories Technical Note 01/2003 (GRL-TN-01-2003), 2003. 
Srivastava S, Awasthi VK, Srivastava SP, Seth PK (1989). Biochemical alterations in rat fetal liver
following in utero exposure to di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP). Indian J Exp Biol;27(10):885–8.
Statutory order: Bekendtgørelse om forbud mod salg, import og fremstilling af cadmiumholdige
produkter. No. 1199 af 23/12/1992. Danish Government
Stringer, R., Labunska, I, Santillo, D., Johnston, P., Siddorn, J. & Stephenson, A. (2000)
Concentrations of phthalate esters and identification of other additives in PVC children’s toys.Environmental Science and Pollution Research 7(1): 27-36
Takada H, Isobe T, Nakada N, Nishiyama H, Iguchi T, Irie H, Mori C (1999).Bisphenol A and
nonylphenols in human umbilical cords. Proceedings of the International Scientific Conference on Environ mental Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals, Monte VerIta , Ascona, Switzerland, March 7–12, 1999
Takahashi, S., Mukai, H., Tanabe, S., Sakayama, K., Miyazaki, T. & Masuno, H. (1999) Butyltin
residues in livers of humans and wild terrestrial mammals and in plastic products. EnvironmentalPollution 106: 213-218
USDHHS (2000) 9th report on carcinogens. Publ: US Department of Health and Human Services.
USDHSS 2003. Second National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals by the
Department of Health and Human Services Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, NationalCenter for Environmental Health, Division of Laboratory Sciences, Atlanta, Georgia. NCEH Pub.No. 02.  Available at http://www.cdc.gov/exposurereport/
WHO, World Health Organisation (1992) Cadmium. Environmental Health Criteria 135. ISBN
9241571357
Wilson, N.K., Chuang, J.C. & Lyu, C. (2001) Levels of persistent organic pollutants in several child
day care centers. Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology 11(6): 449-458Yiin, L.M., Rhoads, G.G. & Lioy, P.J. (2000) Seasonal influences on childhood lead exposure.
Environmental Health Perspectives 108 (2): 177-182Adeoya-Osiguwa, S.A., Markoulaki, S., Pocock, V., Milligan, S.R. & Fraser, L.R. (2003) 17-beta-estradiol and environmental estrogens significantly effect mammalian sperm function.
Human Reproduction 18(1): 100-107
Al-Ghais, S.M. & Ahmad, A.B. (2000) Differential inhibition of xenobioticmetabolizing 
carboxylesterases by organotins in marine fish. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 46(3): 258-264
Alloway, B.J. (1990) Heavy metals in soils. John Wiley and Sons, Inc. New York, 
ISBN 04 7021 5984
Allsopp, M., Santillo, D. & Johnston, P. (2000). Hazardous chemicals in PVC flooring. 
Greenpeace Research Laboratories Technical Note 14/00, November 2000: 10 pp. [published under cover title “Poison Underfoot: Hazardous Chemicals in PVC Flooring and Hazardous Chemicals in Carpets”, ISBN 90-73361-68-0]
Allsopp, M., Santillo, D. & Johnston, P. (2001) Poison underfoot. Hazardous chemicals in 
PVC flooring and hazardous chemicals in carpets. Publ: Greenpeace Research Laboratories/Healthy Flooring Network, ISBN 90-73361-68-0
Allsopp, M., Costner, P. & Johnston, P. (2001) Incineration and Human Health: State of knowledge
of the impacts of waste incinerators on human health. Publ. Greenpeace International, Amsterdam,ISBN 90-73361-69-9: 81 pp. http://www.greenpeace.to/html/commreps.htm
Ariese, F., van Hattum, B., Hopman, G., Boon, J. & ten Hallers-Tjabbes, C. (1998) Butyltin and
phenyltin compounds in liver and blubber samples of sperm whales (Physeter macrocephalus)stranded in the Netherlands and Denmark.. Institute for Environmental Studies, Vrije Universiteit,Amsterdam, Report W98-04, March 1998
Atienzar, F.A., Billinghurst, Z. & Depledge, M.H. (2002) 4-n-nonylphenol and 17-betaestradiol
may induce common DNA effects in developing barnacle larvae. Environmental Pollution 
120(3) 735-738
ATSDR (2000) ATSDR’s toxicological profiles on CD-ROM, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Barr DB, Silva MJ, Kato K, Reidy JA, Malek NA, Hurtz D, Sadowski M, Needham LL, Calafat AM
(2003). Assessing human exposure to phthalates using monoesters and their oxidizedmetabo lites as biomarkers. Environ Health Perspect;111(9):1148–51.
Belfroid, A.C., Purperhart, M. & Ariese, F. (2000) Organotin levels in seafood. Marine Pollution
Bulletin 40(3): 226-232 Bergman, Å., Ostman, C., Nyborn, R., Sjodin, A., Carlsson, H., Nilsson, U. & Wachtmeister, C.A. (1997) Flame retardants and  lasticizers on particulates in the moderncomputerized indoor environment. Organohalogen Compounds 33: 414-419
Bernard, A.M., Vyskocil, A., Kriz, J., Kodl, M. & Lauwerys, R. (1995) Renal effects on children
living in the vicinity of a lead smelter. Environmental Research 68: 91-95
Blount, B.C., Silva, M.J., Caudill, S.P., Needham, L.L., Pirkle, J.L., Sampson, E.J., Lucier, G.W.,
Jackson, R.J. & Brock, J.W. (2000) Levels of seven urinary phthalate metabolites in a humanreference population. Environmental Health Perspectives 108(10): 979-982
Bouchard, N., Pelletier, E. & Fournier, M. (1999) Effects of butyltin compounds onphagocytic
activity of hemocytes from three marine bivalves. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 18(3): 519-522
Butte, W. & Heinzow, B. (2002) Pollutants in house dust as indicators of indoor contamination.
Reviews in EnvironmentalContamination and Toxicology 175: 1-46 Chen, H.Y., Xiao, J.G., Hu, G.,Zhou, J.W., Xiao, H. & Wang, X.R. (2002) Estrogenicity of organophosphorus and pyrethroidpesticides. Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health-Part A 65(19): 1419- 1435
CDC (2003). Second National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals. 
(Revised version). Atlanta, GA, USA: Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Environmental Health. NCEH Pub. No. 02-0716. Accessed Sept 2003 at:http://www.cdc.gov/exposurereport/pdf/secondNER.pdf 
Chen, Z.-S. (1991) Cadmium and lead contamination of soils near plastic stabilizing materialsproducing plants in Northern Taiwan.  Water, Air & Soil Pollution. 57-58: 745-754Chitra, K.C., Latchoumycandane, C. & Mathur, P.P. (2002) Effect of nonylphenol on the anti-
oxidant system in epididymal sperm of rats. Archives of Toxicology 76(9): 545-551
Cima, F., Ballarin, L., Bressa, G., Martinucci, G. & Burighel, P. (1996) Toxicity of organotin 
compounds on embryos of a marine invertebrate (Styela plicata; Tunicata). Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 35(2): 174-182
Colon, I., Caro, D., Bourdony, C.J. & Rosario, O. (2000) Identification of phthalate esters in the
serum of young Puerto Rican girls with premature breast development. Environmental HealthPerspectives 108(9): 895-900
CSTEE (2001a) EC Scientific Committee on Toxicity, Ecotoxicity and the Environment, Opinion on
the results of the Risk Assessment of: 1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid, di-C8-10-branched alkylesters, C9- rich and di-“isononyl” phthalate – Report version (Human Health Effects): Final report,May 2001. Opinion expressed at the 27th CSTEE plenary meeting, Brussels, 30 October 2001: 7 pp. http://europa.eu.int/ comm/food/fs/sc/sct/out120_en.
CSTEE (2001b) EC Scientific Committee on Toxicity, Ecotoxicity and the Environment, Opinion
on the results of the Risk Assessment of: 1,2-Benzenedicarboxylic acid, di-C8-10-branched alkyl
esters, C9- rich and di-“isononyl” phthalate – Report version (Environment): Final report, May 2001. Opinion expressed at the 27th CSTEE plenary meeting, Brussels, 30 October 2001: 
5 pp. http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/fs/sc/sct/ou t122_en.pdf
CSTEE (2001c) Scientific Committee on Toxicity, Ecotoxicity and the Environment (European
Commission), Opinion on the results of the Risk Assessment of: 1,2- Benzenedicarboxylic aciddi-C9-11- branched alkyl esters, C10-rich and di- “isodecyl”phthalate – Report version
(Environment): Final report, May 2001. Opinion expressed at the 24th CSTEE plenary meeting,Brussels, 12 June 2001, 5 pp. http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/fs/ sc/sct/out121_en.pdfDalgaard, M., Nellemann, C., Lam, H.R., Sorensen, I.K. & Ladefoged, O. (2001) The acute effects
of mono(2- ethylhexyl)phthalate (MEHP) on testes of prepubertal Wistar rats. Toxicology Letters122: 69-79
Danish EPA 1998; Environmental project no. 432; Effects of Organic Chemicals in Sludge Applied
to Soil.
Danish EPA 2000; Environmental project no. 534; Chemicals in textiles.Danish EPA 2004: Accessed Jan 2004 at: http://www.mst.dk/Danish EPA 2004a; Accessed Feb. 2004 at: http://www.mst.dk/kemi/02053611.htmDanish EPA 2004b: Accessed Feb 2004 at: http://www.mst.dk/udgiv/publications/2001/87-
7944-596-9/html/kap08_eng.htm
de Santiago, A. & Aguilar-Santelises, M. (1999) Organotin compounds decrease in vitro survival,
proliferation and differentiation of normal human B lymphocytes. Human and ExperimentalToxicology 18(10): 619-624
Di Gangi, J. (1997) Lead and cadmium in vinyl children’s products. Publ: Greenpeace USA, 38pp.Dostal LA, Weaver RP, Schwetz BA (1987). Transfer of di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate through rat milk
and effects on milk composition and the mammary gland. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol;91(3):315–25.
Duty, S.M., Singh, N.P., Silva, M.J., Barr, D.B., Brock, J.W., Ryan, L., Herrick, R.F., Christiani, D.C. &
Hauser, R. (2003) The relationship between environmental exposures to phthalates and DNAdamage in human sperm using the neutral comet assay. Environmental Health Perspectives111(9): 1164-1169
EC (2002a) European Union Risk Assessment Report, 4-nonylphenol (branched) and nonylphe-
nol.  2nd Priority List, Volume 10, EUR 20387 EN, European Communities 2002, Luxembourg:230 pp.
EC (2002b) European Community Common Position (EC) No 19/2002 of 4 December2001
adopted by the Council, acting in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 251 of theTreaty establishing the European Community, with a view to adopting a Directive of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the restrictions of the use of certain hazardous substances in
electrical and electronic equipment (RoHS). Official Journal of the European Communities, 2002/C 90/E, Vol.45: 12-18
EC (2002)  Heavy Metals in Waste.  European Commission DG ENV. E3.  Available at
http://europa.eu.int/comm/environment/waste/heavymetalsreport.pdf
EC 2004. Accessed jan 2004 at: http://www.dehp-facts.com/index.asp?page=5
Elinder, C.G. and Jarup, L. (1996) Cadmium exposure and health risks: recent findings. Ambio 25,5: 370-373Ema, M., Kurosaka, R., Amano, H. & Ogawa, Y. (1995) Comparative developmental toxicity of n-
butyl benzyl phthalate and di-n-butyl phthalate in rats. Archives of Environmental Contaminationand Toxicology 28(2): 223-228
Ema, M., Iwase, T., Iwase, Y., Ohyama, N., Ogawa, Y. (1996) Change of embryotoxic susceptibility
to di-n-butyltin dichloride in cultured rat embryos. Archives of Environmental Contamination andToxicology 70: 742-748
Ema, M., Harazono, A., Miyawaki, E., Ogawa, Y. (1997) Effect of the Day of Administration on the
Developmental Toxicity of Tributyltin Chloride in Rats. Archives of Environmental Contaminationand Toxicology 33: 90-96
Ema, M. & Miyawaki, E. (2002)  Effects on development of the reproductive system in male
offspring of rats given 
butyl benzyl phthalate during late pregnancy.  Reproductive Toxicology 16: 71-76ENDS 2002. Report #328, May 2002ENDS 2003. Report #344, p27, September 2003Eskes, C., Honegger, P., Jones-Lepp, T., Varner, K., Matthieu, J.-M., and Monnet-Tschudi, F. (1999)
Toxicology in vitro 13:555-560
EU (2001) Decision No 2455/2001/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
20 November 2001 establishing the list of priority substances in the field of water policy and
amending Directive 2000/60/EC, Official Journal L 249 , 17/09/2002: 27-30
EU (2002a) Commission Directive 2002/62/EC of 9th July 2002 adapting to technical
progress for the ninth time Annex 1 to Council Directive 76/769/EEC on the approximations of
the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the member States relating to restrictions
on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations (organostannic
compounds). Official Journal L 183, 12.7.2002: 58-59
EU (2002b) Commission Decision 2002/371/EC of 15 May 2002 establishing the ecological
criteria for the award of the Community eco-label to textile products and amending Decision
1999/178/EC. Official Journal L 133, 18/05/2002: 29-41
EU (2003a) Directive 2003/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 May
2003 amending, for the 25th time, Council Directive 76/769/EEC on the approximation of the
laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to restrictions onthe marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations (substances classifiedas carcinogens, mutagens or substances toxic to reproduction - c/m/r), Official Journal of theEuropean Union L 156: pp. 26-30 
http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/pri/en/oj/dat/2003/l_156/l_15620030625en00260030.pdf
33
GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS GREENPEACE INVESTIGATIONS

Bring on the substitutes!
Let’s replace those 
harmful chemicals.