# Archivo original: fisheries-observers-are-human-rights-defenders-on-the-worlds-oceans.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:01 -03 2025

1 
 
Fisheries Observers are Human 
Rights Defenders on the World’s 
Oceans  
 
I. Introduction  
 
Fisheries observers are human rights defenders on the world’s oceans. These 
individuals work independently onboard commercial fishing vessels around the world 
to collect scientific data on the state of the marine environment, and in some 
instances report on compliance with fisheries conservation and management 
measures. The data they provide is crucial to assess fish populations, determine 
sustainable catch levels and to the conservation of the marine ecosystems that 
fisheries rely on. Without the data, information and third -party insight on fishing 
activities that fisheries observers provide —along with the effective follow up on their 
reports —the right to a healthy  and sustainable environment, the right to life, the right 
to health, the right to food, and the livelihoods of billions of people would be even 
more threatened.1 Fisheries observers risk their lives defending not only our human 
rights related to the envi ronment but the environment on which our human rights 
depend.  
 
Fisheries observers are arguably some of the most isolated human rights defenders 
in the world. They work alone alongside the fisheries crew for weeks at a time 
onboard fishing vessels far fro m shore or their home countries. Fisheries observers 
have faced intimidation, threats, and have even disappeared or been killed while on 
the job, but the international, national, and corporate policy responses have been 
woefully lacking.2 Newly -appointed Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human 
Rights Defenders, Mary Lawlor, recently stated she wants to focus particular 
attention on isolated and vulnerable human rights defenders.3 The time is now for 
international recognition of the important human ri ghts work that fisheries observers 
conduct and to reform policies to ensure their protection.  
 
 
In this briefing note, Greenpeace US  explain s:  
 
1 Read D. Porter, Fisheries Observers as Enforcement Assets: Lessons from the North Pacific , 34 Marine Pol’y  
583 (2010).  
2 Human Rights at Sea , “Investigative Report and Case Study: Fisheries Abuses and Related Deaths at Sea in 
the Pacific Region ” (2017); Association for Professional  Observers , “Catalogue of Observer Casualties, Injuries, 
and Near Misses” (2020).  
3 Institute for Human Rights and Business, Mary Lawlor on Human Rights Defenders , Voices IHRB (May 27, 
2020), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9QSvtALQ9aA.  

 
 
2 
 
1) who are human rights defenders;  
2) why fisheries observers are human rights defenders;  
3) what special protections are fisheries observers entitled to as human rights 
defenders and what obligations do states (and private actors) have in 
safeguarding those protections; and  
4) what are current sh ortcomings and gaps in the protection of fisheries 
observers.  
 
Finally, we offer several recommendations to adequately protect fisheries observers 
as key human rights defenders.  
 
 
II. Who are Human Rights Defenders?  
 
Human rights defenders are individuals or groups that are working towards the 
promotion and protection of any human right, including human rights relating to the 
environment, and the protection of the environment on which the enjoyment of 
human rights depend as well. Human rights de fenders can be professionals, 
volunteers or everyday people, and work globally on a diverse range of human rights 
issue areas, including the right to life, food, and water, adequate housing, political 
rights, freedom of expression, freedom of information, and non -discrimination.4 
According to Principle 4 of the Framework Principles on Human Rights and the 
Environment ("Framework Principles"):5 
 
“Human rights defenders include individuals and groups 
who strive to protect and promote human rights relating 
to the environment (see A/71/281, para. 7). Those who 
work to protect the environment on which the enjoyment 
of human rights depends are protecting and promoting 
human rights as well, whether or not they self -identify as 
human rights defenders. Th ey are among the human 
rights defenders most at risk, and the risks are 
particularly acute for indigenous peoples and traditional 
communities that depend on the natural environment for 
their subsistence and culture.”  
 
 
4 Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), “Human Rights Defenders: Protecting the 
Right to Defend Human Rights” 2 (2004).  
5 John Knox, Framework Principles on Human Rights and the Environment (United Nations Human Rights 
Special Procedures 2018) [here inafter “Framework Principles”].The Framework Principles on Human Rights 
and the Environment, compiled by the UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights and the Environment, outline 
state and international obligations to ensure our collective enjoyment of a cle an, safe, healthy, and sustainable 
environment.26 Fisheries observers are the frontline defenders of these international environmental human 
rights on the oceans. The Framework Principles pull together environmental human rights and obligations from 
variou s international human rights treaties, conventions, and resolutions, several of which directly link to 
fisheries observer duties.  

 
 
3 
Environmental human rights defenders ( EHRDs), “help to protect the environment – 
and the rights that depend upon it – from unsustainable exploitation”6 and as such, 
fisheries observers fall precisely within this definition and are deserving of the same 
internationally recognized protections a s all human rights defenders when carrying 
out their work.7 
 
“Human rights defenders are identified above all by what they do and it is through a 
description of their actions . . . and of some of the contexts in which they work . . . 
that the term can bes t be explained.”8 The next section explains in detail the duties 
that fisheries observers perform and how the impact of their work renders them 
Human Rights Defenders.  
 
 
III. Why are Fisheries Observers Human 
Rights Defenders?  
 
The nature and scope of the wo rk of fisheries observers as well the impact of this 
work is of critical importance to the sustainability of fisheries, healthy ecosystems, 
and all of the human rights on which they depend. Through diverse mandates on 
different types of vessels and for the  protection of diverse species, fisheries 
observers conduct scientific work and at times also carry out monitoring, control and 
surveillance duties. They ensure our environmental human rights on the oceans.  
 
A. The work of fisheries observers  
 
As of 2017, the re were an estimated 2,500 fisheries observers working worldwide.9 
They work on all kinds of commercial fishing vessels, with diverse species, and at 
the national, regional, and international levels.10 Fisheries observers are often 
employed through nation al government agencies,11 third-party contractors,12 or 
regional observer programs.13 Most international bodies tasked with managing and 
 
6 John Knox, Environmental Human Rights Defenders: A Global Crisis , Universal Rights Group (2017), 1.  
7 For more on EHRDs, see  Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders 
(A/71/281) (Aug. 3, 2016).  
8 United Nations Office of the High Commissioner of Human Rights (OHCHR), “Who Is A Defender?” 
https://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/SRHRDefenders/Pages/Defen der.aspx.  
9 Tom Knudson, He Was Supposed to Protect the Sea. Then He Vanished from His Ship , Reveal (Ctr. for 
Investigative Reporting 2017), https://www.revealnews.org/article/he -was-supposed -to-protect -the-sea-then-he-
vanished -from -his-ship/.  
10 Sandy L. D avies,  Guidelines for Developing an At -Sea Fishery Observer Programme , FAO Fisheries 
Technical Paper  (2003).  
11 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , National Observer Program Fact Sheet , NOAA Fisheries 
(April 2, 2020).  
12 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , Observer Employers , NOAA Fisheries (2020) , 
https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/national/fisheries -observers/observer -employers . 
13 Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency, FFA Obs erver Program (2008).  

 
 
4 
conserving shared fish stocks straddling national boundaries or in the high seas 
beyond national jurisdiction, known as “Regional Fisheries Management 
Organizations" (RFMOs), require some form of observer  program.14 
 
The objectives of observer programs vary from purely scientific data collection to 
active monitoring, control, and surveillance (MCS). Scientific tasks include biological 
sampling and reporting on catch composition, size, sex, and maturity for  stock 
assessments to determine maximum sustainable yield and future catch allocations. 
MCS tasks can include reporting on compliance with by -catch measures,15 marine 
mammal, sea turtle, and shark protection provisions, gear and species restrictions, 
catch  log verifications, monitoring of transshipments at -sea,16 waste and fishing gear 
disposal, and sightings of unauthorized vessels. Only four of 17 RFMOs reviewed in 
a recent study primarily task fisheries observers with a mandate that officially 
includes c ompliance monitoring, but most observer programs include a mix of 
scientific data collection and conservation measure reporting duties.17 Under RFMO 
regulations, fisheries observers identify violations of conservation and management 
measures and it is up t o the flag state to take appropriate actions.18 
 
Fisheries observers also play a vital role in preventing overfishing and illegal fishing, 
regardless of whether they have a purely scientific focus or an active MCS mandate. 
Overexploitation and declining fi sh populations continue to threaten marine life and 
seafood resources,19 and over two -thirds of RFMO -managed fisheries are 
considered to be depleted or overfished.20 Illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) 
fishing is one of the main contributors to fish  population decline, and threatens our 
collective right to a sustainable marine environment.21 One study estimated that 
between 20 and 32 percent of wild -caught seafood imported into the United States in 
2014 was harvested illegally.22 Fisheries observers are often the only independent 
monitors of activities occurring onboard commercial fishing vessels and are critical to 
determining sustainable fishing quotas and ecosystem -based fisheries 
 
14 Christopher Ewell, John Hocevar, Elizabeth Mitchell, Samantha Snowden, & Jennifer Jacquet, An Evaluation 
of Regional Fisheries Management Organization At -Sea Compliance Monitoring and Observer Programs , 115 
Marine Pol’y  103842 (2020 ). 
15 By-catch refers to all species captured by the fishery other than the target species, which are either discarded 
or retained for food, fishmeal, or other industrial purposes. By -catch is often a large portion of the catch and 
inadequate management of by-catch and discards threatens fisheries worldwide. See Eric L. Gilman, Bycatch 
Governance and Best Practice Mitigation Technology in Global Tuna Fisheries , 35 Marine Pol’y  590 (2011).  
16 Transshipment at -sea refers to the offloading of fisheries catch on the water, often from a fishing vessel to a 
refrigerated cargo vessel. The refrigerated cargo vessel then lands the catch of multiple fishing vessels in port. 
This practice has been criti cized for facilitating the laundering of IUU fish, trade in other illicit goods, and 
human trafficking. See Christopher Ewell, Sarika Cullis -Suzuki, Mikaela Ediger, John Hocevar, Dana Miller, & 
Jennifer Jacquet, Potential Ecological and Social Benefits of a Moratorium on Transshipment on the High 
Seas, 81Marine Pol’y  293 (2017).  
17 Ewell et al. (2020), supra note 1 4. 
18 Judith  Swan, Fishing Vessels Operating Under Open Registers and the Exercise of Flag State 
Responsibilities , FAO Fisheries Circular (2002).  
19 Daniel Pauly & Dirk Zeller, Catch Reconstructions Reveal that Global Marine Fisheries Catches are Higher 
Than Reported and Declining , 6 Nature Communications (2016).  
20 Sarika Cullis -Suzuki & Daniel Pauly, Global Evaluation of High Seas Fisheries Managemen t, in Global 
Atlas of Marine Fisheries: A Critical Appraisal Of Catches And Ecosystem Impacts 76 -77 (2016).  
21 Id. 
22 Pramod Ganapathiraju, et al. , Estimates of Illegal and Unreported Fish in Seafood Imports to the USA , 48 
Marine Pol ’y 102, 105  (2014).  

 
 
5 
management.23 While some fishery bodies currently require 100 percen t observer 
coverage onboard fishing vessels,24 many fisheries require observers on only a 
small percentage of fishing vessels for sampling data, which has been criticized as 
insufficient, improperly enforced,25 and subject to bias.26  
 
In spite of these of ficial impediments, fisheries observers play a significant role in 
diminishing IUU fishing. In a recent doctoral dissertation, criminologist Gohar 
Petrossian showed that “countries that had strong observer schemes in place were 
significantly less likely to  experience high degrees of illegal fishing within their 
territorial waters than those that had insufficient or no such schemes in place.”27 In 
just one American fisheries management zone, between 2000 and 2002, observers 
reported 590 violations, leading o ne federal official to conclude, “the importance of 
documenting and reporting [violations] cannot be overemphasized and should be 
included in all regulatory regimes.”28 A full 36.2 percent of their reports led to a “final 
penalty,”29 including “a warning; forfeiture; or financial penalty or settlement.”30 
Another scholar, Pramod Ganapathiraju, noted, “Fisheries observers can serve as 
deterrent to fisheries violations by their mere presence onboard fishing vessels, 
while collecting sci entific data for fisheries management at the same time.”31 
 
B. The United Nations’ current understanding of human 
rights defenders  
 
Although the UN has yet to recognize fisheries observers as human rights 
defenders, there is room for their inclusion and any concerns about excessively 
broadening the definition of human rights defenders in the process would be 
misplaced. The UN does not recognize human rights defenders categorically, but 
rather functionally (based on their specific activities). Consider, fo r instance, the 
classification of journalists. According to OHCHR, journalists are not necessarily 
human rights defenders in “their general role” (i.e. gathering information and 
disseminating it to the public), but “many journalists do act as defenders, fo r example 
 
23 Eric Gilman, Mariska Weijerman & Petri Suuronen, Ecological Data from Observer Programmes Underpin 
Ecosystem -Based Fisheries Management , 74 ICES J. of Marine Sci. 1481 (2017).  
24 Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization, Chapter V: Observer Sche me, Conservation and Enforcement 
Measures 2019, NAFO/COM Doc. 19 –01 (2019).  
25 The Pew Charitable Trusts , “A Review of Longline Observer Coverage Reporting within the Inter -American 
Tropical Tuna Commission ” (2019).  
26 E. Babcock, E. Pikitch & C. G. Hudson, How Much Observer Coverage Is Enough to Adequately Estimate 
By-Catch? , Report of the Pew Institute for Ocean Science, Rosentiel School of Marine and Atmospheric 
Science, University of Miami (2003).  
27 Gohar Petrossian, “The Decision to Engage in Illegal Fis hing: An Examination of Situational Factors in 54 
Countries” 166 (Ph.D. dissertation, Rutgers, 2012). See also id. at 69.  
28 Quoted in Porter, supra  note 1, at 584.  
29 Id. at 587.  
30 Id. at 585.  
31 Pramod Ganapathiraju, “Illegal and Unreported Fishing: Global Analysis of Incentives and a Case Study 
Estimating Illegal and Unreported Catches from India” 52 (Ph.D. dissertation, University of British Columbia, 
2012). See also  William A. Karp, et al., Strategies Used Throughout the World to Manage Fisheries D iscards , 
in The European Landing Obligation: Reducing Discards in Complex, Multi -Species and Multi -Jurisdictional 
Fisheries 19 (Sven Uhlmann et al., eds., 2019).  

 
 
6 
when they report on human rights abuses and bear witness to acts that they have 
seen.”32 Thus, although the “UN does not consider journalists to be H[uman] R[ights] 
D[efender]s per se . . . those journalists who promote human rights would logical ly 
be considered H[uman] R[ights] D[efender]s.”33 Journalists who promote human 
rights are those who, “through their activities . . . strive to protect the rights of 
others.”34 Similarly, those fisheries observers who strive to protect human rights and 
the resilience of the seas on which human rights rely would properly be classified as 
human rights defenders. In contrast to journalists, however, the defense of 
environmental human rights is inherent in the role of fisheries observers.  
 
Further, as the legal  scholar Yvonne Donders has noted, although the UN’s definition 
of human rights defenders is quite broad —broad enough to “include a large 
collection and variety of persons, groups, organisations, and institutions” —the 
“broadness of this definition should n ot disguise the fact that some human rights 
defenders are much more vulnerable than others and in need of protection.”35 In 
other words, not all human rights defenders are entitled to heightened protection 
simply because they are human rights defenders; ra ther, they are in special need of 
protection when their human rights defense renders them especially vulnerable to 
danger. In the case of journalists, the UN considers those journalists who report on 
human rights to be “among those [defenders] most at risk ,” and therefore they are 
entitled to heightened protection.36 Because fisheries observers are, by definition, 
stationed far from the land and surrounded by potential antagonists, their role 
renders them especially imperiled; they are entitled to heightene d protection as such.  
 
Fisheries observers are properly understood as among the most at -risk 
environmental human rights defenders (EHRDs).37 Perhaps the environmental 
human rights defenders most analogous to fisheries observers are park rangers. 
Just as fi sheries observers safeguard the resilience of the seas and prevent IUU 
fishing, park rangers safeguard the resilience of the forests and prevent illegal 
logging, poaching, and oil exploration. Just as fisheries observers are at risk of 
intimidation or even  murder from those with a financial interest in the impunity of the 
fishing industry, park rangers too must endure threats, bribery, unjustified arrests, 
and even murder. In the Democratic Republic of Congo, for instance, poachers, 
extractive industries, a nd complicit government officials have threatened numerous 
rangers seeking to protect Virunga National Park, and at least ten were murdered in 
 
32 OHCHR, “Who Is a Defender?” supra  note 8.  
33 Tamsin Mitchell, Journalists as Human Rights Def enders: International Protection of Journalists in Contexts 
of Violence and Impunity, in Reporting Human Rights, Conflicts, and Peacebuilding: Critical and Global 
Perspectives 224 -25 (Ibrahim Seaga Shaw & Senthan Selvarajah, eds., 2019). See also  UNHRC, Re port of the 
Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions of Journalist Killings, para. 27 
(A/HRC/20/22) (2012).  
34 Mitchell, supra  note 33, at 225.  
35 Yvonne Donders, Defending the Human Rights Defenders , 34 Neth. Q. Hum. Rts. 282, 283 (2016).  
36 Mitchell, supra  note 33, at 225.  
37 Global Witness, “Defenders of the Earth: Global Killings of Land and Environmental Defenders in 2016,” at 
4 (quoting John Knox as describing EHRDs as those who “work to ensure th at we live in an environment that 
enables us to enjoy our basic rights, including rights to life and health”). For more on EHRDs, see Jennifer M. 
Gleason & Elizabeth Mitchell, Will the Confluence Between Human Rights and the Environment Continue to 
Flow? T hreats to the Rights of Environmental Defenders to Collaborate and Speak Out , 11 Or. Rev. Int’l L. 267 
(2009).  

 
 
7 
2016 alone.38 Dozens more park rangers were murdered in the years that followed, 
many in the Philippines for atte mpting to prevent illegal logging; the Romanian 
forestry union has recorded over 650 physical assaults, death threats, and other acts 
of abuse targeted at rangers.39 This has led human rights organizations, including 
Human Rights Watch and Global Witness, to advocate for their protection as 
especially threatened defenders.40 
 
In sum, the work of fisheries observers is critical to the sustainable long -term 
management and conservation of fish populations and food security, upon which 
human rights depend. This  dovetails with the global movement pushing the United 
Nations to recognise a right to a healthy environment.41 The right to a healthy 
environment is inextricably linked to the right to a secure and stable source of food; 
observers are vital to securing bo th of these rights. Understanding observers as 
human rights defenders would properly recognize the vital roles they play, and it 
would be squarely within the United Nations’ understanding of this category.  
 
 
IV. Impact on the Protection of Human Rights  
 
The work conducted by fisheries observers is critically important for safeguarding 
many rights at the domestic, regional and international level. The right to food and to 
a healthy environment are, for example, among the human rights that the work of 
fisheries  observers helps advance.  
 
A. Right to food  
 
In line with the UN Framework Principles’ obligation on states to ensure a healthy 
and sustainable environment to protect human rights,42 fisheries observers are key 
frontline defenders of the right to food. The International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) codifies the right to adequate food, as well as 
the obligation to make “full use of technical and scientific knowledge” on the “efficient 
 
38 See Global Witness, Defenders of the Earth, supra  note 37, at 8, 18 -19. For more on this, see DR Congo: 
Investigate Attacks on Oil Project Crit ics, Human Rights Watch (June 4, 2014), 
https://www.hrw.org/news/2014/06/04/dr -congo -investigate -attacks -oil-project -critics; Ida Sawyer, Dispatches: 
Congo’s Virunga Park Rangers, Activists Still Need Justice , Human Rights Watch (June 11, 2014), 
https://ww w.hrw.org/news/2014/06/11/dispatches -congos -virunga -park-rangers -activists -still-need -justice.  
39 Global Witness, “Defending Tomorrow: The Climate Crisis and Threats Against Land and Environmental 
Defenders” 29, 33 -34, 41 (2020).  
40 See id . 
41 Center for Inte rnational Environmental Law, “The Time is Now! Global Call for the UN Human Rights 
Council to Urgently Recognise the Right to a Safe, Clean, Healthy and Sustainable Environment” (2020), 
https://www.ciel.org/wp -content/uploads/2020/09/Global -Call-for-the-UN-to-Recognize -the-Right -to-a-
Healthy -Environment -English.pdf. See also Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Issue of Human Rights 
Obligations Relating to the Enjoyment of a Safe, Clean, Healthy and Sustainable Environment (A/73/188) (July 
19, 2018).  
42 Framework Principles,  supra note 5 , at principle 1.  

 
 
8 
development and utilization of natural resources” to ensure conservation and 
distribution of adequate nutritious food.43 The right to food is likewise contained 
within the African Charter44 and the Inter -American Convention on Human Rights.45 
The Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food has stated that the right “requires that 
States respect existing access to adequate food and abstain from taking measures 
that result in reducing such access,” as well as “refrain from adopting an y policy that 
affects the territories and activities of small -scale, artisanal and indigenous fishers 
[without] their free, prior and informed consent.”46 Fisheries observers provide the 
critical technical and scientific knowledge necessary to ensure the s ustainable 
utilization of seafood sources that feed billions of people. Fisheries provide 3.2 billion 
people worldwide with at least 20 percent of their animal protein. In less developed 
coastal countries many communities obtain more than half their animal  protein from 
seafood sources. Moreover, the fisheries sector is the primary source of livelihood 
for approximately 880 million people worldwide, including many of the world’s 
poorest communities.47In light of the centrality of fish as a source of food and  labor, 
the data observers relay is “vital” to “communities working to protect the long -term 
sustainability and viability of ocean fisheries, as much of this information would be 
entirely unverifiable were it not for their contribution.”48 
 
B. Right to a heal thy environment  
 
Fisheries observers are the key monitors and assessors to ensure that states meet 
their obligations under international laws on fisheries management and sustainability 
in order to protect our human right to a healthy (marine) environment. They ensure 
that the sustainability provisions and shared management obligations in international 
law on the oceans can be effectively implemented. Their work also safeguards fish 
populations, upon which the broader health of the marine enviro nment depends.49 
The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and the UN Fish Stocks 
 
43 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), art. 11. 
44 Social and Economic Rights Action Centre and Centre for Economic and Social Rights v Nigeria (“SERAC” 
case), comm. no . 155/96, 2001, §§ 65 -66. 
45  Realizing the Right to Food: Legal Strategies and Approaches , International Development Law Organization 
(IDLO) (September 30, 2015), https://www.idlo.int/publications/realizing -right -food-legal -strategies -and-
approaches, p. 34 . Although the Additional Protocol to the American Convention on Human Rights in the Area 
of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (the Protocol of San Salvador) does not allow for individual 
complaints, the Inter -American Court has found violations of othe r rights (e.g. the rights to life and property) in 
several cases in which plaintiffs’ access to subsistence had been limited. See, e.g., Sawhoyamaxa v Paraguay, 
Inter -American Court of Human Rights, Series C, No. 146 (2006); and Comunidad Ind ígena Yakye A xa v 
Paraguay, Inter -American Court of Human Rights, Series C, No. 125 (2005), both discussed in IDLO, supra 
note 45 , at 43.  
46 Olivier De Schutter, UN Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food, “Interim Report of the Special Rapporteur 
on the Right to Food” § 39 (August 8, 2012), https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/733428?ln=en#record -files-
collapse -header . 
47 United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food , Fishery Workers and the Right to Food, UNGA 
(A/HRC/40/56) (2019).  
48 Human Rights at Sea, supra  note 2, at 4.  
49 U. Rashid Sumaila & Travis C. Tai, Ending Overfishing Can Mitigate Impacts of Climate Change  (Institute 
for the Oceans and Fisheries 2019), https://our.fish/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/2019 -05-
Sumaila_Ending_overf ishing_can_mitigate_Impacts_of_climate_change.pdf. See also Eric J. Brunner et al., 
Fish, Human Health and Marine Ecosystem Health: Policies in Collusion , 38 Int’l J. Epidemiology 93 (2009).  

 
 
9 
Agreement (UNFSA) both enshrine state duties to conserve and manage fisheries. 
UNCLOS requires that states cooperate in the management of shared fish stocks 
that trave rse several national Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs)50 and the 
management of highly migratory species, such as tuna, that swim long distances and 
into the high seas.51 The UNFSA expands on these obligations and tasks Regional 
Fisheries Management Organizat ions (RFMOs) with duties of collective fisheries 
management.52 RFMOs, made up of state parties with contributions from other 
stakeholders, each then create their own legally -binding provisions that govern 
fisheries management and mandate conservation measu res for their members in 
their respective convention areas. Fisheries observers are a critical part of ensuring 
that individual states and regional bodies can fulfill these duties.  
 
C. Right to information  
 
Fisheries observers protect our human right to infor mation about the state of marine 
resources and assist states in meeting their obligation under international and 
domestic law to conduct assessments on possible environmental impacts of 
proposed projects,53 including the effects on the enjoyment of human r ights. Both the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights (ICCPR) codify the human right on the “freedom to seek, receive, and 
impart information.”54 
 
Fisheries observers are the independent “eyes” o nboard fishing vessels in near and 
distant waters.55 They ensure that those outside of the fishing industry know what is 
happening to the marine environment offshore. The data they gather is “the only 
independent information authorities have about how much and what kinds of fish are 
harvested from the world’s oceans and the collateral damage to marine mammals, 
seabirds and other species.”56 In addition, the information they provide prior to the 
development of environmental policies, such as fisheries quotas and conservation 
measures, is critically impor tant for conservation efforts.57 Without accurate, science -
based, and transparent assessments of fish populations, environmental policies and 
sustainability measures will not successfully ensure long -term access to a healthy 
marine environment and the enjo yment of human rights.  
 
 
50 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, art. 63 [herei nafter UNCLOS].  
51 UNCLOS, supra note 50, at art. 64. 
52 United Nations Fish Stock Agreement (UNFSA), arts. 2 & 8.  
53 Economic, Social and Cultural rights, General Comment No. 15, para. 48 (2002) (right to water); Taşkın v. 
Turkey, European Court of Human Rig hts, no. 46117/99, para. 119 (2004); Öneryıldız v. Turkey, European 
Court of Human Rights, no. 48939/99, para. 90 (2004); Social and Economic Rights Action Centre v. Nigeria, 
African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, no. 155/96, para. 53 (2001) (“Og oniland case”); Claude -
Reyes, et al. v. Chile, Inter -American Court of Human Rights, Series C, No. 151 (2006).  
54 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, art. 19 [hereinafter UDHR]; International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights, art. 19 [hereinafter I CCPR] . 
55 The FAO defines landings in “distant waters” as “quantities taken by vessels in all FAO major fishing areas 
other than those adjacent to the flag State.” Richard Grainger Jr. & Serge M. Garcia,  ”Chronicles of Marine 
Fishery Landings (1950 -1994): T rend Analysis and Fisheries Potential” (FAO, 1996).  
56 Knudson, supra  note 9 (emphasis added).  
57 See id. 

 
 
10 
D. Right to effective remedy  
 
Fisheries observers provide the information and reporting that states need to provide 
effective remedies for human rights violations resulting from human activities 
conducted on the world’s oceans.58 In addition, the information that fisheries 
observers provide allows for the monitoring of private actors and business 
enterprises in distant waters, far from national regulatory measures or oversight.59 
This information facilitates the right to effective reme dy in line with the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, the ICCPR60 and the UN Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human Rights (UNGPs).61 
 
 
V. Special Protections for Fisheries 
Observers as Human Rights Defenders  
 
Fisheries observers are entitled to the same protections as all human rights 
defenders at the domestic and international level. States have an international legal 
obligation to protect and defend individuals or groups that are working towards 
protecting our environmental human rights. This s tate obligation is advanced through 
various international mechanisms that need to proactively include fisheries observers 
in their work.  
 
A. Right to protection and a safe and enabling work 
environment  
 
The UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders articulates  the state obligation to 
protect and uphold the rights of human rights defenders. While the declaration is not 
a legally binding instrument, it was adopted by consensus in the UN General 
Assembly and synthesizes human rights standards from several legally binding 
instruments.62 The Declaration states that all human rights defenders have the right 
 
58 Framework Principles,  supra note 5, at principle  10. 
59 C. Faunce, et al., “Are Flow Scale and Observer Scale Relationships the Same Among North Pacific At -Sea 
Processors?” 6 (Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 2020).  
60 UDHR , supra note 54, at  art. 8; ICCPR, supra note 54, at art.  2(3).  
61 Framework Principles,  supra note 5, at principle  12. 
62 The United Nations General Assembly Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups 
and Organs of Society to Promote Universally Recognized Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Declaration on 
Human Rights Defe nders) synthesizes enshrined human rights from instruments such as the Universal 
Declaration on Human Rights, ICCPR, European Convention on Human Rights, African Charter on Human and 
Peoples’ Rights and American Convention on Human Rights. These human righ ts include: the right to freedom 
of opinion and expression, the right to freedom of association, the right to freedom of assembly, the right to 
protest, the right to access funding, the right to access and communicate with international bodies, the right t o be 

 
 
11 
to “seek, obtain, receive, and hold information relating to human rights”63 and have 
the right to lawful exercise of an occupation or profession that entails being  a human 
rights defender, 64 such as being a professional environmental defender. This 
includes ensuring “a safe and enabling environment” where these individuals can 
“work on human rights or environmental issues . . . free from threats, harassment, 
intimi dation and violence.”65 As professional independent information gatherers and 
monitors of fishing activities, fisheries observers are entitled to protections as 
environmental human rights defenders on the oceans.  
 
B. Right to remedy in the event of violation of rights  
 
Human rights defenders have a right to effective remedy and follow up if they are 
subject to interference, intimidation, or harassment while carrying out their work. The 
UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders holds that human rights defenders have 
the right to “benefit from an effective remedy and to be protected in the event of the 
violations” of the rights to a safe and enabling work environment.66 There are several 
international bodies that are tasked with ensuring effective invest igation, follow up, 
and remedy in the case a human rights defender faces interference. These include 
the UN Special Procedures mandate holders, including the Special Rapporteur on 
the Situation of Human Rights Defenders, the Special Rapporteur on Human Rig hts 
and the Environment, the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food, and the UN 
Working Group on Business and Human Rights, all of whose mandates include 
provisions that should cover fisheries observers.  
 
The Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders is specifically tasked with 
promoting “the effective implementation of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders”, through the study of “trends, developments and challenges” and 
recommendation of “effective strategies to better protect human r ights defenders.”67 
The Special Rapporteur on Human Rights and the Environment’s mandate stems 
from a recognition of the “important role played by human rights defenders in the 
promotion and protection of human rights as they relate to the enjoyment of a s afe, 
clean, healthy and sustainable environment” and the Special Rapporteur is tasked 
with “identifying challenges and obstacles to the full realization of human rights 
obligations.”68 The Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food’s mandate stems from 
the re cognition “that everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for 
her/his health and well -being, including food,” and the Special Rapporteur is tasked 
with “the promotion and effective implementation of the right to food, and to make 
 
protected, the right to an effective remedy, and the right to develop and discuss new ideas in the area of human 
rights.  
63 United Nations General Assembly Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and 
Organs of Society to Prom ote Universally Recognized Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, art. 6 [hereinafter 
UNDHRD].  
64 UNDHRD, supra note 6 3, art. 11. 
65 Framework Principles,  supra note 5, at principle 4.  
66 UNDHRD, supra note 63, art.  9. 
67 Mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders, A/HRC/RES/34/5 (2017).  
68 Mandate of the Special Rapporteur on Human Rights and the Environment, A/HRC/RES/37/8 (2018).  

 
 
12 
appropriate recommendations on the realization thereof.”69 The UN Working Group 
on Business and Human Rights promotes the effective implementation of the 
UNGPs and makes recommendations to enhance “access to effective remedies 
available to those whose human rights are  affected by corporate activities.”70 The 
mandates of these Special Procedures and their work to ensure effective follow up 
and remedy in the case of rights violations should cover fisheries observers, and the 
mandate holders need to act to ensure that the ir work includes the protection of 
fisheries observers.  
 
 
VI. Gaps and Shortcomings in the Protection 
of Fisheries Observers  
 
Despite the international duty and obligation to protect and uphold the rights of 
fisheries observers as environmental human rights de fenders, fisheries observers 
often do not work in a safe and enabling environment. While performing their duties, 
fisheries observers have faced threats, intimidation, and violence which has 
culminated in death. The international response has been woefully  inadequate.  
 
International law provides for state obligations to protect and support human rights 
defenders, especially when they are threatened or subject to harm. However, the UN 
and other international actors have not sufficiently included fisheries ob servers in 
calls to action. In recent years UN Environment,71 the UN Special Rapporteur on 
Human Rights and Environment,72 and civil society organizations73 have highlighted 
the increasing plight and killings of EHRDs globally. These international bodies a nd 
reports have commendably pushed for stronger government responses to the 
intimidation and murders of park rangers from the Democratic Republic of Congo to 
Brazil, indigenous peoples protesting destructive mining practices, and 
whistleblowers raising ala rms of toxic pollution by business enterprises. However, 
only the disappearance of American fisheries observer Keith Davis was listed, 
without further elaboration, in the recent Global Witness “On Dangerous Ground” 
report on EHRD deaths and disappearances between 2010 -2015,74 despite many 
 
69 Mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food, A/CHR/RES/2000/10 (2000), reaffirmed in 
A/HRC/RES/6/2 (2007).  
70 Mandate of the Working Group on the Issue of Human Rights and Transnational Corporations and Other 
Business Enterprises, A/HRC/RES/35/7 (2017).  
71 Id. 
72 Knox, supra  note 6. 
73 Global Witness,  ”On Dangerous Ground: 2015’s Deadly Environment: The Killing and Criminalization of 
Land and Environmental Defenders Worldwide”  (2016); International Service for Human Rights, “A Human 
Rights Defender Toolkit for Promoting Business Respect for Hum an Rights” (2015). See also Report of the 
Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders (A/71/281) (August 3, 2016).  
74 Id. Global Witness decided in October 2020 to create a new category in their database for fishery observers. 
Their future  reports will bring more attention to the plight of observers. For further details on Keith Davis’s 
case, see Tory, Sarah, The Mysterious Disappearance of Keith Davis , Hakai Magazine (January 4, 2017).  

 
 
13 
more fisheries observer disappearances and deaths in the past decade.75 Overall, 
interna tional reports, with very few exceptions, have not highlighted fisheries 
observers, told their stories, or advocated for reform in national policies or RFMOs 
that manage fisheries across national boundaries and in international waters.  
 
The Association fo r Professional Observers (APO), a member -based group that 
advocates for the interests of observers, has compiled a list of 14 observer 
disappearances or deaths in the past decade that have not received sufficient 
investigative responses.76 Shocking stories  include Papuan observer Charlie Lasisi’s 
body being recovered drowned and bound in chains, but no arrests were ever made 
in his case.77 Two recent cases include the Ghanaian observer Emmanuel Essien 
who disappeared off of the Chinese -owned vessel Meng Xin  15 in 2019 and whose 
case has never been fully investigated,78 and i -Kiribati observer Eritara Aati Kaierua  
in 2020 whose death onboard a Taiwanese -owned and flagged vessel has been 
considered by some as a potential murder.79 After one observer, James Junior 
Numbaru, reportedly died by falling overboard, his family and Global Fishing Watch 
conducted their own i nvestigations and discovered that the vessel did not initiate the 
required search and rescue operation, and that Numbaru disappeared just three 
days after making a notation of pollution in his notebook; his disappearance is the 
fourth of a Papua New Guinea n observer in just seven years.80 
 
Critically, there is not enough information about the situation of fisheries observers in 
distant waters, and the APO fears that many observer deaths go unreported. 
Currently, only four RFMOs mandate a specific process in  the event that an observer 
disappears or dies.81 Even these processes are limited82 and do not adequately 
follow international law on unlawful death investigations.83Additionally, only eight 
RFMOs have a public manual or document expressly guaranteeing ob servers the 
right to carry out their duties without harassment or intimidation, and only five outline 
specific rights and safety policies for observers.84  
 
Fisheries observers have also reported facing intimidation, threats, and requests to 
not report on sightings of fisheries violations, including in official RFMO reports,85 
indicating that states are not sufficiently ensuring a safe and enabling work 
 
75 Association for Professional Observers , “Catalogue of Observer Casualties, Injuries, and Near Misses” 
(2020).  
76 Id. 
77 Id. 
78 Karen McVeigh & Nancy Dzradosi , The Vanishing: Ghana’s Defenders Face New Perils in Fight Against 
Overfishing , The Guardian  (November 16, 2019) , 
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2019/nov/16/ghana -fisheries -observer -vanishes.  
79 Karen  McVeigh,  Disappearances, Danger and Death: What is Happening to Fishery Observers? , The 
Guardian (May 22, 2020), https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/may /22/disappearances -danger -and-
death -what -is-happening -to-fishery -observers.  
80 “Catalogue of Observer Casualties, Injuries, and Near Misses,” supra  note 2.  
81 Ewell et al. (2020), supra note 1 4. 
82 Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission , “Conservation and Management Measure for the 
protection of WCPFC Regional Observer Programme Observers,” CMM 2017 -03 (2017).  
83 United Nations Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights, The Minnesota Protocol on the 
Investigation of Potentially Unlaw ful Death [hereinafter Minnesota Protocol ]. 
84 Ewell et al. (2020), supra  note 14.  
85 WCPFC , “Annual Report on the Regional Observer Programme ,” WCPFC -TCC15 -2019 -RP02 (2019).  

 
 
14 
environment. Only six of 17 RFMOs reviewed in a recent global study mandate a 
specific process if an obse rver reports intimidation or threats.86 A government survey 
of American observers found that 7 percent had been pressured to change data and 
13 percent had had their equipment or records tampered with or destroyed.87 
Female observers in particular “may be targeted for sexual harassment.”88 
Meanwhile, in the European context, observers are “regularly intimidated, offered 
bribes and undermined by the fishing crews they are observing.”89 Nearly two dozen 
current and former observers told the Guardian that they  experienced “being put 
under surveillance, deprived of sleep, or threatened with being thrown overboard, or 
having their official documentation stolen by fishing crews to conceal a culture of 
overfishing.”90 
 
Fisheries observers face pressure and are subj ect to risk if they refuse to engage in 
the corruption and collusion that has been documented as alarmingly prevalent in 
the fishing industry.91 In written testimony before the House  Committee on Natural 
Resources, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigation in February 2020, 
observer Simione S.B. Cagilaba who was a US Multilateral Treaty Observer in the 
South Pacific detailed his story:92 
 
“The Captain asked me to falsify my data to look like they didn’t catch anything, 
so that it would match his records, but I refused. He looked at me angrily and 
went away. Later on, he again asked me this time more sternly to adjust my 
records. When I again refused, he became angry . . . he then thr eatened me 
and said that he will call his ‘friend in American Samoa’ . . . to ‘deal with me’ . . . 
I was later fired upon my return to Fiji and it made me realize that some 
government officials from some Pacific island countries are overly familiar with 
the fishing company personnel and their boat agents and have been 
compromised, making our jobs as fisheries observers impossible and 
dangerous.”  
 
Corruption and insufficient political will also hinder effective follow up on observer 
reports and often result in inaction rather than effective remedies for IUU fishing and 
other environmental human rights violations. Following the disappearance of Essien 
in Ghanaian waters, an investigation by the Guardian uncovered that while 80 to 90 
percent of observer reports  to the Ghanaian observer program contained evidence of 
illegal fishing and other incriminating activities, “only 23 trawlers were sanctioned for 
illegal fishing in 2018” due to political interference.93 A member of the Ghanaian 
 
86 Ewell et al. (2020), supra note 1 4. 
87 California Environmental Associates & The N ature Conservancy, “Catalyzing the Growth of Electronic 
Monitoring in Fisheries” 27 -28 (2019), https://oursharedseas.com/wp -content/uploads/2019/10/Catalyzing -the-
Growth -of-Electronic -Monitoring -in-Fisheries -CEA.pdf.  
88 Knudson, supra  note 9.  
89 Jack Watling , Fishing Observers “Intimidated and Bribed by Crews ,” The Guardian (May 18, 2012), 
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/may/18/fishing -inspectors -intimidated -bribed -crews.  
90 Id. 
91 Ussif Rashid Sumaila, Jennifer Jacquet & Allison Witter, When B ad Gets Worse: Corruption and Fisheries , 
in Corruption, Natural Resources and Development (Edward Elgar Publishing, 2017).  
92 Written Testimony of Simione S.B Cagilaba, U.S. Multilateral Treaty Observer, South Pacific (1997 -2015), 
before the House Committee  on Natural Resources, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigation , February 27, 
2020.  
93 McVeigh and Dzradosi, supra note 78. 

 
 
15 
fisheries commission explai ned, “We choose the observers … but politicians call our 
bosses and tell us:  ‘Don’t prosecute these people.”94 
 
There is a dangerous dearth of concrete data on the threats, intimidations, and 
harms that observers face. In the United States, for instance, official reports of 
observer abuse rose from 28 in 2009 to 79 in 2015, but “many cases also remain in 
the shadows because observers fear they’ll lose their jobs if they speak out. Others 
don’t speak up because they believe nothing will be done.”95 Further, non -
governmental organizations are often denied access to critical information, further 
entrenching systemic secrecy.96 Watch -dogs attempting to call attention to observer 
deaths and abuses are forced to rely on “[s]elected anecdotal reports.”97 
 
This tendency toward secrecy is surely exacerbated by the sheer amount of money 
at stake, and the losses industry can face if observers report non -compliance or 
illegal activity. In the Pacific, maritime fishing accounts for as much as 10 percent of 
a state’s GDP and can account for the employment of a majority of the population.98 
Yet fishing on the high seas often operates at a very narrow (or non -existent) profit 
margin; one recent study suggested that a majority  of high -seas fishing grounds 
would be u nprofitable without “large government subsidies.”99 More than 90 percent 
of fisheries are “fully fished, overfished, depleted, or recovering from overfishing.”100 
In this context, the dire financial risks posed by penalties for non -compliance are 
acute. Alt hough penalties vary by jurisdiction, they can include significant fines, 
forfeiture of  equipment or vessel, and even imprisonment.101 In England, for 
instance, some recent fines have exceeded £25,000;102 in New South Wales, 
Australia, more than 54,000 fish  and invertebrates were seized between 2018 and 
2019;103 in West Africa, vessels belonging to a single conglomerate have been fined 
hundreds of thousands of U.S. dollars since 2016.104 The reporting of fisheries 
observers can lead to such penalties; as menti oned above, data from just one 
American fisheries management zone had 590 reported violations over two years, of 
which 36.2 percent led to a warning, forfeiture, or financial penalty.105 This risk of 
financial penalties and other forms of censure surely pro vides a perverse incentive 
 
94 Id. 
95 Knudson, supra  note 9.  
96 Matilda Peterson, “Making Waves: A Study of the Patterns and Consequences of Non -State Actor 
Participation in Global Fisheries Governance” 41 (Ph.D. dissertation, Stockholm University, 2020).  
97 Ewell et al. (2020), supra  note 14, at tbl. 1.  
98 Human Rights at Sea, supra  note 2, at 3.  
99 Enric Sala, et al., The Economics of Fishing the High Seas , 4 Science Advances (2018).  
100 Ragnar Arnason, et al., “The Sunken Billions Revisited: Progress and Challenges in Global Marine 
Fisheries” 1 (World Bank, 2017).  
101 For an overview of penalties imposed by regional, sub -regional, and national enforcement of fisher ies 
regulations, see P. Cacaud, et al., “Administrative Sanctions in Fisheries Law” (FAO Legislative Study 82, 
2003); Erik Franckx, “Fisheries Enforcement: Related Legal and Institutional Issues: National, Sub -Regional or 
Regional Perspectives” (FAO Legisl ative Study 71, 2001). It is worth noting, however, that experts have argued 
that penalties for illegal fishing are often too low and thus provide economic incentives for IUU. See 
Ganapathiraju, supra  note 31, at c. 2.  
102 ClientEarth, “The Control and Enfor cement of Fisheries in England” 18 (Sept. 2017).  
103 Department of Primary Industries, “Fisheries Compliance Enforcement” (New South Wales Gov’t, 2019), 
https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/fishing/compliance/fisheries -compliance -enforcement.  
104 Mona Samari, How Ghana’s Weak Penalties Are Letting Trawlers Off the Hook , China Dialogue Ocean 
(Oct. 3, 2019), https://chinadialogueocean.net/10522 -ghana -weak -penalties -let-trawlers -off-the-hook/.  
105 Porter, supra  note 1, at 584, 587.  

 
 
16 
for fishing vessels to refuse to cooperate with observers, or even to engage in violent 
suppression.  
 
 
VII. Recommendations  
 
To ensure the important work of fisheries observers is carried out under optimum 
conditions, to protect their safety and wellbeing, and to adequately and fully 
recognize their role as human rights defenders on the world’s oceans, international, 
regional, a nd national actors and corporations need to take the following key steps:  
 
1) The UN Human Rights Council, the Special Procedures Mechanisms, UN 
Environment, the Human Rights Committee, and the Committee on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights must formally a nd publicly recognize fisheries 
observers as human rights defenders and take prompt action to ensure their 
protection.  
● The Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders, 
the Special Rapporteur on Human Rights and the Environment and the 
Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food must conduct an independent 
investigation and, during their country visits, pay special attention to 
regional observer programs in order to identify and determine:  
a) Cases of intimidation, threats, disappearance, murders or any 
other known violations of the rights of fisheries observers;  
b) Responses to these cases, by regional bodies and states, and 
in particular whether a proper investigation has been 
conducted and whether effective remedial action has been 
taken.  
c) The extent to which these programs include adequate 
measures and safeguards to ensure that fisheries observer 
working conditions are adequate, including protection against 
all forms of violence;  
d) Best practices in existing observer programs;  
e) Measures to add ress the problems identified.  
● The UN Human Rights Council must call on states and RFMOs to 
integrate international laws on human rights defenders106 into their 
observer programs.  
● UN Environment has committed to “denounce the attacks, torture, 
intimidation and murders of environmental defenders” and “request 
government and companies’ accountability . . . where environmental 
defenders have been affected [or] murdered.”107 UN Environment must 
 
106 See Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, supra note 62; see also Framework Principles,  supra note 5, at 
principle 4 (“States should provide a safe and enabling environment in which individual s, groups and organs of 
society that work on human rights or environmental issues can operate free from threats, harassment, 
intimidation and violence.”); UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders, “They Spoke 
Truth to Power and Were  Murdered in Cold Blood: Analysis on the Situation of Environmental Human Rights 
Defenders and Concrete Recommendations to Better Protect Them,” A/71/281 (2016).  
107 UN Environment , “Promoting Greater Protection for Environmental Defenders: Policy” (2018).  

 
 
17 
include the protection of fisheries observers in this commitment to 
effectively implement this policy.  
● The Human Rights Committee must examine and prioritize states 
parties’ compliance with the right to life (art. 6) with respect to the 
deaths and disappearances of fisheries observers.  
● The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights must 
undertake an inquiry into the grave and systematic violations of the 
economic and social rights of fisheries observers, including the right to 
work (art. 6) and the right to safe working conditions (art. 7). The 
Committee must also exa mine how threats against fisheries observers 
hinder coastal communities’ realization of the right to adequate food 
(art. 11).  
● Additionally, the Eco nomic Commission for Latin America and the 
Caribbean must make clear that the Escazú Agreement considers 
fisheries observers to be environmental human rights defenders and 
thus entitled to all of the protections such a designation entails.108 
 
2) Observer prog rams, both regional and national, must publicly recognize and 
internalize the notion that fisheries observers are human rights defenders and 
amend their observer programs accordingly.  
● Observer programs must mandate increasing observer coverage 
onboard fish ing vessels to ensure effective monitoring of collective 
marine resources.  
● Observer programs must increase transparency of observer data to 
ensure public access to critical information on the state of the marine 
environment, the effectiveness of observer p rograms, and the 
protection of environmental human rights.  
● Observer programs must mandate prompt and effective follow -up on 
observer reports of IUU fishing activities, and appropriate remedies for 
any violations identified.  
● Observer programs must integrate  the International Observer Bill of 
Rights109 into their observer programs to ensure labor and human 
rights protections and conduct annual compliance audits:  
a) Observers have the right to a written contract that clearly 
defines employment terms.  
b) Observers hav e a right to non -discriminatory, fair and 
equitable employment.  
c) Observers have a right to a competitive wage package 
commensurate with positions requiring similar duties and 
educational background. Financial independence from the 
monitored industry is cruc ial.  
d) Observers have a right to a working environment with minimal 
health and safety risks.  
 
108 Article 9 of the Regional Agreement on Access to Information, Public Participation and Justice in 
Environmental Matters in Latin America and the Caribbean (“Escazú Agreement”), opened for signature on 27 
Sept. 2018.  
109 Association for Professional Observers, “ International Observer Bill of Rights ,” https://www.apo -
observers.org/billofrights.  

 
 
18 
e) Observers must have access to emergency equipment, 
including an independent two -way communication device to 
report to onshore officials for a daily safety check -in. 
f) Observers have the right to regulatory authority, observer 
program, observer employer and monitored entity support.  
g) Observers have a right to stakeholder integrity and program 
transparency.  
h) Observers have a right to professional development.  
 
3) Observer programs, both regional and national, must aim for 100% onboard 
monitoring on fishing vessels using a combination of human observers and 
electronic monitoring. However, any fishery proposing el ectronic monitoring 
as a stand -alone measure to replace observers, for safety or other reasons, 
must undergo a transparent peer -reviewed assessment prior to its 
implementation to ensure its effectiveness, data comparability and ability to 
detect non -compli ance.  
● Electronic monitoring is becoming increasingly viable onboard distant 
water fishing vessels,110 but electronic monitoring cannot fully stand in 
for human rights defender work. Fisheries observers are critical 
independent parties that oversee corporat e actor abuse and provide 
public access to information in a way that electronic monitoring cannot.  
● Fisheries observers and the observer programs must be the bodies 
tasked with overseeing, reviewing, and documenting all electronic 
monitoring data to ensure independent oversight of this data rather 
than corporate control.  
● The same transparency and public access requirements must apply to 
fishery observer and electronic monitoring data.  
● Turning off electronic monitoring equipment must be recognized as a 
seriou s national fisheries law and RFMO violation with resulting 
sanctions.  
 
4) Observer programs, both regional and national, need to adopt measures that 
provide for the highest standards in investigations conducted following any 
observer death, such as the Minnes ota Protocol on the Investigation of 
Potentially Unlawful Death.  
● The Minnesota Protocol synthesizes international law on investigative 
processes when a state has failed to meet its obligations to protect 
life111 including requirements for: interviews and wi tness protection, 
recovery of human remains, identification of dead bodies, types of 
evidence and sampling, autopsy procedures, and analysis of skeletal 
remains.  
● Observer programs must impose “sanctions against those responsible 
for the violations.”112 RFMOs must remove a flag state that does not 
effectively follow the Minnesota Protocol from the regional observer 
program.  
 
110 Mark Michelin, Matthew Elliott, Max Bucher, Mark Zimring & Mike Sweeney, “Catalyzing the Growth of 
Electronic Monitoring in Fisheries” (2018).  
111 Minnesota Protocol, supra note 8 3, at § I.2.C.  
112 Id. § II.B.10.  

 
 
19 
● States participating in observer programs must ensure that adequate 
reparation and restitution for families of deceased observers is  
provided.113 
 
5) Transnational seafood corporations must integrate the UN Guiding Principles 
on Business and Human Rights and relevant ILO Conventions, including the 
ILO Work in Fishing Convention (No. 188), into their corporate human rights 
policies when con ducting human rights due diligence.  
● Observers should be included alongside crew in the due diligence 
corporations owe with respect to their global seafood supply chains.  
● Seafood corporations must align their environmental, social, and 
governance policies w ith the Greenpeace Corporate Asks.114 
● Audit reports that indicate a failure on the part of seafood suppliers to 
sufficiently monitor fisheries with observers, failure to uphold observer 
rights, and failure to protect observer safety must be met with serious  
penalties, including suspension, and when warranted (e.g. severe 
harm, insufficient progress or remedy, or repeated violations), 
termination of supplier contracts.  
 
 
VIII. Acknowledgements  
 
Greenpeace US115 would like to acknowledge Chris Ewell and Scott Stern for their 
contributions to this paper. We would also like to thank the Association for 
Professional Observers, Global Witness, and John Knox, the former UN Special 
Rapporteur on Human Rights and the En vironment, for their input. All errors and 
omissions are GPUS’s alone.  
 
 
 
 
For further information please contact:  
Andy Shen  
Senior Oceans Adviser, Greenpeace USA  
ashen@greenpeace.org  
 
113 Id. 
114 Greenpeace , “Greenpeace Sustainability, Labour & Human Rights, and Chain of Custody Asks for Retailers, 
Brand Owners and Seafood Companies” (2020).  
115 Greenpeace is a global network of independent national and regional Greenpeace organisations (NROs)  and 
Greenpeace International  as a coordinating organisation.