# Archivo original: full-science-report-making-su.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:41:42 -03 2025

Scientific Report on Effort Reduction Measures in t he  
Western and Central Pacific Ocean Tuna Fishery 
 
GREENPEACE AUSTRALIA PACIFIC 
 
Executive Summary  
 
As a result of growing concerns about the sustainability  of 
fishing activities directed at Western and Central Pacific 
Ocean (WCPO)  tuna stocks, Greenpeace has 
commissioned an analysis of the commercially exploited  
species in the region managed under the aegis of  the 
Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
(WCPFC). Based on the latest information, it appears that 
while Skipjack tuna is being fished at a moderate level,  
both Bigeye and Yellowfin tuna are now being overfish ed.  
Catch levels of these two species are, therefore, not 
sustainable.  These conclusions are based on the use of 
what are essentially conventional fisheries models that 
use the concept of Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY) to 
define management targets.  
 
Even under the current management paradigm, it is clear  
that reductions in fishing efforts to bring fishing mor tality to 
a level consistent with MSY, are necessary. To prevent a 
further decline in Yellowfin and Bigeye tuna in the WCPO, 
effort reductions of the order of at least 20% would b e 
required. Long-term average catch levels consistent with 
FMSY  would be less than 70% of present levels (2001-2003 
average) for both species. Substantial uncertainties, 

  
 however, exist in the stock estimates and in estimates of 
the species’ biological parameters.  In addition, substant ial 
uncertainties are attached to the monitoring of landed  
catch and to the accuracy of the reported figures. Illeg al, 
Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing activities als o 
compromise the quality of data relevant to the 
management of the tuna fisheries in the WCPO. 
 
Accordingly, in order that these fisheries are managed on 
a precautionary basis, and with due regard to the overa ll 
ecosystem, Greenpeace takes the view that effort 
reductions of 50% would be desirable.  This would imply  
the use of  F MSY  as a limit to be scrupulously avoided 
rather than one to be routinely exceeded in these 
fisheries.  In addition, Greenpeace is proposing that a 
network of marine reserves should be established in the 
region which would significantly strengthen management 
of WCPO tuna stocks and facilitate wider environmental 
management in the region. 
 
Hence, Greenpeace proposes: 
 
(1)  The immediate establishment of a marine reserve in 
an enclosed high seas area bound by Palau, FSM, PNG 
and Indonesia, and a commitment  to establishing a 
second fully-protected marine reserve to the east in the 
future. 
 
(2)  Establishment of management objectives of the 
WCPO fishery, based initially on Annex 2 of the UN Fi sh 
Stocks Agreement.  

  
  
(3) An immediate moratorium on the construction of new  
large Purse Seine (Super Seiner & Super Super Seiner ) 
and large Longline vessels intended to fish in the WCPO,  
and controls on the relocation/deployment of such vessels 
from other areas. 
 
(4) The WCPFC undertakes a study of the capacity of 
large Purse Seine and Longline vessels active in the 
WCPO, leading in the short term to the introduction o f 
overall limits on vessel numbers. Also, development of a 
suitable measure of capacity (Purse Seine and Longline) 
to facilitate the orderly management of fleet capacit y in the 
WCPO, including clear definition of vessel categories e.g.  
“large scale”. From a conventional fisheries perspective, 
this study is critical to determining the level of capacit y 
available in the region and more importantly what 
“capacity” the region’s fish stocks can sustain.  From 
Greenpeace’s perspective, however, we take the view that 
Super Super Seiners should not be allowed to operate in 
the region given their huge capacity.   
 
(5)  Large uncertainties are inherent in the models use d to 
produce assessments and forecasts for tuna fisheries in 
the WCPO. These relate to  input data quality  toget her 
with substantial indeterminacies in data relating to ef fort, 
catch and  IUU fishing, as well as to factors such as 
recruitment and the influence of climate change. 
Greenpeace believes that basing management upon MSY 
target reference points is not sufficiently precautionar y.  
Accordingly, Greenpeace regards the 20% effort reduction  

  
 figure suggested from modeling as an absolute bare 
minimum requirement. To assure future sustainability o f 
fisheries in the region this figure should be set at 50% . 
 
(6)  The WCPFC should apply a Longline Total Allowa ble 
Catch (TAC) for Bigeye, based on lower catch levels from  
an earlier time period, with allocations/quotas for cou ntries 
or entities taking a large amount of catch (e.g. more t han 
3,000t). The restriction of catches by other nations to 
catches at that earlier time should also be enforced. Thi s 
measure should be introduced in conjunction with a trad e 
certification/verification system for Bigeye, as used by 
other Regional Fisheries Management Organisations 
(RFMOs). 
 
(7)  Immediate prohibition of at-sea transhipment, wi th 
such transhipment to occur only at designated ports, as 
provided for in the Convention and to be implemented  by 
the Commission. 
 
(8)  Implementation of the following series of measure s to 
reduce IUU fishing in the WCPO, as proposed by 
Greenpeace: ratify and implement the Compliance and 
Fish Stocks Agreements; exert control over port access 
and marketing of tuna products (trade verification); 
strengthen the WCPFC capacity to take action (regional  
and global vessel registries, IUU vessel blacklist, reduce 
size of vessels covered by Monitoring, Control and 
Surveillance (MCS) regulation, boarding and inspection 
regulations, prohibition of at-sea transhipment);practi ce 
good governance at national level (comprehensive 

  
 management  plans, appropriate legislation enforced);  
inspect and arrest IUU stateless vessels (national-level 
action). 
 
(9) That the Commission  commence work on the 
development of criteria for the allocation of TAC and  
Total Allowable Effort (TAE), as provided for by the 
Convention.  
 
(10) Additional research must be carried out to reduce 
uncertainty and indeterminacy attached to key 
parameters/assumptions and model structure of the 
present MULTIFAN-CL models. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The WCPO extends east from the coasts of Asia. It is 
home to over 20 island nations and coastal states 
supporting the world’s largest tuna fishery.  Around 50 % 
of the global production of the main market species of 
tuna comes from this region, and it has often been 
referred to as the last great under-exploited oceanic 
fishery.  This may have been the case until the end of t he 
last decade with annual catches of around 1.6 million 
tonnes. There are increasingly clear signs, however, that  
this can no longer be assumed. The estimated total 
catch [1,2]  has increased by nearly 50% since 1990, and the 
estimated 2004 catch of 2.022 million tonnes was the 
highest ever recorded. Stocks of Skipjack tuna, (the 
mainstay of the fishery comprising 65% of the overall  

  
 catch tonnage), are considered to be in good condition.  
There are increasing concerns, however, about stocks of 
Yellowfin and Bigeye tuna, which account for 24% and 5% 
of the total catch respectively, but represent nearly h alf 
the landed value of the total catch. Connected with the se 
concerns are the concerns attached to suspected 
increases in IUU fishing throughout the fishery sector in 
question. 
 
The Standing Committee on Tuna and Billfish, which 
provides consensus scientific information on the status of 
tuna stocks in the region, has been advising for some 
years that stocks of Bigeye tuna were being heavily 
fished. Since 2003, the advice has been that this species 
was probably being overfished, but, due to some 
fortuitous recent high recruitment into the populatio n, was 
not yet in an overfished state. Similarly, Yellowfin tuna 
stocks have been regarded as close to fully exploited for 
some time, and since 2003 the consensus has been that 
this species is possibly being overfished.    
 
Despite these concerns, the WCPO fishery, has in effect, 
been left unregulated. Until 2004 no RFMO existed. W ith 
the entry into force of the WCPF Convention on June 19th  
2004, and the first meeting of the WCPF Commission hel d 
in December 2004, there now exists a framework for the  
conservation and management of the stocks (tuna and 
other species) which are exploited in the region.  The re is 
now an urgent need to consolidate this framework and 
recognize the urgent need to formulate and adopt 
appropriate conservation and management measures. 

  
 The sustainability of WCPO fish stocks, which can be 
regarded as “at risk”, must be assured through an 
appropriate, precautionary and ecosystem based 
approach to their management. 
 
This report evaluates measures for the conservation and 
management of the WCPO tuna fisheries, addressing 
issues raised in a recent Greenpeace position paper 
submitted for consideration by the WCPFC [3] . These 
measures primarily involve recommendations for effort 
reduction, which are the management instruments which 
have, historically, been most often applied to the 
management of tuna fisheries in other regions. The 
impacts of IUU fishing on the stocks and the possible 
application of marine reserves to the WCPO tuna fishery 
are also considered as part of the suite of measures whi ch 
could be considered. There is, however, no discussion of 
non-target, associated or dependent (NTAD) species, nor 
of ecosystem-based management. However, any 
reduction in efforts might be expected to lead directly  to 
reduced impact of fishing on the ecosystem overall, bot h 
on the target and the NTAD species.  Benefits could be 
expected to accrue to the WCPO epipelagic ecosystem as 
a whole and the emplaced measures could be used as the 
basis on which to ultimately define and formulate an 
ecosystem based management approach. 
 
 
 
 
 

  
  
2.   Fishery Overview   
 
2.1  The WCPO tuna fishery 1 
 
The WCPO tuna fishery operates over a vast area 
stretching from the coasts of Asia to 150 0W, and from 
50 0N to around 40 0S. Within the Convention area (WCP-
CA – see Figure 1), EEZs of coastal states occupy much 
of the equatorial area (10 0N to 10 0S), whereas high seas 
predominate in subtropical areas, especially north of th e 
Equator. It is a very diverse fishery. On the one hand,  it 
involves large international fleets plying the high seas and 
the EEZs of numerous coastal states. On the other hand, 
artisanal and small-scale commercial fisheries supply the 
large populations of Indonesia, the Philippines, and t he 
less populous Pacific Islands. The majority of the catch2  
(considered by weight) is taken in tropical areas, with a  
high proportion of the Purse Seine catch taken in the 
waters of the Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA) 3 
group. 
                                                 
1  Most of the information in this review is taken f rom papers [1][2]  presented at the recent Scientific 
Committee meeting in Noumea, August 2005 
2  All catch estimates given refer to the WCP Conven tion Area and thus will differ from previous estima tes 
which referred to the WCPO, mostly with respect to Longline catches.  
3  Members of the PNA group are PNG, Solomon Islands , Palau, FSM, Kiribati, RMI, Nauru and Tuvalu.  

  
  
  
 
 
The provisional total catch 4 in 2004 was 2,021,773 tonnes 
(t), a record catch, but nonetheless likely to be an 
underestimate (see later). This represents 51% of the 
global catch of the main market species of tuna, and 78 % 
of the Pacific Ocean tuna catch. The total catch rose 
steadily from the early 1980s onwards, with the advent  of 
large-scale Purse Seine fishing. Catches reached a 
relatively stable plateau in 1998.  Since then catches h ave 
been around 2 million tonnes per annum. A record (alb eit 
provisional) catch of 1,376,670t of Skipjack was taken in 
2004. This represented 68% of the provisional total tun a 
catch in this year with Yellowfin 20% (413,201 t), Big eye 
                                                 
4  This total includes only the primary market tuna species (Skipjack, yellowfin, bigeye, and Albacore)  and 
not other scombrids (eg frigate and bullet tunas), billfish and a range of by-catch species, including  sharks, which 
are taken in tuna fisheries Figure 1  
The Western and Central Pacific 
Ocean (WCPO), with the 
Eastern Pacific Ocean (EPO) 
and the WCPFC Convention 
Area (WCP-CA) in dashed lines    
 

  
 6% (125,940t) and Albacore 5% (105,962t) making up t he 
balance of the total (Appendix 1-3). 
 
Although a multi-gear fishery, the majority of the ca tch is 
taken by Purse Seine (62%, and 1,263,161t in 2004), with 
pole-and-line taking 15% (297,515t) and Longline 11%  
(225,786t). The remainder (11%) was taken by a variety  of 
artisanal gear, mostly in eastern Indonesia and 
Philippines, and through a small troll catch (Appendix  1-3).  
 
The Purse Seine  fishery operates primarily in equatorial 
waters, between 10 0N and 10 0S. There is a seasonal 
fishery in the home waters of Japan. Over 200 large 
vessels exploit this fishery. The fleet is made up of 
vessels from Distant Water Fishing Nations (DWFN) 
namely Japan, Korea, Taiwan and the USA. Together w ith 
Pacific Islands-based and Philippines vessels, these take 
the majority of the catch in PNA waters. In addition, small 
(< 250 GT) and large Purse Seine vessels are responsible 
for incompletely reported catches in Indonesian, Philip pine 
and high seas. 
 
The industry targets free (unassociated) schools of fish 
and fish schools associated with floating logs, and with 
artificial Fish Aggregation Devices (FADs). These 
deployed devices are either anchored or allowed to dr ift. 
The spatial distribution of the target fish, and hence  of 
effort and catch, is influenced by large-scale 
oceanographic (ENSO) events. Catches are made further 
east in the equatorial WCPO in El Niño years.  
 

  
 Skipjack tuna dominate the Purse Seine catch, typically 
making up 70-75% of the catch, with Yellowfin 20-25%, 
and Bigeye < 5%.  It is generally considered unecono mic 
for large Purse Seine vessels operating in the Convent ion 
Area to fish exclusively in the limited area of high sea s in 
the equatorial zone, and DWFN fleets rely on agreemen ts 
with Pacific Island states to allow access to tuna within 
EEZs. 
 
The Longline  fishery involves a variety of vessels. Large 
distant water freezer vessels operate widely throughout 
the region. Smaller offshore vessels operate in tropica l 
waters and in the waters of sub-tropical Pacific Islands 
and are often domestically-based. They may land fresh or  
chilled fish. These vessels and the small handline vessels 
working around Indonesia, the Philippines and Vietnam,  
all take large adult fish. The overall Longline catch in  2004 
consisted of similar proportions of Bigeye (37%), Yellow fin 
(31%) and Albacore (30%). Bigeye and Yellowfin were 
taken mostly in tropical areas, and Albacore in more 
temperate waters. The number of Longline vessels 
operating in the WCPO is uncertain, but probably excee ds 
5,000 distant water and offshore vessels, plus 2,500 or 
more handliners in the Philippines. An unknown number  of 
handliners operates in Indonesian waters, together with  
an unspecified number of both small and large 
Longline/handline vessels in Vietnam. Unlike the large-
vessel Purse Seine fleet, a number of these vessels 
operate primarily on the high seas, especially in southe rn 
waters. Here, they target Albacore, and to the north and 
east of the region, Bigeye tuna are targeted.   

  
  
The pole-and-line fishery  involves large domestic/offshore 
fleets in Indonesia and Japan together with a distant w ater 
Japanese fleet. Smaller fleets exist in Pacific Island 
countries. Skipjack comprises over 80% of the catch (> 
90% of the catch in tropical waters), Albacore accounts fo r 
around 12%, (mostly taken in waters east of Japan), wit h 
Yellowfin comprising around 4%. A small quantity of 
Bigeye is taken by the pole-and-line fleets.    
 
2.2  WCPO Yellowfin  
 
Yellowfin tuna of the WCPO are assumed to be a single 
stock for management purposes but are regarded as 
distinct from the Eastern Pacific Ocean (EPO) stock. 
Growing to over 200kg, Yellowfin school at the surface, 
together with Skipjack and Bigeye, as juveniles. They th en 
spend progressively more time in midwater as they grow 
towards adult size and progressively develop a swim 
bladder. They remain fish of the upper mixed layer o f the 
ocean (epipelagic).  ENSO events are known to influence 
their vertical distribution and accordingly, their vulner ability 
to Purse Seine gear. They reach maturity at around 20 kg, 
and Yellowfin are taken by both surface gear (Purse 
Seine) and by longlining as adult fish. The majority of the 
Yellowfin catch (413,201t in 2004) is taken in western 
equatorial areas, with Purse Seine catches accounting for  
43% of the total (in both associated and unassociated 
sets). Longlining accounts for 17% of the catch, and pole-
and-line around 3%. The remainder (a very large 37%)  is 

  
 accounted for by assorted gear such as ring net, handline 
and gillnet in the domestic fisheries of the Philippine s and 
Indonesia. The total catch in the WCPO has been 
relatively stable since 1997 at between 410,000t and 
470,000t, although the Purse Seine catch has been 
declining in recent years. 
 
The size distribution of the catch by the various gear, 
based on regional port sampling programs, is shown in 
Appendix Figure 1. The Philippines and Indonesian 
fisheries account for the majority of the juvenile catch (< 
60cm LCF 5, or 5kg). These take adult (> 100 cm LCF or > 
20kg) fish in the handline fisheries. Purse Seine sets on 
schools associated with floating logs and deployed FADs 
(anchored or drifting) and account for a significant ju venile 
catch, as well as some adult fish. The Longline catch 
consists almost entirely of adult fish, taken in tropical 
areas. There are difficulties in separating the quantit ies of 
juvenile Yellowfin and Bigeye taken by Purse Seine ge ar. 
This leads to some uncertainties in catch estimates for 
both species. 
 
There is some evidence of ENSO influences on Yellowfin 
recruitment which is subsequently reflected in surface and 
Longline catch levels. There is evidence of decadal-scale 
variation in the productivity of the stock. 
                                                 
5  fork length (length to the caudal fork) 

  
 2.3  WCPO Bigeye  
 
Bigeye tuna can reach over 200kg size. They school with 
Skipjack and Yellowfin tuna in equatorial waters as 
juveniles. As adults this association is less marked and 
their distribution is governed by physical factors: they  
become more closely associated with the thermocline and 
cooler water. It is uncertain whether Pacific Bigeye tun a 
can be regarded as a single basin-wide stock for 
management purposes 6, or whether they should be 
managed as separate western and eastern stocks, as is 
done for Yellowfin and Skipjack. Bigeye attain maturit y at 
around 25kg (110cm), and as adults, are caught primarily  
by Longline gear. The catch is taken mostly in an 
equatorial band across the Pacific Ocean, that dips 
southwards in the EPO. The WCPO Bigeye catch in 2004 
(125,940t) was the second highest on record, with 65% of 
this taken by Longline, 21% by Purse Seine (nearly al l in 
associated sets, particularly on drifting FADs). Relativel y 
little is taken by pole-and-line and other gear. The total 
catch of Bigeye in the WCPO has been relatively stable 
since 1997, but the balance attributable to specific gear  
has changed. Purse Seine catches have declined and 
Longline catches have increased. In the EPO, catches 
have been declining since 2000 (total catch 106,679t in  
2004), with Longline catches showing the greatest decli ne 
(39,729t, from an historical high of 104,000t in 1991 ) 
(Appendix 1-3). 
                                                 
6  genetic studies show little evidence of different iation, and there some examples of almost basin-wid e 
tagged fish movements over long periods; both basin -wide and separate WCPO/EPO stock assessments are u sually 
undertaken, given this uncertainty .  

  
  
The size distribution of the catch by various gear is shown  
in Appendix Figure 2. Once again the Philippines and 
Indonesian fisheries account for most of the small 
(<50cm) fish taken. Associated Purse Seine sets account 
for the greater proportion of catches of sub-adult (50-
100cm) Bigeye. Longliners account for most of the catch 
of adult fish. There is considerable uncertainty about the 
catch of juvenile Bigeye. This figure can only be estimat ed 
on the basis of sampling carried out on the catches of 
several fleets using different gear.      
 
2.4 WCPO Skipjack  
 
The Skipjack tuna resource in the Pacific, in common with  
Yellowfin, is assumed to consist of two Pacific stocks, in 
the WCPO and EPO respectively. Skipjack, which do not 
usually exceed10kg, are schooling species of the upper 
mixed layer at all sizes. They are susceptible to ENSO 
influences on their distribution in equatorial areas. T he 
2004 provisional catch was the highest ever, at 
1,376,670t, with surface gear - Purse Seine (78%) and 
pole-and-line (18%) - accounting for virtually all of the 
catch. Most of the catch is taken in equatorial areas 
across the WCPO, except for those taken in a seasonal 
fishery in Japanese waters (Appendix 1-3). As with the 
other species, much of the juvenile catch (< 45 cm) is 
taken in the Indonesian and Philippine fisheries. Skipja ck 
are taken equally in associated and unassociated Purse 
Seine sets. As with the other two species of tuna, ther e is 

  
 evidence of ENSO impacts on recruitment.  Recent levels 
of recruitment into the fishery have been high.  
 
2.5  WCPO Albacore 
 
Albacore are managed as two stocks, those north and 
south of the equator, respectively. The greater part of  the 
overall catch (80-90%) is taken in the WCPO in both 
hemispheres. The balance is taken in the EPO. Recent 
South Pacific Albacore catches (~ 62,000t) has been the 
highest on record, largely as a result of the continued  
development of Pacific Island domestic Longline fisheries. 
The reported 2004 catch was slightly down on 2002-2003  
levels. Longlining accounts for the great majority of th e 
South Pacific catch (72%), and this is mostly taken in  
sub-tropical and temperate areas beyond Latitude 10 0S. A 
recent Resolution from the RFMO responsible for the 
northern Albacore stock the Inter American Tropical Tuna  
Commission (IATTC), R 7 calls for the need to avoid any 
increase in fishing mortality on this fully exploited stock. 
The resolution recognizes that management cooperation 
with the WCPFC will be necessary. The southern 
Albacore stock is regarded as only moderately exploited , 
although there are signs that the biomass available to 
Longline fishing has declined in some areas to the point  
where economic overfishing may be occurring.    
 
                                                 
7  IATTC Resolution on Northern Albacore Tuna (C-05- 02)  

  
 Albacore will not be further considered in this repor t as 
they are generally beyond the terms of reference of t he 
present study. 
The table below (Table 1) summarizes the main features 
of the fishery for each species. 

   Table 1. Summary of tuna fishery characteristics, b y species 
 Abbreviations: WEP Western Equatorial Pacific, CEP Cent ral Equatorial Pacific, 
STSP Sub-Tropical South Pacific, STNP Sub-Tropical Nort h Pacific; U = 
Unassociated set, A = Associated set, T = Troll gear   
Purse 
Seine  Total catch 
2004 (est) Main area  
fished 
% of 
catch, 
set type  Longline 
% of 
catch Pole & 
line % 
of 
catch Other gear % 
of catch 
Yellowfin 407,509WEP 44 -U, A  17 3 36 
Bigeye  116,259WEP/CEP 21 - A 65 1.5 12.5 
Skipjack 1,369,818WEP/CEP 78 -U, A  <1 18 4 
SP 
Albacore  56,740STSP  ~ 0 92 ~ 0 8 –T 
NP 
Albacore  90,348STNP ~ 0 28 39 29 - T 

 2.6  Other species in the WCPO tuna fishery 
 
A range of non-target (by-catch or incidental species) i s 
taken in tuna fisheries, and their estimated catch levels 
have been recently reviewed for the Commission. [4]  By-
catch levels are generally highest in the Longline fisher y, 
low to moderate in associated sets by the Purse Seine 
fishery, and lowest in the pole-and-line fishery and 
unassociated sets by the Purse Seine fishery.  
 
Further consideration of these non-target species is 
beyond the scope of this study, but their management has 
been the subject of resolutions by other RFMOs. 
Assessment of the impact of fishing on the stocks of non-
target, associated or dependent species is, inter alia , one 
of the conservation and management principles of the 
Convention (Art. 5(d)). Hopefully, early steps will b e taken 
at the Commission to introduce resolutions dealing wit h 
sensitive by-catch and other species, including turtles, 
seabirds and sharks.  
 
3. Stock assessments - analyses over the last 5 
years 
 
The current basis of tuna fisheries management in the 
WCPO is an integrated length-based age-structured 
model, MULTIFAN-CL, has been developed and used by 
the Oceanic Fisheries Program of the Secretariat of the 
Pacific Community (OFP-SPC) since the early 1990s.  

 Initially, applied to South Pacific Albacore, it was 
subsequently applied to Yellowfin tuna in 1999, to 
Skipjack tuna in 2000 and to Bigeye tuna in 2000. 
Although production models, tag-based attrition models 
and other approaches have been applied in the past, th is 
data-intensive model is considered robust and is now 
routinely applied to WCPO stock assessments. The model 
has an integrated spatial structure (based largely on 
results of earlier tagging experiments), is able to test  
various assumptions (e.g. measures of abundance, 
Longline effort weighting, etc) and can be used to 
calculate a range of the reference points commonly used 
in tuna management.  
 
Results of MF-CL assessments are normally updated 
annually to incorporate additional data and accommoda te 
any adjustments to the model structure. The results have 
been presented to the Standing Committee on Tuna an d 
Billfish (SCTB) since 1992. The results were 
communicated to the Scientific Coordinating Group of t he 
Preparatory Conference until Prep Con 7 in December 
2004. In August 2005 the results were presented at t he 
first meeting of the WCPFC Scientific Committee. These 
assessments constitute the primary basis of scientific 
advice on tuna stocks to the Commission. The results 
from the assessments for Yellowfin and Bigeye tuna over  
the last five years are tabulated below. The 
recommendations for the management of these species 
derived from assessments of the past five years are 
summarized.  
 

 3.1  Yellowfin tuna 
According to assessments presented in the years 2001 to 
2004 inclusive, the Yellowfin stock was believed to be 
neither overfished (as described by F current < F MSY, in the 
range 0.6 –1.1) nor in an overfished state (as described  
by B current > B MSY , in the range 1.5-2-5). Nonetheless, it 
was recognized that the stock was nearing full 
exploitation. Indeed, equatorial areas were regarded as 
fully exploited. Biomass declines of around 50% in these  
areas (cf. 35% overall for the WCPO) were attributable  to 
fishing. (Appendix 1-3). It was considered that any 
increases in fishing mortality would be unlikely to re sult in 
any long-term increase in yield and could move the stoc k 
to an overfished state. Given indications, moreover, of a 
shift to a lower productivity regime in the WCPO seriou s 
concerns arose that current catches (at near record 
levels) might not be sustainable.  Successive SCTBs, 
therefore, recommended that there be no further 
increases in fishing mortality, especially on juvenile 
Yellowfin.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Year  Status Other indicators Recommendations 
2001  (14 th  SCTB, 
2000 data) At least moderately exploited; not 
over-fished or in overfished state Impact of fishing has led to 35% reduction in biomass (greater in equatorial Pacific) 
 No further increases in F (particularly on juveniles); closely monitor stock condition  
2002  (15 th  SCTB 
2001 data) Likely to be nearing full exploitation; not over-fished or in overfished state; catches may not be sustainable if shift to lower productivity regime Impact of fishing has led to 35% reduction in biomass (greater in tropical areas) Reiterate no further increases in F (particularly on juveniles);closely monitor stock condition  
2003  (16 th  
SCTB2002 data) Not over-fished nor in an overfished state; catches may not be sustainable if shift to lower productivity regime   Reiterate no further 
increases in F (particularly on juveniles) 
2004  (17 th  SCTB 
2003 data) Not being over-fished nor in an overfished state; nearing full exploitation  Biomass reduction of 20-35% (but around 50% in tropical regions) Reiterate no further increases in F (particularly on juveniles;  
2005   (1 st  SC, 
2004 data) Overfished  but not in overfished 
state Equatorial regions heavily impacted by fishing; urgent management action may be required Fcurrent must be reduced for 
sustainable stock levels 
Source: 14 th , 15 th , 16 th  and 17 th  SCTB summary statements; 1 st  Scientific 
Committee (SC) record   

 The 2005 assessment incorporated several adjustments 
to the model. These included changed weighting factors 
for Longline Catch per unit of effort (CPUEs), and 
redefinition of the model regions to give six areas. It  was 
considerably less optimistic then previous assessments. It 
strongly indicated that overfishing was now likely to b e 
occurring  (as described by F current > F MSY,   1.0-1.89, base 
case 1.22). Although the stock appeared at this stage not  
to be in an overfished state, (as defined by B current > B MSY , 
0.93-1.55, base case 1.32) the assessment made it clear 
that the current total catches were unlikely to be 
sustainable in the medium to long term (10 years). In 
short, catches at these levels will continue to reduce the 
total biomass of the stock. Hence, long-term maximum 
sustainable yields from the fishery are estimated to be 
around 270,000t. This is very much lower than the recent  
reported catches in excess of 400,000t. The assessment 
suggested that the Longline fishery had a relatively lo w 
impact on the stock. The greatest impacts were 
attributable to surface fisheries, especially those in 
equatorial areas of the Indonesian and the Philippine  
fisheries. As noted earlier, juvenile and sub-adult Yell owfin 
are taken in both associated and unassociated sets in 
these fisheries. 
 
 

 3.2  Bigeye tuna  
 
The picture that emerged from early assessments of 
Bigeye were characterized by a high degree of 
uncertainty, considered both Pacific-wide and in the mo re 
restricted WCPO region. Even so, by 2004 the 
assessments were clearly indicating a high risk of 
overfishing (described by F current ~  F MSY , 0.89-1.02), 
although the stock was not considered at that stage to be 
in an overfished state (as described by B current > B MSY , 
1.75-2.28). In addition recent recruitment of this spe cies in 
the WCPO had been high. The assessment noted that if 
there was a return this was to return to long term aver age 
or lower levels of recruitment, current catches could not 
be maintained.   
 
By contrast, the EPO situation for Bigeye was somewhat 
more severe. The stock was considered to be both 
overfished and in an overfished state. Accordingly, 
management measures were implemented for the 
Longline fishery by IATTC in 2004, and even earlier for 
catches of juvenile Bigeye by Purse Seine operations.  
 
 

  
Assessment  Stock Status Other issues Recommendations 
2001  (14 th  SCTB 
2000 data) Uncertain; moderate impact on stock.  Declining biomass, recent low recruitment Develop reliable assessments; no further increases in F on surface fisheries until uncertainty resolved  
2002  (15 th  SCTB 
2001 data) Uncertain but nearing full exploitation; not being overfished or in an overfished state   No further increases in F on juveniles 
2003  (16 th  SCTB  
2002 data) Uncertain; overfishing 
occurring, but not in an 
overfished state  No further increases in F on Bigeye tuna 
(all sizes) 
2004  (17 th  SCTB 
2003 data) Close to overfished, but not in an overfished state  Recent recruitment above average No further increases in F on Bigeye tuna (all sizes); decrease in total catch may be needed 
2005  (2004 data, 1st  SC) Overfishing occurring but not in an overfished state Equatorial regions heavily impacted by fishing; urgent management action may be required Fcurrent 
to be reduced; if recruitment returns 
to long term average levels, a further reduction in catch and effort is likely to be required to maintain the stock at sustainable levels  
Source: 14 th , 15 th , 16 th  and 17 th  SCTB summary statements; 1 st  Scientific 
Committee (SC) record 

 Following redefinition of areas used in the modeling 
assessments, changes in Longline abundance indices and 
effort standardization, the 2005 assessment took the view 
that overfishing of Bigeye was in fact occurring. (F current > 
FMSY ,  0.90-1.45, base case 1.23). The stock was not 
thought to be in an overfished state (B current > B MSY , 1.06-
1.48, base case 1.25). Both reference points showed 
some decline relative to the 2004 values. The assessment 
made it clear that if current F levels are maintained, 
however, this will move the stock to an overfished state. 
This would become even more likely if current high 
recruitment levels return long-term average levels or 
below. MSY values based on recent and long-term 
average recruitment are of the order of 90–100,000t a nd 
65,000t respectively, considerably lower than the prese nt 
catch level of around 115,000t.   
   
3.3   Skipjack tuna 
 
Skipjack assessments continue to conclude that Skipjack 
is currently exploited at a moderate level relative to its 
biological potential. The stock is neither being over-fish ed 
nor in an over-fished state. Biomass levels in this short-
lived, high natural mortality species are largely drive n by 
recruitment, and assessments suggest that 
environmentally driven variation in recruitment will b e the 
main influence on stock size and fishery performance. 
Recruitment levels appear to be very high, as has been 
the case for Yellowfin and Bigeye tuna.  
 

 While the biological status of the fishery may be relat ively 
healthy, initial bioeconomic modeling indicates that 
reductions in effort, while reducing catch, would result  in 
economic gains and increased profitability. This would 
result largely from increased catch rates for Purse 
Seiners. In addition, other benefits would be likely t o 
accrue in the form of potentially increased recruitment of 
Yellowfin and Bigeye to the Longline fishery. 
Conversely, it should be noted that, as the Purse Seine  
fishery is a multi-species one, any increase in the Purse 
Seine Skipjack catch would result in increases in Yellowfi n 
(and to a lesser extent, Bigeye) catch, as there is current ly 
no fishing technique to enable fully effective Skipjack 
targeting, to the exclusion of the other species. 
 
3.4 Overview 
 
The assessments of the status of Yellowfin and Bigeye 
tuna in the WCPO have grown increasingly more 
pessimistic over the period 2001 to 2005. It is now thoug ht 
that both Yellowfin and Bigeye tuna are being overfish ed 
according to output from the MF-CL model used.  Some 
important points emerge from these assessments. Firstly, 
the identification of over-fishing of the stocks has resulte d 
from refinement of the models used rather than from any 
obvious changes identified in fishing operations. 
Secondly, the fisheries of all species appear to be 
sustained by recent high levels of recruitment into the 
populations. Hence, it would be prudent to assume that 
resolution of further uncertainties and indeterminacies in 
the data used to inform the models may bring further  

 unwelcome findings and suggestions. Under such 
conditions, management under a precautionary paradigm 
should be implemented urgently.  Thirdly, the ecologi cal 
drivers and constraints on the target populations need to  
be taken fully into account. This should include recognit ion 
that to a certain extent the fisheries overlap by gear  type 
and region and are essentially mixed species fisheries. 
This implies that these fisheries need to be subject to an  
ecosystem-based management regime in order to achieve 
true sustainability. Currently, however, the manageme nt 
options that have been proposed fall well short of wha t is 
necessary to assure true long-term sustainability in these  
fisheries. The following sections of the report outline some 
of the suggestions that have been made to date and 
articulate the views of Greenpeace on what will constitut e 
an effective approach. 
 
4. Conventional Management Options for Yellowfin 
and Bigeye Tuna 
 
At the request of the 5 th  Preparatory Conference, an 
information paper [5]  was prepared by the Interim 
Secretariat on “management options …on how the 
Commission could respond to sustainability concerns in 
respect of Yellowfin and Bigeye ”. This report was 
submitted to the 6 th  Preparatory Conference in Bali in April 
2004, and provides an overview of a range of 
management options that have been applied to tuna 
fishery management in other regions. Some of these 
measures could conceivably be applied in the WCPO. 

  
In general, restrictions on total fishing effort and he nce 
rate of fishing mortality (input controls) have histori cally 
been preferred over direct controls on catch (output 
controls). Notwithstanding this, the use of combined eff ort 
and catch controls in contemporary management 
strategies has increased. This tendency is based 
pragmatically on the realization that either type of 
measure used in isolation may prove inadequate.  
 
The various schemata are summarized in Table 2 below 
and the possible application of these in the WCPO area is 
discussed in the following sections of this report. 
 

 Table 2.  Summary of management options applied to Bigeye and Yellowfin 
in other ocean areas by RFMOs    Source: RFMO websites, references 5, 20.  
Management measure applied Eastern Pacific Ocean (IATTC) Indian Ocean (IOTC) Atlantic Ocean (ICCAT) 
OUTPUT CONTROLS 
Competitive quota (TAC) Yellowfin TAC 1966-1979; 
Juvenile Bigeye catch limits 
1988-99;  Yellowfin catch limits 1998–2001 Qu 
ota for Bigeye catch 
on floating objects considered, but not adopted (Competitive TAC for southern 
Albacore, for countries targeting 
the species) 
Allocated quota 
(TAC) Longline Bigeye catch limited to 2001 levels (2004). Longline catch limits (2004-2006) for four  countries; limited to 2001 levels for others Bigeye Longline catch limits for one nation; limits under development for others 
 Bigeye Longline TAC of 90,000t 
(2005- 2008) Longline catch and 
vessel limits by country, based on average 1991-92 catch; adjustment provisions 
INPUT CONTROLS 
Capacity limits  Limits on total Purse Seine 
carrying capacity (m 3 of well 
space); limits in entry of 
new vessels and expansion 
of capacity Restricting number of Longline vessels > 24m LOA, and GRT,  to number registered in 2003 Restricting number of vessels > 
24m LOA to average number fishing in 2001-02 
Gear limits Net depth, escape grids   

 considered 
FAD restrictions Catch limits on juvenile 
Bigeye, to trigger ban on FAD fishing (1999-2001); now time/area closures on all purse seining Consideration of time/area closures for FAD fishing Closed area/season for FAD use in 1999; renewed in 2004, to be reviewed this year; all surface fishing, not only FADs  
Restrict at-sea transshipment High seas transshipment by 
Purse Seine vessels prohibited   
Area -time 
restrictions, including Marine Reserves  Time/area closures considered; preference for total bans for two periods (2003 and 2004); choice of two six-week periods (2005) Considered but not adopted (large Skipjack catch foregone) 
Area closure to surface fishing 
for November (years 2005-2008), review effect in 2005 
Minimum size restriction  Considered, but not 
implemented Since 1982 (3.2kg); recently rescinded  
Compulsory 
retention of all tuna 
species of all sizes  In place (needs 100% observer coverage); continuing to Jan 07.   
  

 Pursuant to this 2004 review, and the updated stock 
assessments from SCG 3, the first meeting of the WCPF 
Commission (December 2004), directed that advice be 
provided to the second meeting of the Commission 
(December 2005), on the following points:  
 
• “estimates of both sustainable catch and effort levels 
for Bigeye, Yellowfin and South Pacific Albacore” 
 
• “five and ten-year projections of total and spawning 
stock biomass under 2003 catch levels, and possible 
scenarios of changes in catch and effort in the WCP-
CA for the Purse Seine, Longline and other surface 
fisheries which have a major impact on Bigeye and 
Yellowfin tuna, including the effects on the stocks of 
possible time/area closures by fishing methods for 
Bigeye and Yellowfin tuna” 
 
• “the effects on the stocks of measures to mitigate the 
catch of juvenile Bigeye and Yellowfin, including 
controls on setting of floating objects”     
 
In response to this directive, a comprehensive analysis [6]  
was prepared by the OFP and other collaborators. The 
findings were presented to the 1 st  Scientific Committee 
(SC) meeting in August 2005 and are summarized below: 
 
• In relation to the questions concerning sustainable 
and effort levels, the OFP concluded that for 
Bigeye and Yellowfin tuna, effort reductions for 

 both species to around 80% of the current F, which 
would reduce overfishing to F MSY  levels.  
 
• In relation to sustainable catch levels, the OFP 
concluded that for Yellowfin and Bigeye tuna the 
long-term average catch levels consistent with F MSY  
would be less than 70% of present levels (2001-
2003 average) for both species. With recent high 
levels of recruitment, especially for Bigeye, catches 
of 0.95 and 0.77 of current levels for Bigeye and 
Yellowfin respectively would be consistent with 
FMSY. 
 
To fulfill the five and 10-year projections requested by the 
Commission, projections on a 10-year time horizon were 
made. It is noted that the baseline fishery condition s in 
2003 used were in some ways atypical. For example, high 
Purse Seine catches, especially of Yellowfin, took place 
that year. Twelve scenarios, with subsets, were tested, 
with outcomes graphically represented in Figure 1 of th e 
report of Agenda Item 5. Stock projections are somewhat 
simplistic, however, and should be taken as indicative 
only, given uncertainties in the simulations. A number  of 
insights were gained through these projections of possible  
fishery performance under various conditions and of 
responses to restrictions applied over the fishing sectors 
and gear types. 
 
 

  
a) Current general situation  
 
The projections broadly confirmed the general situatio n 
outlined in Section 3. Both Bigeye and Yellowfin ar e 
currently overfished.  
 
Current catches of Bigeye tuna are not sustainable under  
long-term average recruitment. Under the unusually hig h 
recent recruitment levels, overall catches may be 
sustainable in some regions but not in others. In the 
Western Equatorial Pacific (WEP) projected abundance 
declines towards zero even with significant catch 
reductions. The modeled projections suggested that 2003 
effort levels were generally sustainable insofar as they 
would stabilize biomass at levels consistent with MSY.  
 
For Yellowfin tuna , the high 2003 catches are not 
sustainable, and would lead to rapid depletion of stocks,  
especially in the WEP, where abundance declines 
towards zero even with significant catch reductions. 2003 
effort levels were considered to be sustainable, with most  
forms of effort reduction generally effective in keeping  
biomass above levels consistent with MSY.  
 
The projections suggested that biomass levels above 
those consistent with MSY could be achieved for both 
species by effort reductions of between 15% and 30% in 
all fisheries. Together with catch reduction of 30% in a ll 
fisheries for Bigeye, strong increases in modeled biomass 
levels were achieved for Yellowfin and Bigeye. 

  
b) Projected Effects of Specific Measures 
 
i) Bigeye tuna  
 
The greatest positive impact on adult biomass for Bigeye 
tuna was achieved through projections in which reductions 
in Longline catch and effort were reduced. In relation  to 
Purse Seine gear, the most effective measure was the 
switching from associated to unassociated sets. Modeled 
reductions in catch/effort in Indonesia and the Philippi ne 
fisheries had little positive impact.  Closure options on  the 
Purse Seine fisheries were explored and quarterly time -
area closures were found to be effective. Specifically, 
closure of log/FAD sets together with a localized 
redirection of associated sets to unassociated sets was  
found to be beneficial. Quarterly Longline closure opt ions 
were modeled and these simulations suggested that the 
best results were achieved from closures in the Eastern 
Equatorial Area. 
 
ii)  Yellowfin tuna 
 
Of the options modeled for Yellowfin tuna, reductions in 
Purse Seine effort and of effort in the Indonesian an d 
Philippine fisheries gave better results than reduction in 
Longline effort. A switch from associated sets to 
unassociated sets gave less clear benefits for Yellowfin 
than for Bigeye tuna. This is probably due to the fact  that 
Yellowfin are taken by both set types. Little impact w as 
achieved through quarterly closures with effort transfers,  

 but minor benefits were observed in the simulations by 
shifting Longline effort from west to east. 
 
c) Projected effects of reduced catch of juvenile 
Bigeye and Yellowfin tuna 
 
Projections were made involving the impact upon biomass 
of reduced catch of juvenile Bigeye and Yellowfin tuna.  
The best outcomes in the form of increased biomass and 
catch gains were achieved through transfer of effort from  
associated to unassociated sets. These included benefits 
to the Longline fishery. Effort reductions in Purse Sei ne 
fisheries and in the Indonesian and Philippine sectors 
demonstrated potential benefits for Yellowfin, as did many 
of the time/area closures also simulated for the Purse 
Seine sector. 
 
d) Summary 
 
A number of broad conclusions can be drawn from the 
results of the simulated management scenarios and the 
assessments described above. 
 
Firstly, the simulations suggest that current catches of 
both species are not sustainable. This is particularly true  
of the WEP extending from the Philippines to Kiribat i. In 
this area drastic declines in tuna stocks are predicted by 
the models used, even if catch levels are substantially 
reduced. Accordingly, this points to the need to emplace  a 
robust, enforceable management regime for tuna over the 
WCPO as a whole. 

  
Secondly, in the model simulations carried out to explo re 
the impact of possible management intervention, it was 
established that there are positive benefits that flow from 
reducing effort across all fishery types for both Yellow fin 
and Bigeye tuna. Reducing catch levels across all fishery 
types would be of benefit to Bigeye tuna populations.  
 
Thirdly, the simulations suggest that effort reduction 
involving Purse Seine gear were generally most beneficia l 
for the Yellowfin stock, while effort reduction in the 
Longline sector was beneficial to the Bigeye tuna stock. 
 
Finally, the simulations predict that some time/area 
closure options and options involving transfer of fishing 
from associated/FAD sets to unassociated sets were 
beneficial to both species. 
 
While these predictions are useful for illustrative purp oses, 
there are considerable uncertainties in the data used t o 
form the model and in other aspects of the information  
available, to form policy. In addition, the scientific advice 
generated from the assessments appears to be 
predicated on the use of MSY as a target limit value. 
Hence, Greenpeace is of the view that the effort and catch 
reduction suggested by these simulations represent a 
bare minimum level of management which should be 
applied to tuna fisheries in the WCPO. The basis for th is 
assertion is examined in the context of the following 
sections of the report which outline current management 
instruments in use in the WCPO fisheries. The report the n 

 examines specific difficulties in applying management 
schemata in the WCPO. 
 
5. Current management approaches in the WCPO   
 
Various management systems have been applied to 
various tuna fisheries around the world under the 
auspices of the relevant RFMOs. These have been 
summarized in Table 2 above.  In general, input contr ols 
have more commonly been applied (capacity limits, FAD 
restrictions, area-time closures) but output controls are 
also commonly applied, in particular to Longline fisheri es. 
In relation to the WCPO, however, there are currently  no 
management measures that apply throughout the 
Convention Area or throughout the range of any of t he 
stocks. 
 
At national level, measures may be embedded in nation al 
tuna management plans to limit  inter alia numbers of 
operating vessels or catch levels. Exercising of sovereign 
rights in the context of bilateral access arrangements ma y 
also be used to achieve both in-zone conservation and 
management of the resource. At the sub-regional level, 
the US Multilateral Treaty administered on behalf of  the 
Pacific nations by the Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) 
controls access to EEZs and adjoining waters of Pacific 
nations. This limits the number of US Purse Seine vessels 
which may fish in the region. Since 1995, the Palau 
Arrangement has limited the number of Purse Seine 
vessels that may fish in waters of the Parties to the Na uru 

 Agreement (PNA). This arrangement limits the number o f 
Purse Seiners that can operate in what is effectively the  
PNA region to 205 vessels. 
 
This is potentially a very powerful influence on tuna fishing 
operations, (and their impact) in the region. Vessels 
operating under the Palau Arrangement are thought t o 
take around 70% 8 of the WCPO Purse Seine catch. 
Hence, this arrangement has the potential to exert a 
significant amount of control on the Purse Seine effort  
impacting WCPO stocks. At both national and regional 
level therefore, some form of capacity limits are in pl ace, 
at least for the Purse Seine fishery. Nothing is, howe ver, 
in place in the WCPO for the regulation of the Longl ine 
fishery or for other gear.    
 
Even so, the adequacy of the restrictions on Purse Seine 
vessels is open to considerable question. In particular a 
number of weaknesses have been identified in the Palau 
Arrangement that has led the Parties to formulate an 
alternative approach. The Vessel Days Scheme (VDS) is 
described more fully below. 
 
                                                 
8  As a significant number of Purse Seine vessels op erating in the western equatorial Pacific  are probably 
not included in current effort estimates, this is a n overestimate.   

 a) Vessel Days Scheme – Purse Seine effort 
 
In December 2000, the Palau Arrangement Parties 
signaled their intent to move to a new scheme. This was 
intended to replace the limits on “vessel numbers by flee t” 
in the Arrangement, using a scheme based upon limits on 
“vessel days by zone (EEZ)”. The VDS was intended to  
 
“enhance the economic and biological sustainability of th e 
Western and Central Pacific Purse Seine fishery by 
controlling the level of fishing effort by Purse Seine 
vessels within limits consistent with resource 
sustainability; and also increasing economic benefits to 
resource-owning states and economic returns to 
participating vessel owners” [7] .  
 
The broad thrust behind the scheme was the 
establishment of a TAE based initially on an average ef fort 
for the period 1999-2001, then subsequently for 2000-
2002. Overall, this was designed to limit fishing effort  to a 
lower level than currently occurring, consistent with a 
precautionary approach. In addition, it took account of  
SCG recommendations to cap fishing mortality on Bigeye 
and Yellowfin tuna.  
 
In operational terms, this involved the calculation of th e 
total number of vessel days available for allocation to t he 
Parties (PNA TAE), minus days in international waters 
and EEZs of other states. After further subtracting 
obligations associated with the United States Multilate ral 
Treaty (USMLT) and the Federated States of Micronesia 

 (FSM) Arrangement, individual allocations (Party 
Allowable Effort, PAE) would be made according to a 
formula giving equal weight to biomass estimates within 
the EEZs (Skipjack and Yellowfin) and the average vessel 
days fished in the EEZs for the period 1996-2002.  
 
It was intended that PAEs would be transferable 
according to an established set of rules, the definition  of a 
fishing day would be pro-rated to vessel size (3 categori es 
of Length Overall) (LOA), and Parties would be free t o 
allocate their days (PAE) as they wished, presumably 
according to a set of established priorities. Crucial to the 
success of the scheme would be the fully operational 
status of the vessel monitoring system, the Forum 
Fisheries Agency (FFA) Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) 
and the associated in-country hubs. In addition, the 
effectiveness of the scheme would also be determined by 
other factors. The capacity of individual countries to 
manage their PAEs to good effect, on a real time basi s, 
was likely to be important. The effectiveness of tradi ng of 
effort days amongst Parties to take account of ENSO-
driven variation in biomass distribution would also be a  
critical parameter in determining the effectiveness of t he 
proposed scheme. 
 
Unfortunately, the effectiveness of the VDS as a 
management tool in the WCPO remains untested and 
indeed it is yet to be implemented in any form.  It is 
possible that the scheme may be implemented in mid-
2007, subject to endorsement by the PNA at ministerial 
level. This involves a transitional period of between 4 

 months and 18 months from existing arrangements.  The 
scheme has faced considerable criticism from Purse 
Seine operators.  The 2005 World Tuna Purse Seine 
Organization Meeting (WTPO) 9 appeared to be losing 
patience with the VDS process. They considered that 
huge difficulties existed in its application and even in  it 
gaining wide acceptance among PNA members. They 
recommended that its implementation be postponed.  
 
In any case, the original ambitions of large scale effor t 
control under the VDS scheme appear to have been 
comprehensively undermined by the reported likelihood 
that it will be the 2004 effort level that will be u sed as a 
baseline. This is more than 20% higher than the average d 
1999-2001 effort level originally proposed. The 
assumption of this as a baseline means that the scheme 
can no longer be regarded as being consistent with a 
precautionary approach.  It is possible that the VDS could 
serve as a framework through which future effort 
reductions could be made, but this is far from certain. 
However, the success of the VDS as a pivotal 
management framework through which timely 
management of the WCPO Purse Seine fishery can be 
achieved looks extremely doubtful. 
 
The above concerns translate from the Purse Seine 
fishery which accounts for the bulk of tuna caught in the  
WCPO to the Longline fisheries. 
 
 
                                                 
9  WTPO Declaration, 5th Annual Assembly, Manila, Ph ilippines, 20-21 September, 2005. 

  
 b) Longline Effort 
As yet there has been no attempt to limit Longline ef fort in 
the WCPO, in contrast with other ocean areas 
administered by other RFMOs. Early consideration of 
options for managing effort (and catch) in the South 
Pacific Albacore fishery did not result in any substantive  
measures. Proportionally, much less longlining effort is 
directed in areas of the EEZs of coastal states than is th e 
case for Purse Seine fisheries.  Nonetheless there is a 
wide range of vessel size and a very large number of 
Longliners fish within the PNA area and in the WCPO a s a 
whole. The estimates are subject to large uncertainty, but 
number at least 5000. This figure does not include 
thousands more small vessels (handliners etc.) fishing in 
Indonesia and the Philippines but which take adult f ish of 
similar size to those taken by Longliners.  
 
Though data is scarce, Longline effort in the WCPO 
appears to be increasing. It has been claimed that at least 
one entity has increased the number of Longline vessel s 
on the FFA national register by 148 since the 1999 
Multilateral High Level Conference (MHLC) Resolution 
was made to limit capacity increases. This is offset to 
some degree by plans of the same entity to dismantle 1 20 
older Longliners over the next two years. The Longline  
fishery in Vietnam is also expanding, as is the Chinese 
DW Longline fleet. Moreover, Longline fishing has als o 
provided many of the examples of known IUU fishing in 
the region.  

  
As described above, the output of modeled simulations to  
investigate the impact of effort reduction has singled ou t 
limits on longlining in the region as the single most 
effective measure to increase and stabilize biomass of 
Bigeye tuna. It is recognized, however, that such 
regulation is extremely difficult. 
 
 As a result, catch limitation has probably been the mo st 
widely used regulatory tool for Longline fleets. 
 
Recently, for example, the IATTC introduced a self-
enforced Bigeye TAC for Longline vessels of four 
countries (China, Japan, Korea and Chinese Taipei) over 
the period 2004, 2005 and 2006. This requires other 
contracting parties to ensure Longline catches of Bigeye 
do not exceed their 2001 levels. This has already had 
ramifications for the WCPO. There has been some 
transfer of effort -during 2004 - after EPO quotas w ere 
reached, and some “laundering” of Bigeye caught in the  
EPO and described as WCPO fish, has also been 
documented 10 .      
  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
10   Report on the Fishing Capacity of Chinese Taipei.  Informal Consultation towards WCPFC 2, Tokyo, 8-9 
September 2005 

 c) Economic and Regulatory considerations 
 
Any management framework proposed must take into 
account the important role that tuna fisheries play in  the 
economies of the region. 
 
Longline fishing is less capital intensive than Purse Se ine 
operations. It has less requirement for input of capit al, 
technology and expertise. Accordingly, it has been a 
primary focus of domestic fishing industry development f or 
many Pacific Island States, in particular those in sub-
tropical areas. By contrast, Papua New Guinea (and to a  
lesser extent the Solomon Islands) have pursued a 
preferred development pathway of gearing a domestic 
Purse Seine capacity to onshore processing of the catch . 
The economies of other island states (notably atoll stat es 
such as Kiribati) in the tropical region are significantl y 
dependent upon access fees for Purse Seine vessels.  
 
Hence, in considering potential management options, 
most Island states will heavily weigh economic factors in 
their evaluation. There is wide perception that the cu rrent 
state of the stocks is due to the large-scale expansion of 
the fisheries by the DWFN in past years. Unsurprisingly, 
most states are unwilling to curtail current and future 
development aspirations as a result of historical over-
expansion. This has led to a great overcapacity in the 
sector as a whole and in turn has led to departure of t he 
fisheries from sustainability. This unsustainable state is 

 characterized by complete lack of equity in the distributi on 
and availability of the natural capital these fisheri es 
represent.  In turn, this implies that balancing 
development ambitions with the need to restore the 
fisheries to sustainability and to manage them 
subsequently will be a major challenge. Essentially, 
negotiation of timely and substantive fisheries 
management measures in the Convention area may well 
be held hostage to economic development, that in and of  
itself departs significantly from sustainability. 
    
6. Problems identified for effective management of 
WCPO tuna stocks  
 
A range of management options has been considered for 
tuna fisheries in other tropical ocean areas (as 
summarized in Table 2 above) where RFMOs have been 
in place for some time, but where similar problems with  
Yellowfin and Bigeye stocks are nonetheless evident. 
There are, however, a number of potential difficultie s 
which are likely to complicate attempts by the Commission  
to apply any or all of the potential management opt ions 
that have been recognized in studies of the options [5]. 
 
 (1) The WCPO fishery is much larger (in terms of catch –  
50% of the global catch), more complex and spread over 
a much wider area than any of the other ocean areas 
where RFMOs manage tuna fisheries. These areas (and 
the relevant RFMOs) are: The Eastern Pacific Ocean 

 (IATTC), Indian Ocean (IOTC), Atlantic Ocean (ICCAT) 
and the Southern Ocean (CCSBT).  
 
(2) A second raft of complexities arises as a result of 
some of the coastal state fisheries being large and highl y 
complex. The Philippines and Indonesia are good 
examples of this. In these countries, multi-species tuna 
fisheries operate using multiple gear and involves very 
large numbers of vessels of varying sizes. These land 
their catch at hundreds, if not thousands of landing poi nts.  
 
(3) There is a much greater sea area under the jurisdict ion 
of coastal states (cf. high seas) than is the case in any 
other ocean area. Much of this sea area is located in the  
productive equatorial zone. On one hand, in management  
terms, this confers potential advantages to coastal states, 
particularly with management of the Purse Seine fisher y. 
On the other, these coastal nations vary considerably in 
size and economic circumstances. Hence, they vary in 
terms of the way they choose to exercise their rights t o 
manage their natural resources. The resultant geo-pol itical 
environment complicates many aspects of regional 
management, not least being resource allocation issues. 
 
(4) The relative importance of Skipjack in the total cat ch 
(68%) and Purse Seine catch (78%), is higher than in an y 
other fishery11, [2] , whereas management concerns are with 
species that form a relatively minor proportion of the catch 
                                                 
11   This has been  the subject of some uncertainty re cently [9] , with discrepancies between observer data and 
logsheet/port sampling data with respect to the rel ative proportion of Skipjack and “yellowfin plus bi geye” in the 
catch 

 e.g. Yellowfin (20%) and Bigeye (2.2%). Issues of effo rt 
and catch reduction, therefore, require careful economi c 
consideration. Management measures applied to the 
Bigeye and Yellowfin stocks will result in a forgone catch  
of the majority species (Skipjack). 
 
(5) The WCPFC is the most recent of the RFMOs to be 
established. Accordingly, the range and scope of the 
monitoring and surveillance it conducts are limited. It is 
likely to be some time before it is well established and  fully 
functional as a significant regulatory force. As things 
stand, its limited capacity will compromise support of 
identified management and conservation measures and 
the co-ordination of regional management efforts. 
 
The points 1-5 immediately above represent a broad 
spectrum of general organizational capacity issues and 
economic issues. These act as constraints on the delivery 
of effective management and advice for the WCPO tuna 
fisheries. There are a number of more specific issues 
which act to constrain effective management. These relat e 
to the availability and provision of data to inform t he 
advisory process necessary in defining management 
needs and objectives. These aspects are explored in 
more detail in the following sections. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
a) Data provision and availability 
 
The relatively recent creation of the WCPFC means that 
currently there are substantial gaps and inadequacies in 
the data covering the WCPO tuna fisheries. These 
contribute to a substantial level of uncertainty and 
indeterminacy, which translates into a substantially 
reduced confidence in the output from fisheries models 
and the management measures put in place. In some 
cases, data is absent from nations that are not members 
of the Commission and, therefore, do not contribute d ata 
on their fisheries, despite these being of great relevan ce 
to management in the WCPO. A good example is 
Vietnam. Indonesia and the Philippines, on the other 
hand, have acknowledged inadequacies in existing 
statistical coverage due to the complexity of the fisheries 
as noted above. These types of data deficiencies are 
critical given that between 35% and 40% of the total 
Yellowfin catch is estimated to come from this area. The  
Commission members are supporting a project  12  to 
remedy this situation in the medium term. 
  
An illustration of the likely scale of the problem is p rovided 
by the statistics for logsheet coverage in the WCPO. This 
is somewhat less than the 50% overall and falls to 25% or  
below for Longline and 15% for pole-and-line. This l ack of 
data introduces substantial uncertainty into certain 
operational analyses. In addition, the relative propor tions 
of juvenile Yellowfin and Bigeye in the Purse Seine catch, 
is not well characterized. This is possibly because they 

 are of similar appearance and value. The situation wher e 
species composition is estimated from sampling of a 
subset of the fleets and then extrapolated to others ne eds 
to be resolved if data precision is to be improved. 
  
b) Fleet capacities 
 
The considerable uncertainties attached to catch and 
biological data are paralleled by inadequacies in the  data 
describing fleet capacity over the region. In short, the 
capacities (and indeed basic vessel characteristics) of 
fleets operating in the WCPO are not fully documented.  
The Commission, therefore, is poorly placed to consider 
the likely benefits of effort reduction options based o n 
limiting capacity such as capacity limits for large scale  
vessels operating in the region. As an example, under t he 
terms of Art. 24 (4,5) of the Convention, and the De cision 
of the Commission relating to the Record Fishing Vessel s 
and Authorizations to Fish, the Commission was entitled 
to receive from members  by July 1, 2005, a record of fl ag 
fishing vessels authorized to fish in the Convention Area  
beyond their jurisdiction together with similar data f rom co-
operating non-members. It was intended that this 
information should form the basis of the WCPF Record o f 
Fishing Vessels, in other words, those vessels authorized 
to fish in the Convention area beyond the national 
jurisdiction of the flag state. The degree of compliance  
with this process is unknown, but it is believed that few 
countries have complied with the requirement to provide  
information. 
 

 The general lack of information about fleet capacities is 
compounded by large scale failures to observe 
Resolutions from the 4 th  MHLC (1999), 5 th  MHLC (1999), 
the 3rd PrepCon (2002) and the 5 th  PrepCon (2003) to 
“exercise reasonable restraint” in “any further increase  in 
fishing effort and capacity in the Convention Area and  to 
apply the precautionary approach forthwith”. Despite the 
Resolution on Conservation and Management from the 
first Commission meeting affirming that these resolution s 
continue to apply, fishing capacity has continued to 
increase in the Purse Seine and Longline fisheries in 
recent years. The current fishing capacity in the WCP O is 
sufficient to  fish at levels well beyond MSY, an 
observation that appears to be true for Purse Seine 
fishing [9]  and longlining fishing [10]  on a global scale.  
 
There have been several recent attempts to estimate 
Purse Seine vessel capacity in the WCPO [12][13][14] . Some 
of these studies [13]  have excluded vessels active in the 
region on the grounds that they have a well capacity 
below 400m 3 or because they are active in only one EEZ. 
The overall effect of these essentially arbitrary exclusi ons 
has been to exclude from any management related 
calculations and modeling, a considerable proportion of 
the effective capacity for some fleets. For example, in the 
case of the Philippine Purse Seine fleet, half of the 
vessels over 250GRT were not included. This amounted 
to around 20 vessels. None of the smaller vessels of less 
that 250GRT were included. This is against a background 
of most newly constructed vessels (post 1999 Resolution 
on Capacity) being in excess of 2000GRT. 

 A full characterization of Purse Seine and longlining 
capacity on the WCPO is a vital prerequisite to the 
success of any management plan based on options 
restricting capacity [12] .  If the capacity is not known with 
any certainty, the precise benefits of capacity reduction  
cannot be gauged. More fundamentally, if capacity is not 
accurately known, then it is likely to prove impossible to  
ensure that any mandated capacity reduction is translated  
into actual reductions in capacity in the real world. 
 
c) Uncertainties in stock assessments 
 
Notwithstanding the general flexibility and utility o f the MF-
CL model used to inform management in the WCPO 
region, there are important areas of uncertainty that  
require resolution in order to improve the stock 
assessments of the major target species. Examples 
include sensitivity of management reference points, to 
assumptions about the stock recruitment relationship 
(SSR), and about recruitment into the fishery together  with 
the large gaps in Philippines/Indonesian data. Coupled  
with uncertainty attached to the capacity in the variou s 
fisheries sectors, these conspire to undermine confidence 
in stock assessments for the regions. These, and other 
areas, will require refinement and much further work.   
Under these circumstances, however, management 
should be predicated upon the most pessimistic 
assumptions in line with a precautionary approach. 
 
 

 d) Absence of management objectives 
 
Even if efforts are successfully made to eliminate or 
accommodate sources of uncertainty affecting the output 
from fisheries models, meaningful advice on the directio n 
of the fishery is not possible without management 
objectives actually being set. Annex 2 of the Agreement 
provides clear guidance in this regard, proposing that 
fishing mortality does not exceed F MSY  in stocks that are 
not overfished, and B MSY  as a rebuilding target for 
overfished stocks. 
 
The Commission will need to frame a set of management 
objectives for the fishery, and presumably decide on the 
choice of reference points (target/management reference  
points and limit/conservation reference points) that wil l be 
used to evaluate fishery performance. In the view of 
Greenpeace, the use of F MSY  as a limit value does not 
constitute a sufficiently precautionary basis for the 
management of these fisheries. Accordingly, if MSY is to 
be used as a basis for management, it should be as a 
starting point, subsequently taking account of 
uncertainties and indeterminacies in the data.  
 
e) IUU fishing 
 
Allied to the problems concerning precise capacity level s 
within the industry, is the problem of IUU fishing. T he 
scale of IUU fishing on the WCPO tuna stock is not known 
with any great certainty.  It is, however, thought to be a 
substantial problem as discussed further in Section 7 

 below. Quite apart from the economic implications of su ch 
fishing activity, as an uncharacterized element in 
calculations involving effort, capacity and catch level, it  
clearly could impact upon the quality of assessments and 
the scientific advice drawn from them. 
 
7. IUU fishing in the WCPO 
 
IUU fishing in the WCPO tuna fishery is widely regarde d 
as a serious economic and management issue in the 
region generally and for coastal states, in particular. This 
is in addition to the fact that it could act to seriousl y 
compromise effective management and conservation 
measures. Greenpeace [17]  has estimated that IUU fishing 
represented a “conservative” 5% to 15% of the WCPO 
catch in 2002.  This would likely be in addition to th e total 
2 million tonnes from landings and catches reported for  
the WCPO, or at least in part. Given the clandestine 
nature of much IUU fishing activity, there are few, if  any, 
reliable data on the extent of IUU fishing in the WC PO 13 .  
This introduces further uncertainty into the assessment 
system, which is not currently acknowledged for the 
WCPO stock assessments. The following sections of the 
report examine IUU fishing and the management 
implications in more detail. 
 

 Illegal fishing 
 
These activities are also generally unreported and often  
involve unlicensed fishing inside the national waters of 
Pacific Island [15]  and other coastal  states such as the 
Philippines [16] . It may consist of violations of conditions by 
vessels fishing under license. It may involve DWFN 
members or entities of the WCPFC, together with vessels 
of open register, or “flag of convenience” countries. It  has 
been reported [15]  that  illegal fishing, as measured by the 
number of detected violations, has declined in the EEZs o f 
FFA members since the mid-1990s, whereas this has not 
apparently been the case in south-east Asian coastal 
states. In these areas illegal fishing has probably 
increased. Incidents involving illegal at-sea 
transshipments, laundering of fish caught elsewhere 
during such transshipments and other violations continue 
in the WCPO, but the true scale and extent is simply 
unknown.             
 
Unregulated fishing   
 
High seas fishing has long been unregulated, and remain s 
effectively unregulated for those countries that are not  
bound as signatories by the UN Fish Stocks Agreement. 
One of the first acts of a functioning WCPFC should be t o 
enforce the requirement of flag states to issue 
authorization to fish on the high seas 12 , as per the 
decision of WCPFC 1, and duly report to the Commission  
the details of such vessels on an annual basis. These 
                                                 
12   Art 24(2) of the WCPF Convention  

 should be required to carry approved VMS equipment and  
be subject to effective observer coverage. 
 
Unreported fishing   
 
Such activities include two major categories of vessels. 
These comprise firstly, those vessels deliberately not 
reporting their activities and, secondly, vessels of member  
and non-members that fish in the convention area, but 
which are not obliged to report. The latter group i ncludes 
some Vietnamese tuna vessels and some Philippine 
vessels fishing outside their EEZ. These boats are 
generally operating under access arrangements but are 
not required to supply catch data under the terms of t hese 
agreements, nor is such data routinely sought by the 
national authorities. As noted above, there are concern s 
attached to the quality of data that is reported. Ind onesian 
and Philippine logsheet coverage remains incomplete, 
particularly in respect of the high seas activities of some 
fleets. 
 
Overview 
 
Between 5% and 15% of the overall WCPO tuna catch 
may be taken by IUU fishing activities as outlined in th e 
recent Greenpeace Report on this topic. Of this, perhaps 
150,000t may not be included in catch estimates due to 
passive non-reporting and an unknown amount of 
deliberate non- or under-reporting. This is potential ly a 
significant proportion of the catch, and points to a pre ssing 
need for individual states in the WCPO to develop 

 National Plans of Action for IUU fishing and the WCPFC  
could reasonably be expected to develop an IUU POA.  
As a first step a list of IUU vessels and their illegal 
activities needs to be compiled in order to clearly ident ify 
known “bad actors”. This approach has been taken by 
other RFMOs, so is not without precedent [15] . 
 
8.  Proposed effort reduction measures for WCPO and  
their impact 
 
The data that exists on the tuna fisheries in the WCPO are 
characterized by considerable uncertainty and 
indeterminacy. The reliability of the models used in  stock 
assessments is unknown within fairly wide parameters. 
Indeed, it was refinements to the models, rather than any 
substantial change in the body of data gathered to inf orm 
the model, that led to the 2005 conclusion that stocks of 
Bigeye and Yellowfin were being overfished at current  
levels of recruitment. The stocks of Bigeye and Yellowfin 
are not thought to be in an overfished state, however.  
Skipjack tuna currently appear to be exploited at moder ate 
levels relative to current population estimates. 
 
There are identified shortcomings too in respect of curre nt 
effort and catch levels in the WCPO and in relation to  
levels of IUU fishing taking place in the region. Moreov er, 
Purse Seine and longlining capacity is continuing to 
increase.  Greenpeace considers that under such 
conditions a rigorous precautionary approach needs to be  
applied in the management of stocks and the fisheries 
require management on a whole ecosystem basis. The 

 goal of such management should be to reverse current 
overfishing and, thus, reverse continuing biomass trends 
towards an overfished state.  This would accord with the 
spirit of the Resolution on Conservation and Management  
Measures made at the first session of the WCPFC. 
 
As a starting point in this discussion, it is possible to use  
the projected scenarios produced for the WCPFC meeting 
in 2005. As noted above, these lead to the overall 
conclusion that using  F MSY as a limit reference point, 
fisheries for both Yellowfin and Bigeye would require  a 
reduction in F to around 80% of current levels. As poin ted 
out in the simulations [6] , an “across the board” effort cut of 
this magnitude in most fisheries would eliminate 
overfishing of both species, given commonalities in 
fisheries for them. At the same time, however, effort 
reduction in the Purse Seine fishery would come at 
considerable cost in the amount of Skipjack tuna catch 
foregone. Sustainable catch levels are more difficult to 
estimate due to impacts of variable recruitment over time , 
but significant reductions in recent Yellowfin catch levels,  
given recent recruitment, would be necessary (23%). As 
noted above, Greenpeace does not consider MSY as a 
robust basis for establishing a precautionary managemen t 
framework. 
 
As a generality, however, effort reductions may well be  
the preferable suite of options in most cases, particular ly 
in the short term, although inevitably “technology cre ep” 
and other slippage is clearly an issue in the long term 
effectiveness of such measures. Most of the output control 

 (catch-based) options would need to be backed up by 
comprehensive monitoring programs that are not likely to  
be in place in the near future.  
 
One clear possibility exists to cap effort and establish a  
position from which further effort reductions could be 
achieved. Accordingly, Greenpeace proposes, as a first 
but substantive step in this direction, that a moratorium  on 
the construction of large Purse Seine (Super Purse Sein er 
& Super Super Purse Seiner) and large Longline vessels 13  
proposing to fish in the WCPO be imposed. This is in li ne 
with earlier Resolutions of the 4th  MHLC, 5 th  MHLC, 3 rd  
PrepCon and the 5th PrepCon.  In addition, movement of 
vessels from other areas should be strictly controlled. At 
the same time, a WCPFC Record of Fishing Vessels 
should be established at the earliest opportunity and 
studies undertaken on the most appropriate measures of 
effort, and the most suitable option to limit capacity in 
WCPO Purse Seine and Longline fisheries. With these 
proposals in mind, the following sections consider 
possible more specific management options by gear type 
although it must be stressed that these are grounded in 
the current management paradigm, and may not, 
therefore, be sufficiently precautionary. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
13   “large” to be defined following careful considera tion of the implications of the various specificati ons in 
place elsewhere eg 15m LOA/ 3 GT  for municipal ves sels, 24m LOA  for Longline vessels  

 8.1  Purse Seine gear 
 
Yellowfin   
 
The projections indicate that reductions applying to Pu rse 
Seine effort, and Indonesian and Philippines effort i n 
general were likely to be more effective for this specie s 
than reductions in Longline effort, in rebuilding bio mass. 
This is due to the high proportion of the Yellowfin ca tch 
taken by Purse Seine in the WEP (Philippines/Indonesi a). 
 
Achieving a 20- 30% reduction in effort in all fisheri es 
would be extremely difficult, with some form of fisher y 
closure or capacity limit the most obvious options. The 
VDS, which will be predicated upon 2004 data as a 
baseline, appears unlikely to push back Purse Seine 
operations to the required levels. It would not cover a ll 
large Purse Seine operations in the WCPO. Limited 
previous experiences with industry initiatives to reduce 
effort have not been striking.  These include the WTPO, 
with a voluntary scheme for vessels to spend a minimum 
specified time in port after unloading and calls, to l imit 
fleet growth. The OPRT scheme to reduce the large DW 
Longline fleet by 20% is another example. 
 
Nonetheless, some measures suggest themselves and 
could be implemented reasonably readily. For example , 
following the precedent set in the EPO, and as a short-
term measure, the imposition of a six-week closure of t he 
large Purse Seine fishery in the WCPO could be trialed . 
This closure could take place in January-February, 2007, 

 on an experimental basis . Considerable preparatory work 
would be necessary, but the trial would benefit from 
existing EPO experience.      
 
Moreover, an indirect, but quantitatively large impact  on 
fishing efficiency and,  hence, on effort and catch in  the 
fishery could be achieved if the Commission were to 
emplace a prohibition on transshipment on the high seas 
and allow this only to take place in designated ports. This 
is provided for in Art. 29 (1,3,5) and in the existing  
Minimum Terms and  Conditions for Foreign Fishing 
Vessel Access as they apply to the EEZs of FFA 
members. It is probable that such a prohibition on 
transshipment would address IUU fishing activities to 
some degree by restricting opportunities for “launderin g” 
illegal catch. 
 
The inevitable economic impacts of these effective limits 
on effort could be minimized by planning to use the 
enforced closure period to carry out vessel and gear 
maintenance. Given that this is primarily designed to 
restrict effort, such closures could be applied in a 
staggered fashion across fleets to spread downstream 
impacts on the processing sector. Nonetheless, such a 
closure program should be regarded as a symptomatic 
response to the overall problem. It does not address the 
fundamental problem of too many boats chasing too man y 
fish.  
 
 

 Even with restrictions in place on the larger Purse Seine  
vessels, the limitation of effort by smaller vessels 
operating in the WEP needs to be addressed. These 
vessels make a large contribution to the take of Yellowf in 
tuna and have thus played a significant part in drasti c 
reductions in biomass of this species in the WEP. This 
has taken place against the backdrop of the WCPFC 
directive and increasing concerns about food security in 
the region. The issue of capacity in this sub-region may  
need to be dealt with at national level with the ove rsight of 
the WCPFC. 
 
Finally, FAD/log sets are common in the WEP area and 
this is where fishery impacts are most severe. Simulations 
have suggested that transferring this effort to 
unassociated sets could considerably benefit both Bigeye  
and Yellowfin tuna. 
 
Bigeye 
 
The most effective modeled measure to conserve and 
regenerate Bigeye tuna stocks in the WCPO was found to 
be the transfer of FAD/associated set effort to 
unassociated sets. Relatively very few of these fish are 
taken in unassociated Purse Seine operations. 
Implementing and monitoring restrictions on associated 
sets, however, implies considerable resource intensive 
management oversight and enforcement. Limits on the 
number of FADs allowed might be a useful option 
administered at a national level, and indeed these 

 measures are included in some national tuna 
management plans (PNG and Philippines). 
 
The benefits achieved by modeling various quarterly 
time/area closures for Bigeye were not clear.  Measures 
which maintained a relatively high proportion of the  Bigeye 
catch in a time or area limited scenario, resulted in th e 
forfeit of a large amount of the Skipkjack catch.  Moreove r, 
the location of high catch areas is spatio-temporally 
variable.  Overall limits on catch of juvenile catches by 
Purse Seine gear would only be likely to work if a syst em 
of 100% observer coverage was emplaced. 
 
8.2 Longline 
 
Yellowfin 
 
Simulations have shown no options that specifically 
benefit Yellowfin other than overall limits on longl ining 
capacity and on vessel numbers. Some benefits may be 
expected to accrue, however, from measures directed at 
conserving Bigeye tuna. 
 
Bigeye 
 
The modeled projections indicate that, to conserve and 
restore biomass of Bigeye reductions in Longline catch 
and effort were the most effective.  Restrictions on 
fisheries targeting Bigeye have been applied by IATTC , 
IOTC and ICCA. These are based upon set TACs for 

 longlining based on historically lower catch levels as a 
baseline, together with allocations made by country a nd/or 
vessel flag. Such a scheme could be applied in the 
WCPO. This could be based on the 1999 catch levels 
which were some 20% lower than current catches coupled 
with national allocations.  Hence, Japan, Korea, Chines e 
Taipei, China and possibly the USA, all of which take 
more than 3000t per annum, would agree to limit catch es 
to the historical levels together with some other count ries 
involved in the fishery.  The major drawback to catch 
controls of this kind in the WCPO is that they would nee d 
to be self-enforced until trade verification measures coul d 
be formulated. Such controls already exist for trade in  
Bigeye tuna to Japan for other ocean areas and RFMOs. 
Japan is the major market destination for this species. In  
fact, design of such a scheme for the WCPO can be seen 
as almost an obligation in light of the existing simila r 
scheme in place in the EPO. This has led to shifts of eff ort 
into the WCPO and highlights the limitations of measur es 
imposed by single RFMOs. 
 
8.3 Pole-and-line and other minor gear 
 
The pole-and-line fishery catch is dominated by Skipja ck 
tuna with low levels of Yellowfin and Bigeye. Effort in such 
fisheries is generally declining and generally restrictio ns 
on catch and effort have not been imposed by other 
RFMOs.  In any case, restriction on mostly artisanal or 
small-scale commercial gear would be difficult to impose 

 and enforce. It is likely to be best regulated at indivi dual 
coastal state level. 
 
8.4 Impacts 
Table 3 summarizes the options proposed for 
consideration on the basis of modeled projections and 
their possible impacts upon the fisheries. 
 
8.5 Allocation 
 
Under Article 10 of the Convention, the Commission, 
having determined “ the total allowable catch or total level 
of fishing effort within the Convention area , is required to 
develop, “ without prejudice to the sovereign rights of 
coastal States for the purpose of exploring and exploitin g, 
conserving and managing highly migratory fish stocks 
within areas under national jurisdiction”  criteria for the 
allocation of the TAC or total level of fishing effort . This 
must take into account a range of defined pertinent fact ors 
and any other factors that it might consider germane. A ny 
decisions relating to the allocation of TAC or the tot al 
allowable level of fishing effort, given their importa nce, are 
required to be taken by consensus.     
Greenpeace is of the view that, in practice, this is the most 
difficult and challenging issue facing the Commission. It 
will require resolution of a range of matters current ly 
standing unresolved in the Convention on matters of det ail 
e.g. compatibility of conservation and management 
measures. The Commission should begin to tackle the 
allocation question as soon as is possible.     

 Table 3. Suggested management options for the WCPO, with assessm ent of possible 
impacts of their introduction  
Measure Rationale Implementation Fishery impacts Ec onomic 
impacts 
OUTPUT (Catch related)     
Overall TAC on Bigeye Longline catches in the WCPO, with individual 
country allocations for those 
catching more than 3,000t (see schedule); catches by 
others kept to (specify year) 
levels Reductions in Longline catch/effort have large impact on adult biomass 
 Mandatory self-policing combined with trade certification.  Monitoring of high grading etc   Catch of adult Bigeye 
reduced. Bring WCPO in line with similar measures in EPO, to avoid effort displacement (since 
possibly same stock); 
Little impact on coastal states and smaller non-target Longline fisheries Economic impact largely restricted to target species and large Longliners  
Overall TAC on Purse Seine 
Bigeye catches, aimed at 
juveniles  Trigger closure of 
fishery setting 
on floating objects when TAC reached Peg nominal limit at 1999 (or other year ) levels; very high observer coverage needed May only impact in years following low recruitment, and if drifting FAD sets increase  Minor, but may be significant if 
triggered early in a 
given fishing year and TAC is low 
INPUT (Effort related)     
Moratorium on construction of new vessels (large p/s and Longline) for the WCPO; restrict vessel Halt any further increases in WCPO Purse WCPFC decision and basic monitoring; need policy on transfers from other areas, and Will cap total effort and catch initially until fishing power increases (effort Help to secure aspirations of developing states  

 “Immigration” Seine and 
Longline  capacity replacements creep) 
Limit overall Purse Seine capacity (possibly by well volume); apply to vessels >250 GT Overall effort limit  and reduction of 20% needed for both Yellowfin and Bigeye; previous Resolutions Gradual – will need 
capacity documentation; 
decisions on appropriate measure of capacity  Reduce effort, but will 
need constant monitoring  Considerable for some, assuming limit will be set lower than current capacity  
National limits on Purse Seine effort (VDS system)  Limit effort in PNA area (standard days) to 1999-2001 levels, originally) By PNA  countries; fully operational VMS and national capability needed  Reduce effort to previous more acceptable levels, or provide basis to do so Increase value of access Increase costs of fishing 
Limit numbers and  total capacity of Longliners >  specified size eg > 24 m LOA Halt increase in Longline  capacity (and effort )  Vessel register and annual vessel registration  In line with ICCAT and IOTC   
Limit FAD sets per vessel (250 per year) and number of FADs deployed per vessel Reduce Purse 
Seine catch of 
juvenile 
Bigeye (and Yellowfin) Difficult – national responsibility; needs further study Reduce efficiency in some areas; reduce Bigeye catch Increased fishing costs; greater impact in some EEZs than others 

 One month/six week closure 
of Purse Seine fishery  (during 2006) Reduction in effort needed in all fisheries 
 Verification of confinement to port   
Marine Reserve established 
on trial basis Reduce  effort 
in WEP; secure productive habitat; reduce high seas creep (20% of PNA catch) 100% VMS, IUU control 
 
Start with donut; monitor  
then possibly apply to area  further east Possible increase in state revenues  May not be great; effort redistributed and possibly greater catch in adjacent EEZs if no VDS  

9.  Proposed IUU management measures to 
complement effort reduction measures  
 
Several international instruments and initiatives have 
attempted to tackle the issue of IUU fishing globally, 
namely the FAO Compliance Agreement (2002), the UN 
Fish Stocks Agreement (2001) and the International Plan  
of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate IUU Fishing 
(2001). Unfortunately thus far too little progress has been 
made and IUU fishing reportedly continues to rise in so me 
regions.  
 
In the WCPO, PrepCon 3 (2002) adopted a Resolution 14  
relating to IUU fishing and limits on fishing capacity, 
urging state and entities to prevent, deter and elimin ate 
IUU fishing in the Convention area, and to promote 
cooperation in exchanging information on IUU fishing and 
other related activities. Little concrete action seems to 
have occurred on IUU fishing in the WCPO since that 
time.   
 
Greenpeace [8]  recommends five categories of action that 
should be undertaken  “to protect and develop sustainabl e 
fisheries”  
 
• ratify and implement the Compliance and Fish Stocks 
Agreements  
• exert control over port access and marketing of tuna 
products (trade verification) 
                                                 
14   Resolution of the Preparatory Conference relating  to illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, an d 
limits on fishing capacity, November 2002, Manila. 

 • strengthen the WCPFC capacity to take action 
(regional  and global vessel registries, IUU vessel 
blacklist, reduce size of vessels covered by MCS 
regulation, boarding and inspection regulations, 
prohibition of at-sea transhipment) 
• practice good governance at national level 
(comprehensive management plans, appropriate 
legislation enforced  
• inspect and arrest IUU stateless vessels (national-
level action) 
 
Most of these action categories would complement 
proposed effort reduction; others are already embedded in 
some of the management options under consideration e.g.  
prohibition of at-sea transhipment, enhanced MCS 
capability at national and WCPFC level (see later).  
 
10.  Outline and analysis of the Marine Reserves (M R) 
concept in the WCPO 
 
The measures which suggest themselves as a result of 
the various model-based simulations outlined in the 
narrative above can be seen as a relatively complex mix . 
Ultimately, their effectiveness will be determined by t he 
integrity of the model used and crucially by the quali ty of 
the data used to drive the models and the assumptions 
used to constrain them. These are problems common to 
all fisheries managed under a conventional management 
paradigm. Such management is generally not 

 precautionary and rarely departs from single species 
considerations to embrace ecosystems as a whole.  
 
Recognition of the various shortcomings in conventional 
management has led to a growing appreciation of the 
potential positive role of marine reserves in this regar d. 
 
The establishment of globally-linked networks of marine  
reserves - areas where all extractive and destructive 
activities (including fishing) are prohibited - are comin g to 
be seen as crucial to the conservation of marine species 
and habitats, and for preserving ecosystem functions in a n 
undisturbed state. In addition to their primary conserva tion 
function, secondary benefits flow from this in the form  of 
potential protection and enhancement of important 
exploited species.  
 
The concept of marine reserves is also consistent with a 
precautionary approach to environmental protection. In  
general, the functioning and structure of marine 
ecosystems is very poorly understood. These systems are 
not readily amenable to investigation and analysis. 
Accordingly, preservation of significant proportions of 
these ecosystems, as a management strategy in its own 
right, represents adherence to a precautionary 
management and conservation paradigm. Marine 
reserves, then de facto,  constitute an ecosystem-based 
approach consistent with principles and ethics of 
sustainability.  
 

 Nonetheless, designation of an area as a marine reserve 
does not preclude a need to define adequate 
management strategies applied to areas falling outside 
designated marine reserves. The goal is to achieve 
sustainable use of marine resources outside the marine 
reserves network. This implies that these activities must 
conform to principles of sustainability, causing no 
degradation of ecosystem structure and function, and als o 
meet the needs of both current and future generations.  
Hence, marine reserves are a complement to such 
measures (applicable to fishing activities) as reduction in 
fishing effort and capacity, prevention of IUU fishing a nd 
development of non-destructive fishing methods. 
 
Hence, marine reserves comprise one tier of a dual 
approach to ecosystem-based protection efforts and 
associated fisheries management. In this context marine 
reserves have two primary benefits to fisheries 
management which flow directly from their primary ro le in 
the holistic protection of marine ecosystems.  
 
Firstly, marine reserves act as reference areas against 
which the impact of management initiatives executed 
outside the designated areas can be assessed. Secondly, 
they act as a form of insurance against management 
failure, resulting in degradation of the ecosystem in  non-
designated areas. A further benefit to fisheries which may 
flow from marine reserves is enhanced catches beyond 
their boundaries, although this will be most marked wh en 
the non-designated areas are subject to failing 
management and being overfished. This is due to the 

 export of eggs and larvae and the spillover of adult and  
juvenile fish. 
 
While marine reserves cannot directly address the impact 
of climate change, they may help indirectly in as much a s 
healthy marine ecosystems are likely to be more resilien t.  
Marine reserves would also help protect tuna and other 
fisheries from unanticipated effects of climate change by 
providing a robust reference point. 
 
The growing body of marine reserve research, reinforce d 
by the findings of earlier work, formed the basis for a  wide 
ranging consensus statement [21] published at a 
Symposium held at the 2001 annual meeting of the 
American Association for the Advancement of the 
Sciences. This statement identified a number of ecologica l 
effects both inside the reserve boundaries and external  to 
them. 
 
The beneficial effects can be restated as follows: 
 
 1) Within reserve boundaries 
 
a)  Long lasting and rapid increases in abundance, 
diversity and productivity of organisms attributable to 
decreases in mortality, habitat destruction and to 
indirect ecosystem effects 
b)  Reduced probability of extinction of marine speci es 
 
It has been noted that, in general, increasing size confe rs 
increasing benefits, but even small reserves are effective. 

 To achieve a full range of benefits, full protection wi th 
stakeholder involvement and enforcement are required. 
Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) confer lesser benefits. 
 
2) Outside reserve boundaries 
 
a)  The size and abundance of exploited species increase 
in areas adjacent to reserves, although this finding is 
based on relatively few studies. 
b)  Increasing evidence that reserves replenish 
populations regionally through larval export. 
 
3) Effects of reserve networks 
 
a)  Increasing evidence shows that networks of reserves 
are more effective than a single reserve at buffering 
environmental variability and that they provide great er 
protection for marine communities. 
b)  Effective networks must span large geographic 
distances and encompass a substantial area to protect 
against catastrophic events and provide a stable 
ecological "platform" for long-term persistence of mar ine 
communities. 
 
The statement goes on to make it clear that in order to  be 
most effective in a joint role of conserving both fisherie s 
and biodiversity, marine reserves must encompass the full 
diversity of marine habitats, and be operated in the 
context of complementary management tools and a 
monitoring program to define their effectiveness.  It 
concludes that existing scientific information justifies the 

 immediate application of fully protected marine reserv es 
as a central management tool for marine systems. 
 
a) Greenpeace Proposal for a global network of 
marine reserves 
 
Greenpeace [18]  believes that if we are to ensure clean and 
healthy seas and oceans, 40% of each habitat in each 
large marine ecosystem, including the high seas, should 
be set aside as marine reserves. In parallel, the rest of the 
oceans and seas – the other 60% - needs to be managed 
in a sustainable and equitable way.  
 
At the 2006 meeting of the Convention on Biological 
Diversity (CBD), Greenpeace released Roadmap to 
Recovery: a global network of marine reserves 15 .  The 
report presents a proposal for a global network of h igh 
seas marine reserves developed by Professor Callum 
Roberts and his expert team based at York University in 
the UK, and sets out the principles used for designing t he 
network. 
 
b) Marine reserves and highly-migratory species  
 
Almost all the marine reserves that have been established  
so far are small-scale and coastal. These have been 
shown to benefit biodiversity, leading to increases in 
density, biomass, size of individuals and diversity [22] , and 
in many cases have been shown to benefit fisheries in the  
surrounding waters. Common sense, experience and 
                                                 
15   http://oceans.greenpeace.org/en/our-oceans/marine -reserves/roadmap-to-recovery 

 scientific models suggest that marine reserves are likely to 
work best for fish species that are relatively sedentary as 
adults but produce offspring that disperse widely, the 
reserves acting as refugia. 
 
Because of this, it has been widely assumed, in particula r 
by fishery managers, that marine reserves will not pro tect 
migratory species of fish such as tuna. They consider that 
these species will not remain in marine reserves and are 
vulnerable when they move outside. The perception has 
grown that the more migratory a species is, the less 
relevant is the concept of marine reserves to their 
protection and management.  
 
The underlying assumptions behind this perception have 
been examined [23] . A major problem exists with the models 
which are used to predict the impact of marine reserve 
designation. These models have as two key assumptions: 
 
1: that individuals are evenly distributed in a uniform se a  
2: that these individuals move randomly  
 
A third key assumption involved is that  
 
3: fishing activity is conducted at random.  
 
These assumptions are demonstrably false. Migratory 
species are not evenly distributed and fishing effort is n ot 
randomly directed but is most intense where experience  
has revealed migration bottlenecks or habitat critical to a 
particular life stage.  

  
Where exclusively marine migratory species are involved,  
the creation of marine reserves to protect known 
spawning grounds, nursery areas and migration 
bottlenecks, are all likely to confer highly protective 
benefits on the population overall, as well as the 
ecosystems of which they are part.  When the somewhat 
crude predictive models are refined to incorporate a 
spatial variability in a species vulnerability to fishing 
mortality, particularly where this mortality is inten se, then 
clear benefits emerge in the form of both an increased  
spawning stock and catch. [23] 
 
Nonetheless, the precise changes that occur as a result of 
establishing a marine reserve are very difficult to predi ct.   
By establishing large-scale marine reserves there are 
likely to be increases in habitat and ecosystem 
complexity, increases in biomass and enhanced feeding 
opportunities for both prey and predators. Accordingly,  
highly migratory species when encountering such reserve 
areas may spend more time there compared to areas 
outside due to better feeding conditions and, 
consequently, benefit from the protection afforded in the 
reserves [23] . Most of the modeling of potential reserve 
effects has not considered such possible shifts in habitat 
use.      
 
Hence, by taking into account information relating to  the 
critical habitats and the behaviour of migratory specie s it 
should be possible to establish marine reserves that 
benefit these species as a component of pelagic 

 ecosystems, while simultaneously prosecuting a 
sustainable and profitable fishery based upon these 
species.  
 
c) Implementing large-scale marine reserves in the 
WCPO 
 
Although identifying marine reserves that would provide  
the greatest benefit to the tuna in the WCPO is 
challenging, there is information that could greatly a id the 
process, including considerable data relating to the spat ial 
and temporal dynamics of the tuna fisheries. In additio n, 
some data also exists concerning the biology and ecology 
of these species which could prove helpful in defining 
potentail marine reserves.  For example, it might  pro ve 
beneficial to site marine reserves over productive 
seamounts known to aggregate tunas 16 . Some work in this 
area is planned under a forthcoming Global Environment  
Facility (GEF) funded project in the WCPO.  
In the case of Yellowfin tuna,  although spawning  is 
thought to take place over the whole Pacific Ocean, high  
densities of larvae and eggs have been reported in the 
Western Pacific. This includes the Coral Sea, and in the 
Indian Ocean adjoining the North West Shelf area of 
Australia. Catches of Yellowfin tuna increase towards th e 
east in response to El Nino events, although the majority 
of catch is taken in equatorial regions. Tagging studies 
have shown that Yellowfin tuna may move 1000km or 
                                                 
16   Not to be confused with seamounts bottom or midwa ter trawled in some parts of the Pacific   

 more over a twelve-month period, but no directed 
migration has been identified.  [24] 
In the case of Skipjack tuna, although they occur 
throughout the equatorial Pacific, catches are highest in  
the Western Pacific warm pool. This pool is displaced 
under the influence of ENSO variability [25] , and this 
variability in location would need to be taken into a ccount 
when designing a marine reserve network. This species 
[24]  generally aggregates in the area of current 
convergence and boundaries between warm and cold 
water masses, upwelling areas and other areas where 
there are changes in hydrography. Larval distribution 
appears to be governed largely by water temperature 
which must be between 15 0C and 30 0C. The juvenile fish 
occupy the same waters as larvae, but move to cool 
waters as they mature. 
Variation in the occurrence of Bigeye is also related to 
seasonal and climatic changes in surface temperature and 
thermocline and younger fish may aggregate with other  
tuna species at the surface and in the vicinity of floating  
objects. Juveniles have not been reported outside tropical  
waters. Adult fish tend to be solitary. As this species is 
more tolerant of lower water temperature and oxygen 
saturation, it is found generally in deeper waters, up  to 
250m depth [24] . In the case of Bigeye tuna, the greatest 
proportion of the catch appears to be taken by longlini ng 
in the eastern area of the equatorial WCPO. This 
information could be further refined by expanding th e VMS 
currently used to underpin the regulation of the Pur se 
Seine fishery to the longlining fleet. 

 By combining such fisheries data with biological 
information, such as information on migration patterns and 
known spawning areas, it should be possible to identify 
priority areas. One recent study that could help with t his 
process suggests that species diversity for the Pacific was 
positively correlated with climatic variation. This variat ion 
was reflected in changes in Sea Surface Temperature 
(SST), adequate oxygen saturation coupled with 
oceanographic features such as fronts or eddies which 
gave rise to productive feeding areas [26] . 
While it should be possible to identify some key areas that 
could be set aside as large-scale marine reserves by 
combining different sets of existing information, furthe r 
data and research directed at gathering these data is 
necessary. 
 
d) Solving the problem of the “Donut holes” 
 
One pragmatic first step to establishing a network of 
marine reserves in the WCPO, might be for the WCPFC to  
designate those areas of high seas which are completely 
enclosed by EEZs of coastal states, the so-called “donut 
holes”,  as marine reserves.  There are two obvious 
examples - a smaller western area between Palau, FSM, 
PNG and Indonesia (approx.136 0E – 151 0E, lying east-
west, just north of the Equator) and a larger area (1 57 0E 
to 176 0E, lying NW-SE between the equator and 15 0S) 
(see Figure 1). 
 

 Both areas are periodically highly productive and attra ct 
considerable effort and catch 17 , although the smaller area 
seems not to be a high Bigeye catch area, based on 
earlier analyses [10] ; both lie within the WEP, in the PNA 
area and their closure could have a positive effect in 
reducing overall effort and catch for both Longline an d 
Purse Seine fisheries.  Also, designation of these areas as 
marine reserves would be a tool in combating IUU fishing  
which is thought to be rife in these areas.  
 
Comprehensive MCS arrangements would be required for 
the successful implementation of such MRs.  In addition, it  
would be important to gather as much information as 
possible relating to the ecology of these areas and the 
history of the fisheries prosecuted within them, so tha t any 
changes occurring can be effectively monitored.   
 
Initially agreeing to set one of these areas aside as a 
marine reserve for a few years on an experimental basis 
might be the best way of gaining support for the conce pt. 
 
11. Assessment of MR models and an appropriate 
model for the WCPO  
As noted, there seems to be few examples of extensive 
time/area closures as management options in tuna 
fisheries, let alone permanent no-take areas the 
equivalent of marine reserves. The IATTC, in the EPO, 
                                                 
17   The estimated catch in international waters by th e Purse Seine fleets fishing in the WCPO (excluding  the 
Philippines domestic fleet) was around 19% for the period 1996-2003 

 closed an area 18  in December 2003 to all Purse Seine 
fishing for tuna. This was an area, mostly high seas, 
where catches of juvenile Bigeye had been higher than 
average, and where Yellowfin catches were also high. The  
RFMO closed the Purse Seine fishery for the entire EPO 
for six weeks in August-September in 2004.  This 
Resolution was replaced in 2005 19  by a requirement that 
Purse Seine vessels of each party or entity cease fishing 
in the EPO for six weeks during one of two periods 
(August/September or November/December) in each of 
the years 2004, 2005 and 2006. The effects of those 
closures were to be analyzed and assessed in 2005 and 
2006 by the IATTC Scientific Working Group.  Apart fro m 
limited time area/closures associated with restrictions on 
fishing floating objects e.g. ICCAT, IATTC – see earlie r, 
there appear to be no other examples of time/area 
closures in tuna fisheries which might be evaluated for 
their applicability to the WCPO situation. 
Accordingly, Greenpeace suggests that much valuable 
data could be gathered through closing the 
Palau/FSM/PNG/Indonesia donut hole and the other 
defined area, provided the necessary monitoring and 
enforcement arrangements were in place at WCPFC. This 
is, therefore, suggested for trial at the earliest possi ble 
opportunity.    
                                                 
18   IATTC Resolution on the conservation of tuna in t he EPO (C-03-12) 
19   IATTC Resolution for a multi-year program on the conservation of tuna in the EPO for 2004, 2005 and 
2006 (C-04-09)  

 12. Other options  
No other options are considered at this point. The WCP FC 
will need, however, to work cooperatively with the IA TTC 
on several issues:  
 
• In order to manage north Pacific Albacore throughout  
the range of the stock, to implement the recent 
Resolution 20  calling for “measures to ensure that fishing 
effort on the stock in the WCPFC area does not 
increase, and as necessary, measures to reduce fishing 
effort to levels commensurate with the long-term 
sustainability of the stock”.  
• Compatibility between any management measures for 
Bigeye tuna introduced in the EPO and WCPO. 
•  Cooperation in data collection and management of 
particularly of that area in which there is overlap 21  in 
areas of competence of the two RFMOs. 
 
 Conservation and management options relating to non-
target species will need to be considered in the near 
future, as requested by the Commission for the second 
session later this year e.g. cooperation in the conservati on 
of sharks caught in association with tuna fisheries. These 
are likely to be shared stocks between the WCPO and 
EPO in many cases 22 .      
 
                                                 
20   IATTC Resolution on northern Albacore tuna (C-05- 02) 
21   An area between 150 0W and 130 0W, and 4 0S and 60 0S. 
22   IATTC Resolution on the Conservation of sharks ca ught in association with fisheries in the EPO (C-05 -
03) 

 13. Recommendations to the Commission  
 
The Commission is committed to adopting, at WCPFC 2 23 , 
conservation and management measures necessary to 
address sustainability concerns, based on advice from the 
Scientific Committee, the Technical and Compliance 
Committee and any information provided by members at 
least 30 days in advance of the second annual session, in 
December 2005. 
 
“Such measures may include, inter alia: 
(a) catch and effort limits 
(b) capacity limits for large–scale fishing vessels 
(c) measures to address impacts of large-scale 
fishing vessels so as to ensure compatibility between 
measures applied outside areas of national 
jurisdiction and measures being applied by coastal 
states to manage such vessels within their zones 
(d) time and area closures, and  
(e) mitigation measures to address the mortality of 
non-target species, eg seabirds, turtles and sharks. 
In accordance with Art.6 of the Convention, the 
precautionary approach will be applied and the absence 
of adequate scientific information shall not be used as a 
reason for postponing or failing to take conservation 
and management measures.” 
 
The current document focuses primarily on measures (a), 
(b) (c) and (d) at this time.  
                                                 
23   Resolution on conservation and management measure s. WCPFC/Comm.1/8, Annex II 

  
Noting that overfishing is occurring on both Yellowfin a nd 
Bigeye tuna, Greenpeace believes that WCPO resources 
may be in overfished state, given the range of 
uncertainties that pertain to the present assessments, and 
the extent to which IUU fishing may be occurring. 
Measures to rebuild the stock are not yet under 
discussion, but should be anticipated.  Such measures 
must accord with a precautionary approach, particularly 
since capacity and the catch of most species in the 
WCPO continue to grow. It should be noted that recent 
levels of recruitment have been relatively high for 
Skipjack, Yellowfin and Bigeye, and some projections 
predict much less optimistic views of the stocks at long 
term average levels of recruitment.    
 
As noted, it will be some time before the WCPFC is ful ly 
operational and effective, in terms of tackling 
management and conservation issues. These include the 
development of allocation criteria leading to national  
allocations, and comprehensive MCS arrangements 
(including regional observer and VMS programs). Against  
this background, in the short term, it probably falls on  
coastal states, acting individually or in concert, to app ly 
interim management measures at the national level, 
possibly within the framework of national tuna 
management plans. 
 

Greenpeace calls for the following as major 
recommendations to the WCPFC at its second session, in 
terms of the adoption of conservation and management 
measures:    
 
(1)  The immediate establishment of a marine reserve in 
an enclosed high seas area bound by Palau, FSM, PNG 
and Indonesia, and a commitment  to establishing a 
second fully-protected marine reserve to the east in the 
future. 
 
(2)  Establishment of management objectives of the 
WCPO fishery, based initially on Annex 2 of the UN Fi sh 
Stocks Agreement.  
 
(3) An immediate moratorium on the construction of new  
large Purse Seine (Super Seiner & Super Super Seiner ) 
and large Longline vessels intended to fish in the WCPO,  
and controls on the relocation/deployment of such vessels 
from other areas. 
 
(4) The WCPFC undertakes a study of the capacity of 
large Purse Seine and Longline vessels active in the 
WCPO, leading in the short term to the introduction o f 
overall limits on vessel numbers. Also, development of a 
suitable measure of capacity (Purse Seine and Longline) 
to facilitate the orderly management of fleet capacit y in the 
WCPO, including clear definition of vessel categories e.g.  
“large scale”. From a conventional fisheries perspective, 
this study is critical to determining the level of capacit y 
available in the region and more importantly what 

 “capacity” the region’s fish stocks can sustain.  From 
Greenpeace’s perspective, however, we take the view that 
Super Super Seiners should not be allowed to operate in 
the region given their huge capacity.   
 
(5)  Large uncertainties are inherent in the models use d to 
produce assessments and forecasts for tuna fisheries in 
the WCPO. These relate to  input data quality  toget her 
with substantial indeterminacies in data relating to ef fort, 
catch and  IUU fishing, as well as to factors such as 
recruitment and the influence of climate change. 
Greenpeace believes that basing management upon MSY 
target reference points is not sufficiently precautionar y.  
Accordingly, Greenpeace regards the 20% effort reduction  
figure suggested from modeling as an absolute bare 
minimum requirement. To assure future sustainability o f 
fisheries in the region this figure should be set at 50% . 
 
(6)  The WCPFC should apply a Longline Total Allowa ble 
Catch (TAC) for Bigeye, based on lower catch levels from  
an earlier time period, with allocations/quotas for cou ntries 
or entities taking a large amount of catch (e.g. more t han 
3,000t). The restriction of catches by other nations to 
catches at that earlier time should also be enforced. Thi s 
measure should be introduced in conjunction with a trad e 
certification/verification system for Bigeye, as used by 
other Regional Fisheries Management Organisations 
(RFMOs). 
 
(7)  Immediate prohibition of at-sea transhipment, wi th 
such transhipment to occur only at designated ports, as 

 provided for in the Convention and to be implemented  by 
the Commission. 
 
(8)  Implementation of the following series of measure s to 
reduce IUU fishing in the WCPO, as proposed by 
Greenpeace: ratify and implement the Compliance and 
Fish Stocks Agreements; exert control over port access 
and marketing of tuna products (trade verification); 
strengthen the WCPFC capacity to take action (regional  
and global vessel registries, IUU vessel blacklist, reduce 
size of vessels covered by Monitoring, Control and 
Surveillance (MCS) regulation, boarding and inspection 
regulations, prohibition of at-sea transhipment);practi ce 
good governance at national level (comprehensive 
management  plans, appropriate legislation enforced);  
inspect and arrest IUU stateless vessels (national-level 
action). 
 
(9)   That the Commission  commence work on the 
development of criteria for the allocation of TAC and  Total 
Allowable Effort (TAE), as provided for by the Conven tion.  
 
(10)   Additional research must be carried out to red uce 
uncertainty and indeterminacy attached to key 
parameters/assumptions and model structure of the 
present MF-CL models. 
 
 
 
 
 

 References 
1 Williams, P. and Reid, (2005) Overview of tuna fisherie s 
in the WCPO, including economic conditions – 2004. 
WCPFC-SC1, GN – WP 1 
2 Lawson, T.A. and P. Williams (2005) Estimates of annua l 
catches in the WPCFC Convention Area. WCPFC-SC 1, 
ST-IP 1. 
 3 Greenpeace (2005) Position paper on the conservation 
and management of highly migratory fish stocks in the 
WCPO. WCPFC-SC1, GN IP-8 
4 Molony, B. (2005) Estimates of the mortality of non-
target species with an initial focus on seabirds, turtles and 
sharks. WCPFC- SC 1, EB WP-1 
5 Interim Secretariat  of the Preparatory Conference (2004) 
Management Options for Bigeye and     Yellowfin Tuna  in 
the WCPO. WCPFC/PrepCon/ WP 24, April 2004 
6 Hampton et al. (2005) Estimates of sustainable catch 
and effort levels for target species and the impacts on 
stocks of potential management measures. WCPFC-SC1, 
SA WP 10. 
7 Rodwell, L. (2004) FFA initiatives related to the Pal au 
Arrangement, Purse Seine management and the 
management of Bigeye fishing mortality in the WCPO,.  
SCTB 17, WP FTWG -6 
8 Lawson, T. (2005) Status of data collection, compilatio n 
and dissemination. WCPFC – SC1, ST – WP 1.  
9 Lawson, T. (2005) Update on the proportion of Bigey e in 
“Bigeye plus Yellowfin” caught by Purse Seiners in the 
WCPO. WCPFC – SC1, ST – WP 3. 
10 Reid et al. (2005) An analysis of the fishing capacity of 
the global Purse Seine fleet. In Management of tuna 

 fishing capacity; conservation and spice-economics FAO, 
Rome 
12 Miyake, P. (2005) A review of the fishing capacity of t he 
Longline fleets of the world. In 
12  Joseph, J. (2005) Past developments and future options 
for managing tuna fishing capacity, with special emphas is 
on tuna Purse Seine fleets. WCPFC-SC1, FT IP-5 (taken 
from Management of tuna fishing capacity; conservation 
and socio-economics. FAO, Rome. 
13 Gillett, R and A. Lewis (2003) A survey of Purse Seine 
fishing capacity in the WCPO, 198-2003. Admin Rept. AR -
PIR-03-04, US Dept of Commerce, NOAA.  
14 Reid et al. (2003) An analysis of fishing capacity in the 
WCPO and management implications. Marine Policy 
27(6): 449-469 
15 Richards, A.H. (2003) Fisheries monitoring, control and  
surveillance in the WCPO region. Report 03-25  
16 Lewis, A.D. (1995)  Distant water fishing nation (DWFN) 
activity in the Philippines EEZ – a review. Desk study 
undertaken for the Philippines Tuna Research Project 
(PTRP). 29p. 
17 Greenpeace (2004) Pirates of the Pacific; Loopholes 
and solutions in the fight against illegal, unreported  and 
unregulated fishing in the Pacific. Greenpeace Austra lia 
Pacific, June 2004 
18 Greenpeace (2005) Ecological criteria for the 
identification of potential marine reserves. 
August 2005 manifesto. 
19  SPC (2002) Overview of Bigeye in WCPO tuna 
fisheries. ABY WG of the FFC, WP 1.1.  

 20 SPC (2002) A comparison of management regimes 
applied to fisheries taking Bigeye tuna in four oceanic 
regions. ABY Species Working Group, 4 th  meeting, 
Rarotonga, Cook Is. May 2002 
21 Scientific Consensus Statement on Marine Reserves 
and Marine Protected Areas. Symposium on Marine 
Protected Areas. Annual Meeting of  the American 
Association for the Advancement of the Sciences. Publ. 
National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis, 
University  of California at Santa Barbara. 12pp 
http://www.nceas.ucsb.edu/Consensus/consensus.pdf  
22 Halpern, B.S. (2003). The impact of marine reserve s: 
do reserves work and does reserve size matter? 
Ecological Applications 13 (1): 117-137 
23 Roberts C. M. and Sargant H. 2002.  Fishery benefi ts 
of fully protected marine reserves: why habitat and 
behaviour are important.  Natural Resource Modeling. 
Volume 15, No. 4 Winter 2002 
24 Myers, R.A. & Worm, B. (2005) Extinction, survival or  
recovery of large predatory fishes. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society  Series B 360: 13-20.  
25 Froese, R. and D. Pauly. Editors. 2005.FishBase. 
World Wide Web electronic publication. 
www.fishbase.org, version (09/2005) 
26 Lehodey, P., Bertignac, M., Hampton, J., Lewis, A.,  
Picaut, J., (1997) El Niño Southern Oscillation and tun a in 
the western Pacific. Nature 389: 716-718. 
 

Appendix Figure 1.  Features of the WCPO Yellowfin 
fishery  
                                                                           (from Williams and Reid, 2005)  
 
         
 WCP -CA  
Yellowfin 
catch by gear  
Distribution of yellowfin tuna 
catch, 1990-2003 
Annual 
yellowfin 
tuna catch 
by gear 
type, 2003. 
Numbers 
(left) and 
weight  
Green – Indo/Phils, red – p/s assoc, yellow – p/s unassoc, blue  - longline  

 Appendix Figure 2.  Features of the WCPO Bigeye 
fishery 
     (from Williams and Reid, 2005) 
    
 
 
  
 
 WCP -CA b igeye 
catch, by gear. 
1972 -2004  
2003 catch of 
bigeye by 
length (left) 
and weight 
Green – Indo/Phils, red - p/s assoc sets,  blue – longline  Distribution of 
bigeye tuna catch, 
1990 -2003  

 Appendix Figure 3.  Features of the WCPO Skipjack 
fishery   
    (from Williams and Reid, 2005)  
 
  
   
 
  
  
 
 
 WCP -CA 
skipjack 
catch by gear 
Distribution of 
skipjack tuna 
catch, 1990 -2003 
2003 
skipjack 
catch by 
length 
(left)  and 
weight  
Green – Indo/Phils, red – p/s assoc, yellow – p/s unassoc, blue – pole -and -line