# Archivo original: genetically-engineered-fish-2.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:01 -03 2025

geneticall y engineered fish – new threats to theenvironmentGENETICALLY ENGINEERED FISH
– NEW THREATS TO THE ENVIRONMENT
REPORT 2004 fish
report |  worldwide  |  issue genetic engineering

2|  GE FISH REPORTsummary 3
introduction 4
I GENETIC ENGINEERING OF FISH – CRUDE SCIENCE 6
II FAST GROWING, UNHEALTHY GE FISH 6
IIICURRENT PROBLEMS WITH AQUACULTURE 7
i fish escape from fish farms 7
IV POTENTIAL ECOLOGICAL IMPACTS OF GE FISH 8
i impacts on native fish populations 9
iiunexpected effects and trojan genes 9
iii sterilisation will not be 100 % effective 11
V NO! TO THE COMMERCIALISATION OF GE FISH 12
iwidespread opposition to the commercial 
development of GE fish 13
conclusion 14
references 15GENETICALLY ENGINEERED FISH
– NEW THREATS TO THE ENVIRONMENT
PUBLISHED OCTOBER 2004 fish
published by Greenpeace International October 2004
date July 2004
author Luke Anderson 
Greenpeace Genetic Engineering Campaign
editor Dr Janet Cotter
design &layout Tania Dunster , kÏ design,The Netherlands
printing Primaveraquint,The Netherlands
contact person isabelle.meister@int.greenpeace.org© GP/NEWMAN
Luke Anderson 
Author of Genetic Engineering, Food and Our Environment (1999). Since
1997 he has worked with environmental, farming and social justice groupsaround the world as an advisor on genetic engineering and related issues.He can be reached at luke@geaction.org

GE FISH REPORT |  3summary
This briefing examines the development of genetically engineered (GE)
fish, which could soon be produced on a commercial scale.
There are many GE fish under development, often engineered with growth
hormones to make the GE fish grow faster enabling them to reachmarketable size at an earlier age.
*There are numerous concerns over the welfare and environmental impact
of these unhealthy, fast growing fish.
*The techniques of producing GE fish are crude, and generally involve the
random insertion of DNA into the fish genome.This process may disruptthe tightly controlled network of DNA in the fish.
Current understanding of the way in which genes are regulated is
extremely limited, and any change to the DNA of an organism at any pointmay well have effects that are impossible to predict or control.There is already concern regarding environmental effects, human health
impacts and welfare of intensive fish farming in aquaculture. Fish areknown to escape frequently from aquaculture facilities, which can theninterbreed with, or displace, native fish populations.There is a highpotential for ecological disruption should GE fish escape from aquaculturefacilities. Fast growing GE fish could compete for food, disrupting aquaticfood webs and ecosystems.
*Researchers have shown that GE fish with a growth hormone gene could
have a mating advantage due to their increased size. An experimentalstudy was developed (called the ‘Trojan gene’ model), whichdemonstrated that the release of just 60 GE fish could lead to anextinction of a wild population within only 40 generations.
*Contrary to industry claims, sterilisation of GE fish will not be 100 %
effective in a commercial situation, and will not prevent allcrossbreeding between GE fish and wild fish.
There is widespread opposition to the farming of GE fish in aquaculture
facilities, the most economically profitable method of rearing farmed fish.Several governments and intergovernmental organisations have alreadytaken steps to ensure that any GE fish (e.g. for scientific researchpurposes) are kept in secure, land-based facilities.
However , escaped GE fish will not respect national boundaries, GE fish
must be considered as global releases by the multilateral environmentalagreement, the UN Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety.
*In a commercial aquaculture situation, the physical containment of
these fish can never be guaranteed. Escapes of GE fish into the aquaticenvironment could have devastating effects on wild fish populations andbiodiversity.
Therefore, Greenpeace demands that the genetic engineering of fish
for commercial purposes should be prohibited.
© MCALLISTER/GP

4|  GE FISH REPORTintroduction
Greenpeace first published a report in 2000 on
the hazards of genetically engineered fish.1This
report is an update, presenting the newscientific findings on threats to the environmentof genetically engineered fish.
The first genetically engineered (GE), also
called genetically modified (GM) or transgenic,fish was reported in China in 1985. Since then,experiments have been conducted with over 35different kinds of GE fish in about 50laboratories around the world.
2Most of the fish
being engineered are varieties important to theaquaculture industry, such as salmon, carp,trout, catfish, and tilapia. Genes introduced intoGE fish have come from a wide range ofsources, including other fish, chickens, humans,cattle and rats.Some GE fish are used in laboratory research(e.g. for the study of gene regulation andfunction) and some have been developed as‘drug factories’, their bodies engineered tocontain products that are useful to thepharmaceutical industry. However, much of
the research into GE fish has focused on thedevelopment of traits such as rapid growththat are valued by companies involved inintensive fish farming.GENETICALLY ENGINEERED FISH
– NEW THREATS TO THE ENVIRONMENT
INTRODUCTION fish
© GP© GP

GE FISH REPORT |  5*OTHER FISH THAT HAVE BEEN GE INCLUDE ARCTIC CHAR ,AFRICAN
CATFISH ,INDIAN CATFISH ,BLUNTNOSE BREAM ,BROWN TROUT ,
GILTHEAD BREAM ,BLACKHEAD BREAM ,WUCHANG BREAM ,CHINOOK
SALMON ,COHO SALMON ,KILLIFISH ,LARGEMOUTH BASS ,JAPANESE
MEDAKA ,MUD CARP ,MUMMICHOG ,SILVER CRUCIAN CARP ,RED
CRUCIAN CARP ,LOACH ,NORTHERN PIKE ,PENAEID SHRIMP ,SEA
BREAM ,STRIPED BASS AND WALLEYE .4** COUNTRIES WITH LABORATORIES INVOLVED IN GE FISH
RESEARCH BETWEEN 1996-2003 INCLUDE THE UNITED STATES ,
CANADA ,CUBA,INDIA ,SINGAPORE ,SOUTH KOREA ,JAPAN ,CHINA ,
ISRAEL ,SCOTLAND ,ENGLAND ,FINLAND ,THE NETHERLANDS ,
HUNGARY ,NEW ZEALAND AND TAIWAN .5TABLE 1:EXAMPLES OF GE FISH BEING DEVELOPED3
SPECIES *
atlantic salmon
rainbow trout
goldfishtilapia
tilapiatilapia
salmon
zebra fish
channel catfish
striped bass
mud loach
common carp
grass carp
indian major carpsabaloneoysterFOREIGN GENE
Antifreeze promoter gene from ocean pout,
growth hormone gene from chinook salmon
Growth hormone gene from sockeye salmonAntifreeze gene Human gene for clotting factor VII
Tilapia growth hormone gene and promoter
sequence from human cytomegalovirus
Modified tilapia insulin-producing geneLysosome gene from rainbow trout and
pleurocidin gene from flounder
Green fluorescing protein gene from jellyfish,
red fluorescing protein gene taken fromDiscosoma (Indo Pacific relative of seaanemones and coral)
Growth hormone gene from salmon, cecropin
genes from moth
Insect genesMud loach growth hormone gene, promoter
genes from mud loach and mouse
Growth hormone genes from salmon and human
Human interferon gene
Human growth hormone geneGrowth hormone gene from coho salmonGrowth hormone gene from coho salmonDESIRED EFFECT
Increased growth and feed efficiency
Increased growth and feed efficiency
Cold toleranceProduction of clotting factor for
pharmaceutical production
Increased growth
Production of human insulin 
Disease resistance
The GloFish are marketed as pets 
and designed to glow in fish tanks
Increased growth, non-specific bacterial
immunity
Disease resistanceIncreased growth and feed efficiency;
2 to 30-fold increase in growth
150% growth improvement in culture
conditions, improved disease resistance,tolerance of low oxygen level
Disease resistanceIncreased growthIncreased growthIncreased growthCOUNTRY **
United States, Canada
United States, Canada
China, CanadaUnited States,
United Kingdom
Cuba
Canada
United States, Canada
Singapore. Sold
commercially as petsin United States andTaiwan
United States
United States
China
China, United States
China
IndiaUnited StatesUnited States

GENETICALLY ENGINEERED FISH
– NEW THREATS TO THE ENVIRONMENT fish
6|  GE FISH REPORTIGENETIC ENGINEERING OF FISH – CRUDE SCIENCE
There are several ways of producing GE fish, all of which are crude and
can lead to unexpected and unintended effects. One way to make GE fishis by genetically altering the sperm of male fish.There are a number ofmethods to do this, including:
*Attaching the new genes to viruses which then ‘smuggle’ these genes into
the sperm,
*Using an electric shock to create pores in the sperms’ cell membrane,
and then introducing the genes into the sperm.
6
However , by far the most commonly employed method used to engineer
fish is by microinjection,7where:
*Scientists make billions of copies of the DNA that they want to end up
in the GE fish by inserting the genes into a piece of DNA called aplasmid that can be reproduced inside bacteria in the laboratory.
*The genes are then isolated and millions of copies are injected with a
very fine needle into fertilised fish eggs as soon as possible afterfertilisation (usually at the one or two cell stage). A piece of DNAcalled a ‘promoter’ is also inserted along with the ‘new’ gene in order to‘switch it on’ in its new host. Promoters, that often force genes toexpress their traits at very high levels, also have the potential toinfluence other genes in the organism.
8
*Some of these eggs will have successfully incorporated the new genes,
and some of the fish that hatch will therefore be GE. As it is notpossible to insert a new gene with any accuracy, the gene transfer mayalso disrupt the tightly controlled network of DNA in the fish. Currentunderstanding of the way in which genes are regulated is extremelylimited, and any change to the DNA of an organism at any point maywell have effects that are impossible to predict or control.The new genecould, for example, alter chemical reactions within the cell or disturbcell functions.This could lead to changes in behaviour , instability, andthe creation of novel substances in the fish such as new toxins orallergens or changes in nutritional value.
9An example of unexpected effects in GE fish:
When GE coho salmon were compared to a control group of non-GE coho
salmon, it was found that the genetic engineering process had affected theactivity of a number of non-target genes in the GE fish.These changesincluded an increased amount of the protein parvalbumin-b in the GEsalmon, a protein that has been identified as a major food allergen in fish.
11
For further examples of unexpected effects in GE fish, see Section iv ii“Unexpected effects and Trojan genes”.
IIFAST GROWING, UNHEALTHY GE FISH
Most aquaculture-related research on GE fish has focused on increasingthe growth rates of farmed fish so that they reach marketable size morequickly.
12Growth hormone genes taken from humans, other mammals or
fish have been engineered into at least 15 species of fish.13
*In one experiment, Atlantic salmon were engineered with growth
hormones to enable them to reach adult size more quickly. After oneyear , most had a two- to six-fold increase in growth, whilst the largestwas 13 times normal size for its age.
14
*A company called Aqua Bounty Farms (a division of A/F Protein) is
currently seeking approval in the United States to commercialise a GEAtlantic salmon.This salmon has been engineered with an extra gene forgrowth hormone production taken from a chinook salmon and a‘promoter’ gene which forces the salmon to produce high levels of thegrowth hormone all year round.This means that instead of only growingduring the spring and summer months, the GE salmon grows constantly,reaching adult size in about 18 months.This compares to 24-30 monthsfor a non-GE salmon.
15
*One study noted that when growth hormone is engineered into salmon,
“the endocrine stimulation can be elevated to pathological levels insome cases”, such as abnormally enlarged skulls in the GE fish, leadingto difficulty in respiration and feeding.
16Other studies have reported
that GE carp have suffered from similar abnormalities.17
In summary, forced expression of the growth hormone in GE fishraises a number of animal welfare concerns.

© GP/NEWMAN
© GP/MCALLISTER
GE FISH REPORT |  7IIICURRENT PROBLEMS WITH AQUACULTURE
GE fish are to be introduced within the context of intensive fish farming. In
order to begin to understand the hazards and risks posed by GE fish, it isfirst necessary to examine the many problems that already exist withincurrent aquaculture systems.
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
global demand for seafood may double by 2040.
18With wild fisheries
suffering major declines due to over-fishing and habitat destruction, it iswidely suggested that the projected shortfalls in fish supply will be met byexpansion within the aquaculture sector .
19
Since 1987, global aquaculture production has more than doubled. By1995, it accounted for 18.5% of the total world seafood supply.
20More
than 160 species of finfish and shellfish are currently farmed, includingcatfish, trout, salmon, tilapia, oysters, crayfish, clams and shrimp.
21
Aquaculture has a long history – fish farming has been integrated intodiverse sustainable farming practices in Asia for at least 2000 years.Modern intensive aquaculture operations, however , are often grosslyinefficient, damaging to the environment and raise many welfare concerns.
One of the first kinds of GE fish expected to reach commercial approval is
salmon.
In salmon farming:
*The fish are kept in net pens, which are tethered in coastal waters.The
fish are so densely stocked that ideal conditions are created for disease.
These diseases race rapidly through the crowded fish pens, and in orderfor the salmon to survive they are fed antibiotics, and dosed withpesticides.The pesticides, uneaten feed and wastes from the fishsmother and pollute the sea floor beneath the fish farms, affectingbottom dwelling organisms.
22
*The salmon often incubate sea lice and other parasites, which then
spread to wild salmon populations. In Norway, parasites from fish farmswere so devastating to wild fish that the government made the decisionto poison all aquatic life in dozens of rivers and streams in the hopethat disease-free populations could then be restored.
23*Farmed salmon are fed synthetic pigments in order to give their flesh
the pink colour normally associated with salmon. Without this pigment,the flesh of these salmon would be an unhealthy looking pale grey.
24
*Farmed salmon accumulate cancer-causing chemicals in their bodies
called polychlorinated biphenols (PCBs) from the fishmeal they are fed.On average, farmed salmon have 16 times the PCBs found in wildsalmon. PCBs not only cause cancer but also present other health risksas well.These include neurodevelopmental risks to unborn children frommaternal consumption of PCB-contaminated fish.
25
It is often suggested that fish farming will compensate for the collapse ofwild fisheries and is a means to provide more animal protein to hungrypeople. Most intensive fish farming operations are, however , extremelyinefficient and require more protein in the form of fishmeal to feed thefarmed fish than is supplied by the end harvest.The fishmeal is commonlymade with wild-caught fish such as anchovy, jack mackerel, pilchard,capelin, menhaden, herring, and sardines.
*It can take three to five pounds of fishmeal to produce a single pound of
farmed salmon.
26
In summary, modern intensive aquaculture operations are often grossly
inefficient, damaging to the environment, and raise animal welfare concerns.
ifish escape from fish farms
In commercial aquaculture, fish are farmed in pens in contact with aquatic
systems for practical and economic reasons. However , fish frequently escapein large numbers from fish farms.These escapes can occur due to humanaccidents, harsh weather conditions or because of predators such as sealstearing holes in the net pens and cages the fish are kept in.
*In 1988, a storm tore apart the moorings and nets of hundreds of sea
pens along the Norwegian coast, allowing a million farmed salmon to
escape.
27Between 1992-1996, losses of salmon from fish farms in
Norway averaged 1.3 million a year .28As a result of incidents such as
these, in some parts of the country escaped fish that have bred andformed their own populations outnumber wild ones by five to one.
29

8|  GE FISH REPORTGENETICALLY ENGINEERED FISH
– NEW THREATS TO THE ENVIRONMENT fish
© GP/NOVIS
*Between 1994 and 1996, at least 120,000 salmon escaped from fish
farms in British Columbia. About 20,000 of them escaped from a
tanker truck spill on Vancouver Island.30
*From 1996 to 2000, almost 600,000 Atlantic salmon escaped from the
net pens in Washington State waters.There is evidence that Atlanticsalmon that have escaped from Washington or British Columbia fish farmsare beginning to establish a breeding population off Vancouver Island.
31
*During 1999, 255,000 salmon escaped from Scottish fish farms.32
*A storm in December 2000 caused steel cages containing salmon to buckle in
Machias Bay in the US state of Maine, leading to the escape of 100,000 fish.33
*In the Magaguadavic River in New Brunswick, Canada, the number of
farmed fish entering the river between 1992 and 1999 was two to eighttimes that of the wild salmon returning to the same river to spawn.
34
Farmed salmon are genetically very uniform, bred to the needs of theindustry with traits such as rapid growth or high tolerance to the crowdedconditions in the fish farms. Wild salmon populations, on the other hand,are genetically diverse and “highly adapted to the specific conditions ofthe local river systems to which they return to spawn”.
35
Interbreeding between wild salmon and those that escape from farmsalters the genetic makeup of the wild salmon populations.
*There is evidence that escaped Atlantic salmon are beginning to establish a
breeding population in the Pacific, off Vancouver Island in Canada.There is
much concern that these Atlantic salmon may compete for food andhabitat with the fragile populations of Pacific salmon, many of which havealready been listed under the Endangered Species Act.
36The Washington
State Hearings Board in the northwestern US has ruled that Atlanticsalmon that escape from fish farms should be classified as a “pollutant”.
37
*In Maine, on the Atlantic coast of the US, Atlantic salmon have been
listed under the Endangered Species Act. It is estimated that only 500Atlantic salmon with a truly native genetic makeup remain in the wild.Escapes of farmed salmon pose a major threat to the recovery of thesegenetically distinct wild salmon.
38
In summary, fish regularly escape from commercial aquaculturefacilities and can threaten native fish populations.IVPOTENTIAL ECOLOGICAL IMPACTS OF GE FISH
“For more than half a century theoretical biologists have been developing
ideas about biological networks and hierarchies and applying them to our
knowledge of molecular genetics. The task of assessing the environmental
impact of a genetically engineered organism is to understand what effect,
no matter how small, the genetic modification has had on every one of the
characteristics relevant to the organism's interactions with members of
other species (as well as the physical environment); and then to predict all
of the resultant effects that may occur in the organism's ecological
network. With our current, very sketchy knowledge of how complex
networks behave, it is impossible to carry out this task in a satisfactory way.
Our understanding of ecological networks and their evolution is insufficient
for any meaningful assessment of the impacts of artificial genetic change
accomplished by genetic engineering.” Dr. Peter Wills, theoretical biologist.39
When examining the potential ecological consequences of the release of a GEfish, it is important to keep in mind that the complexity and dynamic behaviourof biological systems means that there are fundamental limitations inherent inany risk assessment.
40It is possible to make an evaluation of the behaviour of a
GE fish based on any new traits it may have (e.g. engineered cold toleranceincreasing the geographic range of GE fish, leading to possible invasion of anyescaped fish into new ecosystems). However , experience shows us that the mostdevastating ecological consequences can often be completely unexpected.
For example:
*The intentional introduction of the myxoma virus (causing myxomatosis) to
control rabbit populations in England is one such example. As desired by
those introducing it, the myxoma virus caused a dramatic decline in rabbitpopulations. However , it also led to a surge in the abundance of aparticular species of grass on which the rabbits previously grazed. Anotherpreviously dominant species of grass was unable to compete and declinedsubstantially, g iving rise to a shor tage of nesting material for a certain
variety of ant.This, in turn, triggered the extinction of the alreadyendangered Large Blue butterfly 
(Maculina arion) due to a symbiotic
relationship between the ant and the butterfly.41
In summary, ecological networks are complex and poorly understood.Therefore, the ecological impact of any escapes of GE fish cannot befully taken into account by risk assessment; the precautionaryprinciple must be applied.
42

GE FISH REPORT |  9iimpacts on native fish populations
Escaped GE fish will probably be able to travel over considerable distances
and may have novel traits that have never previously existed within aparticular ecosystem. Characteristics such as increased rates of growth,cold tolerance or faster breeding cycles could give GE fish a competitiveadvantage over native fish and potentially lead to the displacement ofnative fish populations. In many cases, they may disrupt ecological systemsin some or all of the same ways as non-native species that have beenintroduced into new habitats.
43
*In 1954, the British colonial administration in Uganda first introduced Nile
perch into Lake Victoria, with the intention to increase fish production.Within 30 years the carnivorous perch, which can grow up to 6 feet inlength, had decimated the indigenous fish populations, leading to theextinction of 50% of the over 400 different species of small fish in thelake. With the loss of so many species of algae-eating fish, the waters ofLake Victoria are now frequently choked with algal blooms and oxygenlevels are seriously depleted. Several species of insect, which were oncekept under control by fish now gone from the lake, breed in unprecedentednumbers. Also, unlike the native fish, the Nile perch do not dry well in thesun, and the wood fires needed to dry the Nile perch have increased therate of deforestation and consequent erosion of the lake’s shoreline.
44
*Forty-four native species of fish in the United States are currently
threatened or endangered by non-indigenous fish.These introduced fishhave had far reaching impacts on the ecology of aquatic ecosystems andhave competed with native fish for food, shelter , mates, habitat andbreeding sites.
45In Florida, for example, blue tilapia escaped from two
aquaculture facilities and have since become established in EvergladesNational Park and other waterways. In a number of streams where thesefish have become abundant, almost all vegetation and native fish specieshave disappeared.
46
*The European zebra mussel has spread into most freshwater habitats in the
eastern United States, having arrived in the Great Lakes via ballast waterreleased from ships that travelled from Europe. Zebra mussels competedirectly with native mussels, clams, and snails, and reduce food and oxygenfor native fauna.
47The invasive mussels also clog water intake pipes and
water filtration and electric generating plants, with an estimated US$3billion a year spent on control and cleaning measures.
48COLD TOLERANCE – AN INVASIVE TRAIT ?
In 1982, a scientist at Memorial University of Newfoundland in Canadaaccidentally froze a tank filled with a species of arctic fish called a flounder .When the tank was thawed out it was found that the fish were still alive.Thisled to the discovery of a gene in the flounder that produces an ‘antifreeze’protein, enabling it to tolerate freezing waters.
49Since then, biotech
researchers have been engineering salmon with this flounder gene in anattempt to incorporate the antifreeze protein into the GE fish, in the hopethat salmon farms could operate in waters that would normally be excludedbecause of subzero water conditions. Although researchers have managed toengineer the salmon with the antifreeze gene with some success, theantifreeze protein in the GE salmon is currently being expressed at levels thatare too low to make it commercially useful for this purpose. However it isexpected that the use of more powerful ‘promoter’ genes, taken from insects,may increase the amounts of antifreeze protein in the salmon. Increasedtolerance to cold water could increase the geographic range of GE fish,leading to possible invasion of any escaped fish into new ecosystems.
In summary, escaped GE fish could disrupt natural fish populations in a
similar fashion to other escaped non-native fish. However, because oftheir novel characteristics, they could pose additional problems asdescribed by the “Trojan gene effect” below.
iiunexpected effects and trojan genes
“Unfortunately, for an exotic organism it is almost impossible to
determine either the risk of species spread or hazard to the
environment before introduction because of the nearly infinite
number of direct and indirect biotic interactions that occur in
nature.” William Muir & Richard Howard, authors of the Trojan Gene
Hypothesis50
Genes are engineered into fish because the genetic engineers want to
confer the GE fish with a particular trait, such as rapid growth. However ,due to inherent problems in the genetic engineering process, GE fish oftenalso exhibit a range of unanticipated characteristics.
51

GENETICALLY ENGINEERED FISH
– NEW THREATS TO THE ENVIRONMENT fish
10 | GE FISH REPORT“What surprised us was how fast a GMO mating advantage could
cause a transgene to spread in a population,” said Richard Howard,
another of the Purdue researchers. “A population invaded by a few
genetically modified individuals would become more and more
transgenic, and as it did the population would get smaller and
smaller. We call this the ‘Trojan gene effect’.”
“Imagine a pie, and you eat 30 percent of it every day,” said Howard.
“Half of it is gone in two days, and within a week less than one-tenth
of it remains. It is conceivable that a similar effect could occur among
fish populations if GMOs with ‘Trojan genes’ escape into the wild.”68
Further research on the “Trojan gene” effect has now been published in
scientific journals.69Together, this research shows that there are
numerous ways in which genes engineered into GE fish could invadewild fish populations, reduce their fitness, and potentially cause theirextinction.
One of the ways in which an escaped GE fish could impact on other fish
within an ecosystem, and end up being invasive, is through competition forfood. One study found that genetically engineered salmon with a growthhormone gene consumed 250 % more food than non-GE salmon of thesame size, suggesting that they could be highly competitive. GE predatoryfish such as salmon, trout, or tilapia may also prey on other fish atunusual times during the season, as many GE fish mature at an earlier agethan their non-GE counterparts. Altered feeding patterns such as thesecould result in major disruptions to aquatic ecosystems.
70
When researchers placed non-GE coho salmon and coho salmon GE witha growth hormone gene together , they found that when food supplies werelow, the genetically engineered salmon dominated the acquisition of foodresources, consistently outgrew the non-GE salmon and affected theirgrowth. Dominant GE individuals emerged which then becamecannibalistic towards the other fish, including other GE salmon that wereweaker than them. When there was low availability of food, all the groupscontaining genetically engineered salmon also then experienced populationcrashes or complete extinctions, whereas groups containing only non-GEsalmon had good survival and growth rates.
71*With salmon GE with growth hormones, for example, growth hormone
genes in the GE fish have also influenced swimming ability,52feeding
rates,53muscle structure and enzyme production,54disease resistance,55
body morphometry,56pituitary gland structure,57life span,58larval
developmental rate,59smoltification,60risk-avoidance behaviour ,61cranial
morphology and gill irrigation.62
These unanticipated consequences of the genetic engineering process, whichare also in many cases undesired effects, add to the difficulties of assessingthe ecological hazards associated with a GE fish. For example, although fishgenetically engineered with a growth hormone may have characteristics suchas increased size which increase their ability to compete with their wildcounterparts, the genetic engineering process often leaves them with somekind of disadvantage, such as increased mortality in their offspring.
63
Some scientists have argued that disadvantages, such as increased mortalityin the offspring of GE fish, mean that there is little risk that GE fish willprove to be invasive or in other ways hazardous to the environment.
64
Researchers at Purdue University in the US, however , found that interactionsbetween traits that would appear to offer a disadvantage and other traits inGE fish that appear to offer some kind of competitive advantage, couldactually increase the hazard of GE fish to aquatic ecosystems.
The Purdue laboratory studies used GE and non-GE Japanese medaka fish
as experimental models to study the potential effects of the release of asmall number of GE fish into the wild.The GE fish were engineered with ahuman growth hormone gene and had a competitive advantage — themales were larger , making them more attractive to female mates. But thegenetic engineering process had also given the GE fish a disadvantage —their offspring were less likely to survive.
65These data were then fed into
computer models, which came up with startling results.The first studyfound that the release of just sixty of these GE fish into a wild
population of sixty thousand led to the extinction of both fishpopulations in just 40 generations.
66
“You have the very strange situation where the least fit individual in
the population is getting all the matings—this is the reverse of
Darwin’s model,” says William Muir , one of the researchers. “The sexual
selection drives the gene into the population and the reduced
viability drives the population to extinction.”67

© GP
GE FISH REPORT |  11iiiSterilisation will not be 100 % effective
“One of the most significant issues raised by environmentalists is
the potential for negative effects on wild stock posed by “gene
flow” [from GE fish]. Use of sterile fish will eliminate this issue.”
Elliot Entis, President of Aqua Bounty Farms72
Companies currently seeking commercial approval to market GE fish are
claiming that sterilisation of these fish can protect the environment fromthe hazards associated with the escape of GE fish from fish farms.Theyclaim that the methods used can be 100 % effective.
73However , other
evidence indicates that this cannot be achieved under commercialconditions.
A number of different methods can be used to sterilise fish, but there is
one principal technique being proposed for GE fish, called ‘triploidy.’ Withthis method, temperature or pressure shock is applied to fish eggs shortlyafter fertilisation.This produces eggs that contain three chromosomes(triploids) instead of the normal two and fish grown from these eggsusually do not develop normal sexual characteristics.
74
Although most of the fish produced by triploidy will be sterile, it is widelyacknowledged that a small percentage of triploid fish will develop sexualcharacteristics and be fertile.
75
*A study of GE tilapia fish that were triploids, for example, found that some
of the male fish had sperm in their testes, ‘indicative of reproductivefunctionality’.
76One of the reasons that low fertility in male fish is of
concern was highlighted in publications by Muir and Howard, authors ofthe Trojan Gene Hypothesis. Among their scenarios where escaped GE fishcould lead to extinction of both GE and native fish populations,
77was one
where GE male fish have lowered fertility,78while at the same time being
more viable (through a trait such as increased disease resistance).79The
researchers concluded that “attempts to reduce GE male fertility that
do not result in complete male sterility may increase the hazard
rather than reduce it”.80
Aqua Bounty Farms, the company currently seeking commercial approval forits GE salmon, say that the company will ensure that all the triploid eggs willbe female and that every batch of eggs will be thoroughly screened.
81While it
is possible to achieve close to 100% sterilisation of eggs through carefulscreening, many people in the industry (including from companies developingthe GE fish) are doubtful that this kind of screening would be economicalunder conditions of commercial production.
82
When GE crops were commercialised, the biotech industry demanded‘tolerance’ levels to legalise genetic contamination of other crops with pollenfrom GE plants, having denied for years that such contamination would everoccur . Since the widespread commercialisation of these crops in the 1990’s,there have been numerous instances of contamination from GE crops.
83It is
extremely likely, therefore, that faced with economic considerations undercommercial production, the companies developing GE fish will demandacceptance of less than 100 % success rates in the sterilisation of GE fish.
84
Even without GE fish reproducing, escapes of sterile GE fish could still have amajor impact on wild fish populations.This could occur through the spreadingof diseases or through competition with wild fish for resources, such as foodor habitat.
85Damage to wild fish populations could also occur if sterile GE
fish compete with wild fish for mates.86This fruitless mating could depress
populations of already endangered species of fish.87
There are other major problems associated with triploid fish, which raisequestions as to whether the technique will be suitable for commercialaquaculture operations, as well as major animal welfare concerns.
*Triploid Atlantic salmon exhibit greater variability in growth,
88diminished
tolerance of chronic stress,89reduced survival during egg incubation and,
during marine grow-out,90a number of abnormalities including spinal
abnormalities,91abnormalities of the lower jaw,92and greater susceptibility
to cataract formation.93Triploid fish have also been found to suffer from
breathing difficulties, low blood haemoglobin levels and higher rates of
mortality.94
In summary, sterilisation is unlikely to be 100 % effective in acommercial situation. In addition, there are welfare concernsregarding triploid fish.

GENETICALLY ENGINEERED FISH
– NEW THREATS TO THE ENVIRONMENT fish
12 | GE FISH REPORTVNO! TO THE COMMERCIALISATION OF GE FISH
GE fish could be the first GE animals to receive any government approval for
sale as food.95No official approval has yet been granted for the sale of GE fish
for human consumption, but there are at least three countries where approvalcould be in the pipeline.
*In the United States, commercial approval is currently being sought for GE
salmon and catfish.The company developing the GE salmon, Aqua Bounty
Farms, says that it has pre-orders for 15 million eggs and it had hoped toreceive commercial approval by 2002.There has been intense controversyover GE fish in recent years, however , and the company now says that itdoes not expect its application to be approved until late 2004 at theearliest.The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) decided to regulatethe salmon, GE with a gene for a growth hormone, as a new ‘animal drug’.The FDA has been widely criticised as lacking both the legal authority andecological expertise to regulate GE fish.
96
*Researchers at the Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology in
Cuba are seeking government approval for GE tilapia. Mario Estrada,leader of the project, says that feeding studies have been conducted,including an experiment in which the tilapia were eaten by humanvolunteers.The researchers expect that it will be 2005 before they hearwhether or nor approval will be granted.
97
*In China, GE carp is currently being tested for possible commercial
production.98However , concerns about their impact on the environment
mean that commercialisation is unlikely in the near future.99
Although regulatory bodies in the US or elsewhere may soon decide to givecommercial approval for a GE fish, it is not possible to say if these GE fishwill be safe to eat.The process of genetic engineering itself typically results inunexpected and unintended changes in the organism that is being geneticallyengineered. In the case of a GE fish, this could include the modification of anexisting fish protein, or the creation of a new protein that could cause allergicreactions.
100Such modifications could go unnoticed by government regulators
who often depend on the very companies who stand to profit fromcommercial approval of a GE organism to do the safety assessment. In mostcases, government regulators require companies to assess the safety of GEorganisms by examining a narrow range of known characteristics, whilefailing to require any thorough analysis of the hazards posed by unexpectednew molecules that could be harmful.
101
GLOFISH – A GE PET
For just US$5, you too could be the proud owner of the world’s first GEhousehold pet. On sale since January 2004 in pet stores across the UnitedStates, the GE fish called GloFish, are being marketed by a Texas biotechfirm called Yorktown Technologies. Originally developed from zebra fish byresearchers at the University of Singapore, GloFish engineered with afluorescing gene taken from a jellyfish glow green, while those engineeredwith genes taken from Discosoma (a relative of sea anemones and coral)have a reddish hue when exposed to black or fluorescent light.
While this GloFish might sound cute to some aquarium owners, the attempt
to win acceptance for this GE pet is really the thin end of a much moreambitious wedge as far as the genetic engineering industry is concerned.Theindustry has been told again and again by its public relations advisors thatthere might have been more success in winning global acceptance of GEfoods if the first ones introduced had offered something perceived as a‘consumer benefit’, such as increased vitamin content.The industry hopes acute GE pet could be a good way to prepare the public for a flood of otherGE animals in the pipeline, such as fast growing fish or pigs engineered forintensive factory farming operations.
The US Food and Drug Administration declined to regulate the GE GloFish,
because there are currently no regulations that pertain to ornamental fish.
“Allowing the unregulated sale of GloFish provides a gateway for GE
fish to find their way on to our dinner plates and into our
environment,” commented Joseph Mendelson, legal director of the
Washington based Center for Food Safety. “By not stepping in to regulate
these fish, the US regulatory agencies are establishing a dangerous
precedent for all future gene-altered animals, whether created as food
or pet fads”.102

GE FISH REPORT |  13iwidespread opposition to the commercial development of GE fish
Increasing awareness of the considerable hazards associated with GE fish
means that the commercial future of GE fish is far from certain.Opposition to the commercial development of GE fish has been voiced bygovernments, industry bodies, scientific institutions and a wide range ofother organisations.
*Deep concern about the ecological impacts of GE fish has been expressed
by highly influential scientific bodies such the Royal Society and the US
National Academy of Sciences.
103The Royal Society called for a
moratorium on the release of GE fish in sea pens and recommended thatcommercial approval only be granted for GE fish kept in contained land-based facilities. Although land-based facilities are an improvement on fishfarms located in open water , experience with such facilities shows thatanimals, floods and human accident mean that fish could still end upescaping into open waterways.
104Birds, for example, pick up fish from
land-based farms and then sometimes drop them into open water .Flooding, which is increasingly common as climate change alters weatherpatterns, can also provide routes for fish to escape.
*In 1992, the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife in the US published
an administrative rule, stating that:
“The Department shall consider
releases of GE fish to pose a serious risk to wild populations. The
Department shall not authorize the release of GE fish into locations
where such fish may gain access to wild fish populations”.105In 2001,
the state of Maryland in the US placed a five-year prohibition on theintroduction of any GE fish into any state waterways that flow into anyother body of water .
106In 2002, the Washington Fish and Wildlife
Commission banned all GE fish from Washington State fish farms inmarine waters.
107In 2003, California passed a law making it illegal to
spawn, cultivate, or incubate any GE fish in the waters of the Pacific Oceanover which the state has jurisdiction.
108
*During recent meetings of the National Atlantic Salmon Conservation
Organization (NASCO, established by international treaty and consisting ofCanada, Denmark, the European Union, Iceland, Norway, the RussianFederation, and the United States), the parties agreed to support aresolution, which states that the parties will 
“take all possible actions
to ensure that the use of GE salmon, in any part of the NASCOConvention Area, is confined to secure, self-contained, land-based
facilities”.109
*In March 2002, European ministers agreed at the 5th North Sea
Conference at Bergen, Sweden to take all possible actions to prevent therelease of GE marine organisms to the marine environment, and to ensurethat their culture is confined to secure, self-contained, land-basedfacilities.
110Other bans on the environmental release of GE fish are in place
at a local and national level in Europe.111In Austria, for example, the
federal counties of Salzburg, Styria and Vorarlberg adopted amendmentsto their fisheries law, which ban the release of GE fish.
112
*A number of industry bodies representing aquaculture and fisheries
interests are strongly opposed to the use of GE fish.113The Swedish Fish
Industry Association, for example, recommends its member companies 
“to completely refrain from having anything to do with GE fish”.114
*In June 2003, the Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission, the
Helsinki Commission and the Commission for the Protection of the MarineEnvironment of the North East Atlantic held a joint ministerial meeting inBergen, Germany. In the joint declaration from this meeting, they statedthat:
“Recognising that the release of genetically modified marine
organisms presents an inherent threat of potentially severe,
irreversible and transboundary effects, and the need to apply the
precautionary principle, we agree to take all possible actions, in
accordance with the requirements of the Directive 2001/18/EC and
comparable national legislation, to ensure that the culture of
genetically modified marine organisms is confined to secure, self-
contained, land-based facilities in order to prevent their release to
the marine environment.”115
Several governments, intergovernmental organisations and conventions havealready taken steps to try to prevent GE fish from being accidentally ordeliberately released into aquatic systems. However , steps need to be takenglobally, as any released GE fish will not respect national boundaries. Asuitable multilateral instrument would be the Cartagena Protocol onBiosafety of the Convention on Biological Diversity, which seeks to protectbiological diversity from the potential hazards posed by GE organisms.
© GP/HODSON

14 | GE FISH REPORTconclusions
This report has examined many of the hazards associated with GE fish.
The physical containment of these fish cannot be guaranteed undercommercial conditions and any escapes into the environment could havedevastating effects on wild fish populations and biodiversity.
Greenpeace demands that:
*Genetic engineering of fish for commercial purposes should be prohibited.
Once approved for commercial use, GE fish may never be contained;
*The Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety of the Convention on
Biological Diversity consider the special transboundary challenges posedby GE fish, including the risks they pose to the environment, with a view toprohibiting any facilities that could result in the introduction (eitheraccidental or deliberate) of GE fish into freshwater and marineecosystems.GENETICALLY ENGINEERED FISH
– NEW THREATS TO THE ENVIRONMENT
CONCLUSIONS fish
© GP/NOVIS© GP/NOVIS

GE FISH REPORT |  151 |
2 |
3 |
4 |
5 |van Aken, J. 2000 ‘Genetically engineered fish: swimming against the tide of reason’, Greenpeace International.
<http://archive.greenpeace.org/geneng/highlights/gmo/swimming.PDF>
Devlin, R.H. 2000. Risk assessment of genetically-distinct salmonids: difficulties in ecological risk assessment of
transgenic and domesticated fish. In: P . Gallaugher & C. Orr (eds.), Aquaculture and the Protection of WildSalmon, 63–69. Vancouver: Simon Fraser University.Reichardt,T. 2000. Will souped up salmon sink or swim?, Nature 406: 10–12.
UN FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) 2000. Genetically Modified Organisms and
Fisheries In: UN FAO The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. pp. 71-77<www.fao.org/DOCREP/003/X8002E/x8002e05.htm#P30>Pew Initiative on Food and Biotechnology 2003. Future fish – Issues in Science and Regulation of Transgenic Fish.Chapter 1,Table 2.Zbikowska, H.M. 2003. Fish can be first – advances in fish transgenesis for comm ercial applications.Transgenic
Research 12: 379–389.
The Royal Society of Canada 2001.Elements of precaution: recommendations for the regulation of food
biotechnology in Canada. Ottawa, p.182 <www.rsc.ca/foodbiotechnology/GMreportEN.pdf>Goldburg, R. 2000. Something Fishy.The Gene Exchange, May 2000, <www.ucsusa.org/Gene/su98.fishy.html>
Lu, J-K., Chen,T.T., Allen, S.K., Matsubara,T., & Burns, J.C. 1996. Production of transgenic dwarf surfclams,
Mulinia lateralis, with pantropic retroviral vectors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93: 3482-3486.Peek, A.S., Wheeler , P .A., Ostberg, C.O. & Thorgaard, G.H. 1997. A minichromosome carrying a pigmentation geneand brook trout DNA sequences in transgenic rainbow trout. Genome 40: 594-599.Lu, J.K., Burns, J.C., Chen,T.T. 1997. Pantropic retroviral vector integration, expression and germline transmissionin medaka 
(Oryzias latipes) . Molecular Marine Biology and Biotechnology 6: 289-295.
Varadi, L., Benko, I., Varga, J., & Horvath, L. 1999. Induction of diploid gynogenesis using interspecific sperm andproduction of tetraploids in African catfish,
Clarias gariepinus Burchell (1822). Aquaculture 73: 399-409.
Szelei, J., Varadi, L., Muller , F ., Erdelyi, F ., Orban, L., Horvath, L. & Duda, E. 1994. Liposome-mediated genetransfer in fish embryos.Transgenic Research 3: 116-119.Martinez, R., Arenal, A., Estrada, M.P ., Herrera, F ., Huerta, V., Vazquez, J., Sanchez,T. & de la Fuente, J. 1999.Mendelian transmission, transgene dosage and growth phenotype in transgenic tilapia 
(Oreochromis hornorum)
showing ectopic expression of homologous growth hormone. Aquaculture 173: 271-283.Sheela, S.G., Pandian,T.J. & Mathavan, S. 1999. Electroporatic transfer , stable integration, expression andtransmission of pZpssypGH and pZpssrtGH in Indian catfish. Aquaculture Research, 30: 233-248.Alok D.,Talwar , G.P . & Garg, L.C. 2000. In vivo activity of salmon gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH), itsagonists with structural modifications at positions 6 and 9, mammalian GnRH agonists and native cGnRH-II onthe spawning of an Indian catfish. Aquaculture International 7: 383-392.Rahman, M.A. & Maclean, N. 1999. Growth performance of transgenic tilapia containing an exogenous piscinegrowth hormone gene. Aquaculture 173: 333-346.Pitkanen,T.I., Krasnov, A., Reinisalo, M., & Molsa H. 1999.Transfer and expression of glucose transporter andhexokinase genes in salmonid fish. Aquaculture 173: 319-332.Nam, Y.K., Noh, C.H. & Kim, D.S. 1999.Transmission and expression of an integrated reporter construct in threegenerations of transgenic mud leach (Misgurnus mizolepis). Aquaculture 172: 229-245.Kinoshita, M.,Toyohara, H., Sakaguchi, M., Inoue, K., Yamashita, S., Satake, M., Wakamatsu, Y. & Ozato, K. 1999A stable line of transgenic medaka (
Oryzias latipes ) carrying the CAT gene Aquaculture 143: 267-276.
Hinits, Y, & Moav, B. 1999 Growth performance studies in transgenic Cyprinus carpio . Aquaculture, 173: 285-296.
Fu, C.H., Cui, Y.B., Hung, S.S.O. & Zhu, Z.Y. 2000 Whole-body amino acid pattern of F-4 human growth hormonegene-transgenic red common carp 
(Cyprinus carpio) fed diets with different protein levels. Aquaculture, 189: 287-
292.Ju, B., Xu, Y., He, J., Liao, J.Yan,T., Hew, C.L.. Lam T.J. & Gong, Z. 1999. Faithful expression of green fluorescentprotein (GFP) in transgenic zebrafish embryos under zebrafish gene promoters. Developmental Genetics 25:1-10.Many of the academic listings in the U.S are “sea grant” universities, with aquaculture programs established incollaboration with industry and government. For a full listing of U.S. sea grant programs, see<www.nsgo.seagrant.org/NationalSeaGrant.html#NE>See also the following weblinks:<www.AquaGene.com><www.ag.auburn.edu/genemap/ok1.html#GENEMAP><www.intrafish.com/article.php?articleID=3066><www.sg.ohio-state.edu/Project/f-PIlist.html ><www.iisgcp.org/resrch/aq/AnnualR/aqr9.htm><www.seagrant.uconn.edu/biotech.html, http://chemistry.uconn.edu/FrankGroup/fish.html><www.mcb.uconn.edu/fac/fac/chen.htm, http://www.bme.uconn.edu/faculty/chen.html><www.ocean.udel.edu/level1/facultystaff/faculty/jgallagher/Presentation1/index.htm><www.uga.edu/gm/1299/FrontFind.html><www.umbi.umd.edu/~comb/programs/aquaculture/arc.html><www.flseagrant.org>http://www.rsmas.miami.edu/divs/mbf/people/mschmale.html<www.gcd.med.umn.edu/faculty/hackett.html><www.seagrant.wisc.edu/research/subprograms/biotechnology/research.html ><www.sci.wsu.edu/sbs/faculty/ghthorgaard.html><www.scitech.gc.ca/fptt/bc.html> <www.bioatlantech.nb.ca/rv99/abstracts/james_wright.htm><www.mun.ca/osc><www.science.uwaterloo.ca/biology/faculty/bols.html> 6 |
7 |
8 |
9 |
10 |
11 |
12 |
13 |
14 |
15 |
16 |
17 |
18 |
19 |<http://staff.science.nus.edu.sg/~choy-l%20hew/research_programs.html>
<www.dbs.nus.edu.sg/Staff/gong.html> <www.science.nus.edu.sg/Research/pdf/pdfprojects/GFP .htm><www.nbiap.vt.edu><www.stw.nl/projecten/B/bbi4161.html><www.canterbury.ac.nz/publish/research/97/A19.htm><www.iisgcp.org/resrch/aq/AnnualR/aqr9.htm>< www.chula.ac.th><www.ebnic.org/aquacult/CN%20Speakers/prof_zhu_zuoyan.htm>
Squires, E.J. 1999. Status of sperm-mediated delivery methods for gene transfer . Murray, J.D., Anderson, G.B.,
Oberbauer , A.M. & McGloughlin, M.M. (eds.),Transgenic Animals in Agriculture. New York: CABI Publishing.Inoue, K., Yamashita, S., Hata, J., Kabeno, S. Asada, S., Nagahisa, E., Shiba,T. & Fujita,T. 1990. Electroporationas a new technique for producing transgenic fish. Cell Differentiation and Development 29: 123–28.Inoue, K., & Yamashita, S. 1997.The techniques using electroporation to generate GE fish. In: Houdebine, L.M.(ed.),Transgenic Animals: Generation and Use. Harwood Academic Publishers, Amsterdam, pp. 129-132.Sin, F .Y.T., Barkley, A.C., Walker , S.P ., Sin, P .L., Symonds, J.E., Hawke, L.& Hawkins, C.C. 1993. Gene transfer inchinook salmon by electroporating sperm in the presence of PRSV-lac Z DNA. Aquaculture 117: 57–69.
MacLean, N., & Rahman. A. 1994.Transgenic fish. In: MacLean, N. (ed.), Animals with Novel Genes, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 63-105.
Steinbrecher , R. & Ho, M.-W. 1996. Fatal flaws in food safety assessment: critique of the Joint FAO/WHO
Biotechnology and Food Safety Report. <www.psrast.org/fao96.htm>Kapuscinski, A.R. & Hallermanm, E.M.. 1991. Implications of introduction of GE fish into natural ecosystems.Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 48 (Suppl. 1): 99–107.
US Congress Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) 1993. Harmful non-indigenous species in the United States.
OTA-F-565, Washington, DC. USA. <www.wws.princeton.edu/~ota/ns20/alpha_f.html>Fagan, J. Assessing the safety and nutritional quality of genetically engineered foods.<www.psrast.org/jfassess.htm>.
Hill, J.A., Kiessling, A. & Devlin, R.H. 2000. Coho salmon 
(Oncorhynchus kisutch) transgenic for a growth
hormone gene construct exhibit increased rates of muscle hyperplasia and detectable levels of differential geneexpression. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 57: 939–950.
Lindstrom, C.D.V., van Do,T., Hordvik, I., Endresen, C. & Elsayed, S. 1996. Cloning of two distinct cDNAs
encoding parvalbumin, the major allergen of Atlantic salmon 
Salmo salar . Scandinavian Journal of Immunology
44: 335–344.
Devlin, R.H. 1997.Transgenic salmonids. In Houdebine, L.M. (ed.),Transgenic Animals: Generation and Use.
Harwood Academic Publishers, Amsterdam, pp.105-117.
Dunham, R.A. & Devlin, R.H. 1999. Comparison of traditional breeding and transgenesis in farmed fish with
implications for growth enhancement and fitness. In: Murray, J.D., Anderson, G.B., Oberbauer , A.M. &McGloughlin, M.M. (eds.),Transgenic Animals in Agriculture. CABI Publishing, New York, USA.Pinkert, C.A. & Murray, J.D. 1999.Transgenic farm animals. In: Murray, J.D., Anderson, G.B., Oberbauer , A.M. &McGloughlin, M.M. (eds.),Transgenic Animals in Agriculture. CABI Publishing, New York, USA.
Du, S.J., Gong, Z.Y., Fletcher , G.L., Shears, M.A., King, M.J., Idler , D.R. & Hew, C.L. 1992. Growth enhancement
in transgenic Atlantic salmon by the use of an all fish chimeric growth-hormone gene construct. Bio Technology10: 176-181.
Stokstad, E. 2002 Engineered fish: friend or foe of the environment? Science 297: 1797.
Stoll, M. 1999 Designer fish flounder over legal hurdles. Christian Science Monitor 4th March, 1999.<www.csmonitor .com/durable/1999/03/04/p19s1.htm>
Dunham, R.A. & Devlin, R.H. 1999. Comparison of traditional breeding and transgenesis in farmed fish with
implications for growth enhancement and fitness. Murray, J.D., Anderson, G.B., Oberbauer , A.M. & McGloughlin,M.M. (eds.),Transgenic Animals in Agriculture. CABI Publishing, New York, USA.Devlin, R.H., Yesaki,T.Y., Donaldson, E.M., Du, S.J., Hew, C.L. 1995. Production of germline transgenic pacificsalmonids with dramatically increased growth-performance. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences52: 1376–84.
Chen,T.T.,Kight, K., Lin, C.M., Powers, D.A., Hayat, M., Chatakondi, N., Ramboux, A.C., Duncan, P .L. & Dunham,
R.A. 1993. Expression and inheritance of RSVLTR-rtGH1 complementary DNA in the transgenic common carp,
Cyprinus carpio . Molecular Marine Biology and Biotechnology 2: 88–95.
Dunham, R.A., R.H. Devlin. 1999. Comparison of traditional breeding and transgenesis in farmed fish withimplications for growth enhancement and fitness. In Murray, J.D., Anderson, G.B., Oberbauer , A.M. & McGloughlin,M.M. (eds.),Transgenic Animals in Agriculture. CABI Publishing, New York, USA.
Stokstad, E. 2002 Engineered fish: friend or foe of the environment? Science 297: 1797.Rana, K.J. 1997. Global overview of production and production trends 1984-1995. In: Review of the State of
World Aquaculture. FAO Fisheries Circular no. 886 FIRI/C886(Rev.1)<www.fao.org/docrep/003/w7499e/w7499e05.htm> GENETICALLY ENGINEERED FISH
– NEW THREATS TO THE ENVIRONMENT
REFERENCES fish
references

16 | GE FISH REPORT20 |
21 |
22 |
23 |
24 |
25 |
26 |
27 |
28 |
29 |30 |
31 |
32 |
33 |
34 |
35 |Rana, K. & Immink, A. 2001.Trends in global aquaculture production: 1984-1996. UN FAO (Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations) <www.fao.org/DOCREP/FIELD/006/AD742E/AD742E00.HTM>Graing, R. 2001. Recent trends in global fishery production up to 1996. UN FAO (Food and AgricultureOrganization of the United Nations) <http://www.fao.org/fi/trends/catch/catch.asp>Goldburg, R. 2000. Something fishy.The Gene Exchange, May 2000, <www.ucsusa.org/Gene/su98.fishy.html>
Garibaldi, L. 1996. List of animal species used in aquaculture. FAO Fisheries Circular no. 914 FIRI/C914,
<www.fao.org/docrep/W2333E/W2333E01.htm>
Goldburg R. & Triplett,T. 1997. Murky waters: environmental effects of aquaculture in the US.The Environmental
Defense Fund. <www.environmentaldefense.org/pdf.cfm?contentid=490&filename=AQUA%2Epdf>Johnston, P ., Santillo, D., Stringer , R., Ashton, J., McKay, B., Verbeek, M., Jackson, E., Landman, J., van denBroek, J., Samsom, D., & Simmonds, M. 1998. Greenpeace report on the world’s oceans. Greenpeace ResearchLaboratories Report, May 1998. Publ: Stichting Greenpeace Council. ISBN: 90/73361/45/1: 154 pp. Chapter 5.<www.greenpeace.to/pdfs/reportworldsoceans.pdf>Johnston, P . & Santillo, D. 2002. Chemical usage in aquaculture: implications for residues in market products.Greenpeace Research Laboratories Technical Note 06/2002: 15 pp.<www.greenpeace.to/pdfs/Technical_Note_06_02.pdf>
Weiss, K.R. 2002. Fish farms become feedlots of the sea, Los Angeles Times, December 9 2002,
<http://curezone.com/art/read.asp?ID=69&db=6&C0=1>
Weiss, K.R. 2002. Fish farms become feedlots of the sea, Los Angeles Times, December 9 2002,
<http://curezone.com/art/read.asp?ID=69&db=6&C0=1>
Environmental Working Group <www.ewg.org/reports/farmedPCBs/es.php>
Hites, R.A., Foran, J.A., Carpenter , D.O., Hamilton,M.C. Knuth, B.A. & Schwager , S.J. 2004. Global assessment oforganic contaminants in farmed salmon. Science, 303: 226-229.
Tacon, A.G.J. 1996. Feeding tomorrow’s fish. World Aquaculture. Sept. 27, 1996, 20-32.
Goldburg R. & Triplett,T. 1997. Murky waters: environmental effects of aquaculture in the US.The EnvironmentalDefense Fund. <www.environmentaldefense.org/pdf.cfm?contentid=490&filename=AQUA%2Epdf>
van Aken, J. 2000 ‘Genetically engineered fish: swimming against the tide of reason’, Greenpeace International.
<http://archive.greenpeace.org/geneng/highlights/gmo/swimming.PDF>
Fleischman, J, 1997. Muddying the waters. Audubon 99:64-69.MacKenzie, D, 1996. Can we make supersalmon safe? New Scientist, 27 January 1996, 14-15.Slaney,T.L., Hyatt, K.D., Northcote,T.G. & Fielden, R.J. 1996. Status of anadromous salmon and trout in British
Columbia and Yukon. Fisheries 21: 20-35.Blumenthal, L 2000. Genetically altered salmon cause debate among U.S. officials.The News Tribune,Tacoma,Washington, Aug 21, 2000.Ludwig, B. 1996. Position of the British Columbia Ministry of Environment, Land and Parks on the use of non-reproductive Atlantic Salmon., Bulletin of the Aquaculture Association of Canada 96:32-37.
Blumenthal, L 2000. Genetically altered salmon cause debate among U.S. officials.The News Tribune,Tacoma,
Washington, Aug 21, 2000.Mottram, B. 1996. Firm’s Atlantic salmon loss NW anglers’ gain. Morning News Tribune,Tacoma, WA, October23, 1996.Dodge, J. 1997. Escaped fish open to anglers. Olympian, WA, July 23 1997.
Lymbery, P . 2001. In too deep - the welfare of intensively farmed fish. Compassion In World Farming Trust, Feb 2001Runyon C. 2001.Transgenic Fish. Research Memorandum for Environment, Energy and Transportation Program,
national conference of state legislatures, April 2001 <www.ncsl.org/programs/esnr/transgfish.htm>Stokstad, E. 2002 Engineered fish: friend or foe of the environment? Science 297: 1797.Daley, B 2001 Escaped farm salmon raise alarm in Maine.The Boston Globe, Feb 23, 2001,<www.boston.com/dailyglobe2/0.../Escaped_farm_salmon_raise_alarm_in_Maine+.shtm>
At the time of writing of this report, the Magaguadavic River is the only Canadian river for which there is annual
data on escaped farmed fish and wild fish.The Royal Society of Canada 2001.Elements of precaution: recommendations for the regulation of foodbiotechnology in Canada. Ottawa, p.151 <www.rsc.ca/foodbiotechnology/GMreportEN.pdf>Carr , J., Anderson, J.M., Whoriskey, F .G.& Dilworth,T. 1997.The occurrence and spawning of cultured Atlanticsalmon 
(Salmo salar L.) in a Canadian river . ICES Journal of Marine Science 54: 1064–1073.
Whoriskey, F . 2000.The North American east coast salmon aquaculture industry: the challenges for wild salmon.Atlantic Salmon Federation, St. Andrews, NB, USA.
Goldburg R. & Triplett,T. 1997. Murky waters: environmental effects of aquaculture in the US.The Environmental
Defense Fund. <www.environmentaldefense.org/pdf.cfm?contentid=490&filename=AQUA%2Epdf>36 |
37 |
38 |
39 |
40 |41 |
42 |
43 |
44 |
45 |
46 |
47 |
48 |Rimmer , D.W. 1998, Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) in Tsitika river , 1998. Ministry of Environment, Lands and
Parks, Fisheries Section, B.C., V9T 6J9.Volpe, J.P .,Taylor , E.G. Rimmer , D.W. Glickman. B.W. 2000. Evidence of natural reproduction of aquaculture-escaped Atlantic salmon in a coastal British Columbia river . Conservation Biology 14: 899–903.Gross, M.R. 2000. Will farmed Atlantic salmon invade the ecological niches of wild Atlantic salmon? In: P .Gallaugher , C. Orr (eds.), Aquaculture and the Protection of Wild Salmon. Simon Fraser University, Cont. Stud.Sci., Burnaby, BC: pp. 25–28.Reichardt,T. Will souped up salmon sink or swim?, Nature 406: 10–12.Goldburg, R. 2000. Something Fishy.The Gene Exchange, May 2000, <www.ucsusa.org/Gene/su98.fishy.html>
Doughton, S. 1997. Hearings set on impact of farmed fish that escape from floating pens. News Tribune,Tacoma,
WA, June 18, 1997, B1.
Goldburg R. & Triplett,T. 1997. Murky waters: environmental effects of aquaculture in the US.The Environmental
Defense Fund. <www.environmentaldefense.org/pdf.cfm?contentid=490&filename=AQUA%2Epdf>
Wills, P . Biological Complexity, <www.phy.auckland.ac.nz/staff/prw/biocomplexity/bio_complexity_home.htm>Wills, P . Biological Complexity, <www.phy.auckland.ac.nz/staff/prw/biocomplexity/bio_complexity_home.htm>Solé, R.V. & Newman, M. 1999. Patterns of extinction and biodiversity in the fossil record’, Santa Fe Institute
Working Paper 99-12-097, December 1999. Example taken from Peter Wills’ website on biological complexity,<www.phy.auckland.ac.nz/staff/prw/biocomplexity/bio_complexity_home.htm>
The Precautionary Principle has been defined and adopted by several international environment agreements,
including Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration (http://www.unep.org), the preamble of the Convention on BiologicalDiversity (http://www.biodiv.org).
Tiedje, J.M. Colwell, R.K., Grossman, Y.L. Hodson, R.E., Lenski, R.E., Mack, R.N. & Regal, P .J. 1989.The planned
introduction of genetically engineered organisms: ecological considerations and recommendations. Ecology 70:298–315.Kapuscinski, A.R. & Hallerman, E.M. 1990.Transgenic fish and public policy: anticipating environmental impactsof transgenic fish. Fisheries 15: 2–11.Kapuscinski, A.R. & Hallerman, E.M. 1991. Implications of introduction of transgenic fish into natural ecosystems.Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 48: 99–107.Hallerman, E.M. & Kapuscinski, A.R. 1992. Ecological and regulatory uncertainties associated with transgenicfish. In: Hew,C.L. & Fletcher , G.L. (eds.) Transgenic Fish. World Scientific Publishing Company, Singapore. pp.209-288.Regal, P .J. 1986. Models of genetically engineered organisms and their ecological impact. In: Mooney, H.A. &Drake, J.A. (eds.), Ecology of Biological Invasions of North America and Hawaii. Ecological Studies: Analysis andSynthesis 58, Spring-Verlag, New York, USA pp. 111–129.Tiedje, J.M., Colwell, R.K., Grossman, Y.L., Hodson, R.E., Lenski, R.E., Mack, R.N. & Regal, P .J. 1989.Theplanned introduction of genetically engineered organisms: ecological considerations and recommendations. Ecology70: 298–315.
Grosman, E. 1995. Nile Perch Trade and Environment.Trade and Environment (TED) case study no. 206
<www.american.edu/TED/PERCH.HTM>Gophen, M., Ochumba, P .B.O. & Kaufman, L.S. 1995. Some aspects of perturbation in the structure andbiodiversity of the ecosystem of Lake Victoria (East Africa). Aquatic Living Resources 8: 27-41.See also The American Museum of Natural History ‘Endangered - exploring a world at risk’,<www.amnh.org/nationalcenter/Endangered/perch.html>O’ Riordan, B. 1992. Fishing out the gene pool. Appropriate Technology 18: 6-9.Toner , M. 1991. Are test-tube fish such a hot idea? International Wildlife, Nov-Dec 1991: 34.
Wilcove D.S. & Bean, M.J.. 1994.The big kill: declining biodiversity in America's lakes and rivers. Environmental
Defense Fund, Washington, DC. 275 pp.Taylor , J.N., Courtenay, W.R. & McCann, J.A. 1984. Known impacts of exotic fishes in the continental UnitedStates. In: Courtenay, W.R. & Stauffer , J.R. (eds.) Distribution, Biology, and Management of Exotic Fishes. JohnsHopkins University Press, Baltimore, USA pp. 322-373.Pimentel, D, Lach, L, Zuniga, R, Morrison, D 2000. Environmental and economic costs associated with non-indigenous species in the United States. Bioscience 50: 53-65.
Goldburg, R. & Triplett,T. 1997. Murky waters: environmental effects of aquaculture in the US. Environmental
Defense, New York USA. p.11. <www.environmentaldefense.org/documents/490_AQUA.pdf>
Benson, A.J. & Boydstun, C.P . 1995. Invasion of the zebra mussel into the United States. In: LaRoe, E.T., Farris,
G.S., Puckett, C.E., Doran, P .D. & Mac, M.J. (eds.) Our L iving Resour ces: a Report to the Nation on the
Distribution, Abundance, and Health of U.S. Plants, Animals and Ecosystems. U.S. Department of the Interior ,National Biological Service, Washington, DC, USA pp. 445-446. http://biology.usgs.gov/s+t/index.htmKeniry,T. & Marsden, J.E. 1995. Zebra mussels in southwestern Lake Michigan. In: LaRoe, E.T., Farris, G.S.,Puckett, C.E., Doran, P .D. & Mac, M.J. (eds.) Our Living Resources: a Report to the Nation on the Distribution,Abundance, and Health of U.S. Plants, Animals and Ecosystems. U.S. Department of the Interior , NationalBiological Service, Washington, DC, USA pp. 445-448. http://biology.usgs.gov/s+t/index.htm
US Congress Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) 1993. Harmful non-indigenous species in the United States.
OTA-F-565, Washington, DC, USA. <www.wws.princeton.edu/~ota/ns20/alpha_f.html>GENETICALLY ENGINEERED FISH
– NEW THREATS TO THE ENVIRONMENT
REFERENCES fish

GE FISH REPORT |  1749 |
50 |
51 |
52 |
53 |
54 |
55 |
56 |
57 |
58 |
59 |
60 |
61 |
62 |
63 |
64 |
65 |
66 |
67 |Lewis, C. 2001. A new kind of fish story: the coming of biotech animals. U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Consumer Magazine, January-February 2001.
Muir , W.M. & Howard, R.D. 2002. Assessment of possible ecological risks and hazards of GE fish with implications
for other sexually reproducing organisms.Transgenic Research 11: 101-114.
The Royal Society of Canada 2001. Elements of precaution: recommendations for the regulation of food
biotechnology in Canada. Ottawa, Canada, p.156 <www.rsc.ca/foodbiotechnology/GMreportEN.pdf>Rahman, M.A. & Maclean, N. 1999. Growth performance of transgenic tilapia containing an exogenous piscinegrowth hormone gene. Aquaculture 173: 333–346.
Farrell, A.P ., Bennett, W. & Devlin. R.H. 1997. Growth-enhanced transgenic salmon can be inferior swimmers.
Canadian Journal of Zoology 75: 335–337.
Devlin, R.H., Johnsson, J.I., Smailus, D.E., Biagi, C.A., Jonsson, E. & Bjornsson, B.T. 1999. Increased ability to
compete for food by growth hormone-transgenic coho salmon 
Oncorhynchus kisutch (Walbaum). Aquaculture
Research 30: 479-482.Abrahams, M.V. & Sutterlin. A. 1999.The foraging and antipredator behaviour of growth enhanced transgenicAtlantic salmon. Animal Behaviour 58: 933–942.
Hill, J.A., Kiessling, A. & Devlin, R.H. 2000. Coho salmon 
(Oncorhynchus kisutch) transgenic for a growth
hormone gene construct exhibit increased rates of muscle hyperplasia and detectable levels of differential geneexpression. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 57: 939–950.
Devlin, R.H. 2000. Risk assessment of genetically-distinct salmonids: difficulties in ecological risk assessment of
transgenic and domesticated fish. In: P . Gallaugher & C. Orr (eds.), Aquaculture and the Protection of WildSalmon, 63–69. Simon Fraser University, Vancouver , Canada.
Ostenfeld,T.H., McLean, E. & Devlin. R.H. 1998.Transgenesis changes body and head shape in Pacific salmon.
Journal of Fish Biology 52: 850–854.
Mori,T. & Devlin. R.H. 1999.Transgene and host growth hormone gene expression in pituitary and nonpituitary
tissues of normal and growth hormone transgenic salmon. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology149: 129–139.
Devlin, R.H., Yesaki,T.Y., Donaldson, E.M., Du, S.J., Hew, C.L. 1995. Production of germline transgenic pacific
salmonids with dramatically increased growth-performance. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences52: 1376–1384.Devlin, R.H., Yesaki,T.Y., Donaldson, E.M. & Hew, C.L. 1995.Transmission and phenotypic effects ofantifreeze/GH gene construct in coho salmon 
(Oncorhynchus kisutch) . Aquaculture 137: 161–169.
Devlin, R.H., Yesaki,T.Y., Donaldson, E.M. & Hew, C.L. 1995.Transmission and phenotypic effects of
antifreeze/GH gene construct in coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch) . Aquaculture 137: 161–169.
Saunders, R.L., Fletcher , G.L. & Hew, C.L. 1998. Smolt development in growth hormone transgenic Atlantic
salmon. Aquaculture 168: 177–193.
Abrahams, M.V. & Sutterlin. A. 1999.The foraging and antipredator behaviour of growth enhanced transgenic
Atlantic salmon. Animal Behaviour 58: 933–942.
Devlin, R.H., Yesaki,T.Y., Donaldson, E.M., Du, S.J., Hew, C.L. 1995. Production of germline transgenic pacific
salmonids with dramatically increased growth-performance. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences52: 1376–1384.Devlin, R.H., Yesaki,T.Y., Donaldson, E.M. & Hew, C.L. 1995.Transmission and phenotypic effects ofantifreeze/GH gene construct in coho salmon 
(Oncorhynchus kisutch) . Aquaculture 137: 161–169.
Devlin, R.H., Biagi, C.A., Yesaki,T.Y., Smailus, D.E. & Byatt, J.C. 2001. Growth of domesticated transgenic fish - a
growth-hormone transgene boosts the size of wild but not domesticated trout. Nature 409: 781–782.
Knibb, W. 1997. Risk from genetically engineered and modified marine fish.Transgenic Research 6: 59–67.
Dunham, R.A. 1999. Utilization of transgenic fish in developing countries: potential benefits and risks. Journal ofthe World Aquaculture Society 30: 1–11.
Muir , W.M., Howard, R.D. 1999. Possible ecological risks of transgenic organism release when transgenes affect
mating success: sexual selection and the Trojan gene hypothesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciencesof the United States of America 96: 13853-13856.Howard, R.D., DeWoody, J.A. & Muir , W.M. 2004.Transgenic male mating advantage provides opportunity forTrojan gene effect in a fish. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America101: 2934-2938.
Muir , W.M., Howard, R.D. 1999. Possible ecological risks of transgenic organism release when transgenes affect
mating success: sexual selection and the Trojan gene hypothesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciencesof the United States of America 96: 13853-13856.
Walker , M. 1999. Could one genetically modified fish invade a species and destroy it? New Scientist, 4 December
1999.68 |
69 |
70 |
71 |
72 |
73 |
74 |
75 |
76 |
77 |
78 |
79 |80 |Boutin, C. 2004. Purdue scientists: genetically modified fish could damage ecology. <www.innovations-
report.com/html/reports/environment_sciences/report-26148.html> 24 Feb 2004.
Muir , W.M. & Howard, R.D. 2002. Assessment of possible ecological risks and hazards of GE fish with implications
for other sexually reproducing organisms.Transgenic Research, 11: 101-114.Hedrick, P .W. 2001. Invasion of transgenes from salmon or other genetically modified organisms into naturalpopulations (vol 58, pg 841, 2001), Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 58: 2317.
Devlin, R.H., Johnsson, J.I., Smailus, D.E., Biagi, C.A., Jonsson, E. & Bjornsson, B.T. 1999. Increased ability to
compete for food by growth hormone-transgenic coho salmon 
Oncorhynchus kisutch (Walbaum). Aquaculture
Research 30: 479-482.Royal Society, 2001.The use of genetically modified animals, In: GM Animals for Agricultural Uses.The RoyalSociety, London. Ch. 4.6, para. 59. <www.royalsoc.ac.uk>Reichardt,T. 2000. Will souped up salmon sink or swim? Nature 406: 10–12.Stokstad, E. 2002 Engineered fish: friend or foe of the environment? Science 297: 1797.
Devlin, R.H., D'Andrade, M., Uh, M. & Biagi, C.A. 2004. Population effects of growth hormone transgenic coho
salmon depend on food availability and genotype by environment interactions. Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences, 101: 9303–9308.Howard, R.D., DeWoody, J.A. & Muir , W.M. 2004.Transgenic male mating advantage provides opportunity forTrojan gene effect in a fish. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America101: 2934-2938.
Entis, E. 2003. Genetically modified fish: promise or problematic?’, fromViewpoint, a live discussion forum on
washingtonpost.com, January 23, 2003 <www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/liveonline/advertisers/viewpoint_pew012303.htm>
Hileman, R. 2000. Biotech regulation under attack. Chemical & Engine ering N ews 78: 28-31 22nd May 2000.
The Royal Society of Canada 2001. Elements of precaution: recommendations for the regulation of food
biotechnology in Canada. Ottawa, Canada, p.160 <www.rsc.ca/foodbiotechnology/GMreportEN.pdf>
Goldburg, R. & Triplett,T. 1997. Murky waters: environmental effects of aquaculture in the US. Environmental
Defense, New York USA. p.77 <www.environmentaldefense.org/documents/490_AQUA.pdf>Shelton, W.L. 1996. Reproductive manipulation of fishes: ecologically safe assessment of introductions. US-ARS,Biotechnology Risk Assessment Research Grants, Program Abstract of Funded Research 1996.Benfey,T.J., Solar , I.I., De Jong, G. & Donaldson, E.M. 1986. Flow-cytometric confirmation of aneuploidy in spermfrom triploid rainbow trout.Transactions of the American Fisheries Society 115:838-840.Lincoln, R.F . & Scott, A.P . 1984. Sexual maturation in triploid rainbow trout,
Salmo gairdneri Richardson. Journal
of Fish Biology 25:385-392.Thorgaard, G.H., & Allen, K. 1992. Environmental impacts of inbred, hybrid and polyploid aquatic species. In:Rosenfield, A. & Mann, R. (eds.) Dispersal of L iving Organisms i nto Aquatic Ecosystems. College Park, University
of Maryland, USA pp. 281-288.Allen, S.K., Jr . 1987. Reproductive sterility of triploid shellfish and fish. Ph.D. dissertation, University ofWashington, Seattle. Cited in Thorgaard & Allen 1992.Blankenship, K. 1994. Experiment with Japanese oysters ends abruptly. Bay Journal 10 (July/August 1994):1-4.Alliance for the Chesapeake Bay, Baltimore, USA <www.bayjournal.com/94-08/oyster .htm>Royal Society, 2001. Potential hazards of GM animals. In: GM Animals for Agricultural Uses.The Royal Society,London. Ch. 5.2, para. 105. <www.royalsoc.ac.uk>Royal Society of Canada 2001. Elements of precaution: recommendations for the regulation of food biotechnologyin Canada. Ottawa, Canada. <www.rsc.ca/foodbiotechnology/GMreportEN.pdf>US Congress Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) 1995. Current Status of Federal Involvement in U.S.Aquaculture. OTA-BPENV- 170 Washington, DC. USA <www.wws.princeton.edu/~ota/ns20/alpha_f.html>Reichardt,T. 2000. Will souped up salmon sink or swim? Nature 406: 10–12.Stokstad, E. 2002. Engineered fish: friend or foe of the environment? Science 297: 1797.Wang, Z.P ., Guo, X.M., Allen, S.K. & Wang, R. 1999 Aneuploid Pacific oyster (
Crassostrea gigas Thunberg) as
incidentals from triploid production. Aquaculture 173: 347-57National Research Council 2004. Biological Confinement of Genetically Engineered Organisms.The NationalAcademies Press, Washington, D.C., USA. <www.nap.edu/books/0309090857/html>Stokstad, E. 2004. Experts recommend a cautious approach. Science 303: 449.
Razak, S.A., Hwang, G.L., Rhman, M. A. & Maclean, N. 1999. Growth performance and gonadal development of
growth enhanced transgenic tilapia 
Oreochromis niloticus (L.) following heat-shock-induced tripoidy, Marine
Biotechnology 1:533-544.
Muir , W.M. & Howard, R.D. 2002. Assessment of possible ecological risks and hazards of GE fish with implications
for other sexually reproducing organisms.Transgenic Research 11: 101-114.
Maclean, N. & Laight, R.J. 2000,Transgenic fish: an evaluation of benefits and risks. Fish Fish 1: 146–172.Maclean, N. & Laight, R.J. 2000,Transgenic fish: an evaluation of benefits and risks. Fish Fish 1: 146–172.Muir , W.M. & Howard, R.D. 2002. Assessment of possible ecological risks and hazards of GE fish with implications
for other sexually reproducing organisms.Transgenic Research 11: 101-114.

18 | GE FISH REPORT81 |
82 |
83 |
84 |
85 |
86 |
87 |
88 |
89 |
90 |
91 |
92 |
93 |
94 |
95 |Kay, J. 2002. ‘Frankenfish’ spawn controversy. Debate over genetically altered salmon. San Francisco Chronicle,
San Francisco, USA, April 29, 2002.http://sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/chronicle/archive/2002/04/29/MN155761.DTL
Hileman, R. 2000. Biotech regulation under attack. Chemical & Engine ering News 78: 28-31 22nd May 2000.
see, e.g. Boyce, N. (2000) Taco trouble. New Scientist, 7th October 2000, p.6.
Quist, D. & Chapela, I.H. (2001) Transgenic DNA introgressed into traditional maize landraces in Oaxaca, Mexico.Nature 414: 541-543;Greenpeace (2002) Genetic pollution - a multiplying nightmare. Greenpeace Genetic Engine ering Briefing P ack.
Feb. 2002, <www.greenpeace.org/international_en/multimedia/download/1/10062/0/genetic_pollution.pdf>Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS) 2004. Gone to Seed.<www.ucsusa.org/food_and_environment/biotechnology/page.cfm?pageID=1315>
Sutterlin, A., Fletcher , G., Hew, C. & Benfey,T. 1996. Environmental risks in using transgenic Atlantic salmon and
rainbow trout for commercial marine production in Canada. Proceedings U.S. Department of AgricultureBiotechnology Risk Assessment Research Grants Symposium 1996, Ch. 10 Fish.<www.nbiap.vt.edu/brarg/brasym96/sutterlin96.htm>
Sutterlin, A.M. & Collier , C. 1991. Some observations on the comm ercial use of triploid rainbow trout and Atlantic
salmon in Newfoundland. Proceedings of the Fish Sterility Workshop, Feb. 20, Halifax, N.S. Canadian TechnicalReport of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences no. 1789. 15-33.
Thorgaard, G.H., & Allen, K. 1992. Environmental impacts of inbred, hybrid and polyploid aquatic species. In:
Rosenfield, A. & Mann, R. (eds.) Dispersal of L iving Organisms i nto Aquatic Ecosystems. College Park, University
of Maryland, USA pp. 281-288.
Musick, J.A., Harbin, M.M., Berkeley, S.A., Burgess, G.H., Eklund, A.M., Findley, L., Gilmore, R.G., Golden, J.T.,
Ha, D.S., Huntsman, G.R., McGovern, J.C., Parker , S.J., Poss, S.G., Sala, E., Schmidt,T.W., Sedberry, G.R., Weeks,H. & Wright, S.G. 2000. Marine, estuarine, and diadromous fish stocks at risk of extinction in North America(exclusive of Pacific salmonids). Fisheries 25: 6-30.
Friars, G.W., McMillan, I., Quinton, V.M., O'Flynn, F .M., McGeachy, S.A., & Benfey,T.J. 2001. Family differences
in relative growth of diploid and triploid Atlantic salmon 
(Salmo salar L.) . Aquaculture 192: 23-29.
Benfey,T.J. 1996. Use of all-female and triploid salmonids for aquaculture in Canada. Bulletin of the Aquaculture
Association of Canada 96-2: 6-8. <www.aquacultureassociation.ca/bulletin/bull96-2.html>
McGeachy, S.A., Benfey,T.J. & Friars, G.W. 1995. Freshwater performance of triploid Atlantic salmon (Salmo
salar) in New Brunswick aquaculture. Aquaculture 137: 333-341.
Lymbery, P . 2002. In too deep - the welfare of intensively farmed fish. Compassion in World Fa rming Trust.
<www.ciwf.org.uk/publications/reports/in_too_deep_2001.pdf>
Sutterlin, A., Fletcher , G., Hew, C. & Benfey,T. 1996. Environmental risks in using transgenic Atlantic salmon and
rainbow trout for commercial marine production in Canada. Proceedings U.S. Department of AgricultureBiotechnology Risk Assessment Research Grants Symposium 1996, Ch. 10 Fish.<www.nbiap.vt.edu/brarg/brasym96/sutterlin96.htm>Sutterlin, A.M., Holder , J. & Benfey,T.J. 1987. Early survival rates and morphological abnormalities in landlocked,anadromous and hybrid (landlocked x anadromous) diploid and triploid Atlantic salmon. Aquaculture: 64: 157-164.Jungalwalla, P .J. 1991. Production of non-maturing Atlantic salmon in Tasmania. Canadian Technical Report ofFisheries and Aquatic Sciences no. 1789: 47-71.Hughes, D.R. 1992. Lower jaw deformity in farmed Tasmanian Atlantic salmon,
Salmo salar (Salmoniformes,
Teleosti). Final report. In: Proceedings of the Saltas Research Review Seminar , 29th April, 1992. SalmonEnterprises of Tasmania, Hobart,Tasmania pp. 17-64.King, H. & Lee, P . 1993. Jaw deformities and respiratory physiology of triploids. Progress report In: Proceedingsof the Saltas Research Review Seminar , 29th April, 1993. Salmon Enterprises of Tasmania, Hobart,Tasmania pp.37-44.Lee, P . & King, H. 1994. Effects of reduced dietary energy on the incidence of jaw deformities in TasmanianAtlantic salmon. In: Reports from the Saltas 1993-94 Research and Development Programme. SalmonEnterprises of Tasmania, Hobart,Tasmania. pp. 61-69.O'Flynn, F .M., McGeachy, S.A., Friars, G.W., Benfey,T.J. & Bailey, J.K. 1997. Comparisons of cultured triploid anddiploid Atlantic salmon 
(Salmo salar L.) ICES Journal of marine science 54: 1160-1165.
Wall, A.E. & Richards, R.H. 1992. Occurrences of cataracts in triploid Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) on four
farms in Scotland. Vet erinary Record 131: 553-557.
Lymbery, P . 2002. In too deep - the welfare of intensively farmed fish. Compassion in World Fa rming Trust.
<www.ciwf.org.uk/publications/reports/in_too_deep_2001.pdf>
There have been examples of ‘mistakes’ where genetically engineered animals have ended up in the human food
supply, but these animals have not been officially approved for human consumption. E.g, Westphal, S.P . 2001. Pigout. New Scientist, 28th July 2001 p. 14.Reuters Commodities News (Eng) US biotech researchers careless with 386 pigs. 6th February, 2003.Anon 2004. Pig feed blunder . New Scientist 28th February 2004, p.4.Hoag, H. 2003 Transgenic salmon still out in the cold in United States. Nature 421: 304.
Center for Food Safety 2001. Petition seeking a moratorium on the domestic marketing and importation ofgenetically engineered fish. Citizen petition before the United States Food and Drug Administration.<www.centerforfoodsafety.org/legal_acti2.cfm>.Pew Initiative on Food and Biotechnology, 2003. Future fish – issues in science and regulation of transgenic fish.<http://pewagbiotech.org/research/fish/fish.pdf>Luoma, J.R. 2001. Fish or Foul? Coming soon to a dinner table near you: DNA filet., Mother Jones, March/April2001 <www.motherjones.com/news/outfront/2001/03/xgenic.html>Zitner , A. 2001. Gene-altered Frankenfish coming to market’ Los Angeles Times, January 2, 2001 Available at<www.organicconsumers.org/ge/dunhamfish.cfm>Goldburg, R. 2000. Something Fishy.The Gene Exchange, May 2000, <www.ucsusa.org/Gene/su98.fishy.html>Blumenthal, L 2000. Genetically altered salmon cause debate among U.S. officials.The News Tribune,Tacoma,Washington, Aug 21, 2000.Reichardt, A. 2000. Will souped up salmon sink or swim? Nature 406: 10–12.Stoll, M. 1999 Designer fish flounder over legal hurdles. Christian Science Monitor 4th March, 1999.<www.csmonitor .com/durable/1999/03/04/p19s1.htm>Stokstad,E. 2002 Engineered fish: friend or foe of the environment? Science 297: 1797.Kaufman, M. 2000 Frankenfish or tomorrow’s dinner? Washington Post, October 17, 2000, p A01 Available at:<www.mindfully.org/GE/Frankenfish-Tomorrows-Dinner .htm>Matheson, J. 1999. Will transgenic fish be the first ag-biotech food-producing animals? FDA VeterinarianNewsletter , May June 1999, Volume XIV, No III <www.fda.gov/cvm/index/fdavet/1999/may.html#GEs>
Hoag, H. 2003.Transgenic salmon still out in the cold in United States. Nature 421: 304.Wu, G., Sun, Y. & Zhu, Z. 2003. Growth hormone gene transfer in common carp. Aquatic Living Resources 16:
416-420.
Wu, G., Sun, Y. & Zhu, Z. 2003. Growth hormone gene transfer in common carp. Aquatic Living Resources 16:
416-420.
Hill, J.A., Kiessling, A. & Devlin, R.H. 2000. Coho salmon 
(Oncorhynchus kisutch) transgenic for a growth
hormone gene construct exhibit increased rates of muscle hyperplasia and detectable levels of differential geneexpression. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 57: 939–950.Royal Society of Canada 2001. Elements of precaution: recommendations for the regulation of food biotechnologyin Canada. Ottawa, Canada. p.182 <www.rsc.ca/foodbiotechnology/GMreportEN.pdf>Lindstrom C.D.V., van Do,T., Hordvik, I., Endresen, C. & Elsayed, S. 1996. Cloning of two distinct cDNAs encodingparvalbumin, the major allergen of Atlantic salmon 
(Salmo salar) . Scandinavian Journal of Immunology 44:
335–344.
See Greenpeace 2002. GE food –safe to eat? Genetic Engineering Briefing Pack, May 2002
<www.eu.greenpeace.org/downloads/gmo/GEFOODsaftey.doc>
Personal communication between Joseph Mendelson and Luke AndersonNational Research Council 2002. Animal Biotechnology: Science Based Concerns.The National Academies Press,
Washington DC, USA <http://books.nap.edu/books/0309084393/html/89.html#pagetop>Royal Society of Canada 2001. Elements of precaution: recommendations for the regulation of food biotechnologyin Canada Ottawa, Canada, January 2001 <www.rsc.ca/foodbiotechnology/GMreportEN.pdf>Royal Society, 2001.The use of genetically modified animals, In: GM Animals for Agricultural Uses.The RoyalSociety, London. <www.royalsoc.ac.uk>
About 20,000 salmon escaped from a tanker truck spill on Vancouver Island, Ref. Slaney,T.L., Hyatt, K.D.,
Northcote,T.G. & Fielden, R.J. 1996. Status of anadromous salmon and trout in British Columbia and Yukon.Fisheries 21: 20-35.
Oregon Administrative Rule 635-007-0595
<http://arcweb.sos.state.or .us/rules/OARS_600/OAR_635/635_007.html>
H.B. 189, Maryland. Laws, Chap. #54. April 10 2001 <http://mlis.state.md.us/2001rs/billfile/HB0189.htm>Anon 2002. Washington state issues ban on transgenic fish. Seafood News, 18 Dec 2002
<www.fass.org/fasstrack/news_item.asp?news_id=891>
California SB 245, Signed by Governor 10/12/03; Chpt 871, Statutes of 2003.
<http://pewagbiotech.org/resources/factsheets/legislation/index.php?StatusID=1&Year=2003>
Resolution by the Parties to the Convention for the Conservation of Salmon in the North Atlantic Ocean to
Minimise Impacts from Aquaculture, Introductions and Transfers, and Transgenics on the Wild Salmon Stocks.TheWilliamsburg Resolution Adopted at the Twentieth Annual Meeting of NASCO in June 2003 and amended at theTwenty-First Annual Meeting of NASCO in June 2004. p.23 <www.nasco.int/pdf/nasco_cnl_04_54.pdf>96 |
97 |
98 |
99 |
100|
101|
102|
103|
104|
105|
106|
107|
108|
109|GENETICALLY ENGINEERED FISH
– NEW THREATS TO THE ENVIRONMENT
REFERENCES fish

GE FISH REPORT |  19The Bergen Declaration (Ministerial Declaration from 5th North Sea Conference, Bergen, March 2002)
“Recognizing that the release of genetically modified marine organisms is an emerging issue in the North Seaowing to the inherent, potentially severe, irreversible and transboundary effects, and the need to apply theprecautionary principle, the Ministers agree to take all possible actions, in accordance with the requirements of theDirective 2001/18 EC and comparable national legislation, to ensure that the culture of genetically modifedmarine organisms is confined to secure, self-contained, land-based facilities in order to prevent their release to themarine environment.”Full text of the declaration, and further information and background to the North Sea Conference itself, isavailable at <http://odin.dep.no/md/nsc/>
Letter to Greenpeace from Margareta Winberg, Swedish Minister of Agriculture, Sep 2002: ‘According to a
decision taken by the Swedish Parliament last year “Alien species and genetically modified organisms that may bea threat to biological diversity may not be introduced”. Further , the decision states “Genetically modified fish maynot be released”.This decision is the national position regarded as an instruction for Swedish delegations in futureinternational deliberations concerning genetically engineered salmon.MAFF (Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food) 2001. Review of salmon and freshwater fisheries’, UKGovernment Response. Available at: <www.defra.gov.uk/fish/salmon/salmon.pdf> Recommendation 51: “Any GEfish kept in England and Wales should be confined to self- contained land-based and escape-proof facilities, with allnecessary measures taken to ensure they cannot deliberately (by, for example, vandals) or accidentally be releasedinto the natural environment.”
Styria: Gesetz vom 18. Mai 1999 über das Fischereirecht in Steiermark (Steiermärkisches Fischereigesetz 2000)
LGBl. Nr . 85/1999. http://ris.bka.gv.at/lr-steiermark/Vorarlberg: Gesetz über die Fischerei in den Binnengewässern (Fischereigesetz) LGBl. Nr . 47/2000,<www.vorarlberg.at/vorarlberg/land_politik/land/gesetzgebung/weitereinformationen/landesrecht/voris.htm>
Stoll, M. 1999 Designer fish flounder over legal hurdles. Christian Science Monitor 4th March, 1999.
<www.csmonitor .com/durable/1999/03/04/p19s1.htm>One of the biggest fish fa rming companies in the world, Nu treco Aquaculture, based in the Netherlands, say that
they “will never use GE eggs.” Forbes magazine, February 19, 2001 p. 106Also, ‘Norwegians applaud Greenpeace stance’, Intrafish, 6 Apr 2001. Excerpt from Ethical rules for theaquaculture association: “The association do not accept GM fish which differ from natural populations and whichcan affect biodiversity and surrounding environment in a negative way”…”It's marvellous that Greenpeace is alsotaking up the fight against genetically modified salmon,” said NFF chairman,Tarald Sivertsen. On the Norwegiansalmon farming organisation's w ebsite it is abundantly clear that Norwegian fish farmers and fish farmers across
the globe are against plans by the American company Aqua Bounty Farms to produce genetically modified salmonon a commercial basis.
Comments sent in response to information requests from Greenpeace. Other replies include:
FEDIS (Belgian Federation of retailers) “As agreed, we're info rming you of the position adopted on 9 May by the
Commission 'food safety' of FEDIS re: international comm ercialisation of eggs from GM sal mon. (....) In the case
of GM salmon, members of FEDIS cannot accept its comm ercialization because the r isks of environmental
damage have been clearly identified. It is now to competent authorities to verify them.The utmost precaution istherefore necessary. (...). Besides, if one cannot say anymore that there is global overproduction of salmon, one canstill say that supply meets demand, which remains high. Consequently, an insufficient production can certainly notbe invoked to justify a demand for authorisation as the one introduced by A/F Protein. We will forward thisstandpoint to our European organization EuroCommerce, as well as to the Ag Min Jaak Gabriels.” - Letter toGreenpeace May 2001.In 1996 the ISFA (organisation for salmon-producing countries around the world), implemented the followingresolution: In line with good environmental practice, the ISFA rejects unequivocally the production of geneticallymodified salmon. “In connection with the aim of maintaining a high animal ethics standard, the ISFA's memberswill not make use of growth hormones in their salmon production.”…. “It is not possible to make a clearerstatement. Nevertheless, every year we bear the brunt of attempts to connect gene manipulation to salmon through[publicity] from this firm. We very much appreciate Greenpeace's engagement in focusing attention on this issue. Iam hoping in any case that a united salmon industry and Greenpeace's efforts can bring an end to these attempts.Consumers across the globe should be made aware that Norwegian fish farmers base their livelihoods on asustainable and environmentally friendly production of a healthy and good product.The consumers deserve thismuch and they can rely on this.”
Declaration of the Joint Ministerial Meeting of the Helsinki and OSPAR Commissions - (JMM 2003/3(final
version)-E) <www.ospar .org/eng/html/md/joint_declaration_2003.htm>110|
111|
112|
113|
114|
115|
© GP/MCALLISTER

greenpeace international
Ottho Heldringstraat 5, 1066 AZ Amsterdam, Netherlandst +31 20 514 8150  f +31 20 514 8151www.greenpeace.orgGENETICALLY ENGINEERED FISH
– NEW THREATS TO THE ENVIRONMENT fish
© GREENPEACE