# Archivo original: global-wind-energy-outlook.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:39:51 -03 2025

2
S E P T E M B E R  2 0 0 6
GLOBAL WIND ENERGY 
OUTLOOK 2006


2Contents  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 4
The Global Status of Wind Power | Drivers for Wind Energy | The World’s Wind Resources and Grid Integration |  
The Environmental Impacts of Wind Power | Global Wind Energy Outlook Scenario | Energy Policy Issues and Recommendations
THE GLOBAL STATUS OF WIND POWER 8
Record Year in 2005 | Europe | North America | Asia / Latin America | Australasia |  Africa | Offshore
DRIVERS FOR WIND ENERGY 16
Security of Supply | Environmental Concerns | Economics | Employment and local Development |  
Technology and Industrial Development
THE WORLD’S WIND RESOURCES AND GRID INTEGRATION 22
Wind Resource Assessments | Variability and Grid Integration | Issues for Integrating Wind Power | Recent Studies
THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF WIND POWER 28
Visual Impact | Noise | Wildlife – Birds | Wildlife – Bats | Offshore Wind Farms
THE “GLOBAL WIND ENERGY OUTLOOK” SCENARIO 36
The Scenarios | Energy Efﬁciency Projections | Core Results |  Detailed Results | Regional Breakdown |  
Main Assumptions and Parameters | Costs and Beneﬁts | Global Wind Energy Outlook – Research Background
ENERGY POLICY ISSUES AND RECOMMENDATIONS 50
Legally binding Targets for Renewable Energy |  Speciﬁc Policy Mechanisms | Electricity Market Reform |  
International Action on Climate Change | Reform of International Financing | Action by International Bodies | Policy Summary
ANNEX 58

3Foreword
IN MANY PARTS OF THE WORLD , wind energy has already 
grown to be a mainstream energy source. This growth has long 
been driven by concerns about global climate change, mainly 
in the developed world and especially in Europe. 
Climate change is a complicated and alarming predicament. 
As devastating as Hurricanes Katrina and Rita may have been, 
their wrath is nothing compared to the devastation that 
climate change will wreak on our planet if governments fail to 
address the world‘s fossil fuel addiction. Cutting greenhouse 
gas emissions makes both environmental and economic 
sense. The goal of climate policy should be to keep global 
mean temperature rise to less than 2 ºC above pre-industrial 
levels in order to avoid dramatic damage to ecosystems and 
disruption to the climate system. To meet these targets, the world needs to fundamentally change the way it 
generates and uses energy in the coming decade.
However, other challenges such as energy supply security and the volatility of fossil fuel prices have become just as 
pressing, both in the OECD and in emerging market. Global energy needs are growing at a staggering rate world 
wide. Over-reliance on energy imports from few, mostly politically unstable countries and volatile oil and gas 
prices make for a shaky supply situation that is already inﬂicting massive drains on the global economy.
Wind energy is the most attractive solution to the world’s energy challenges. It is clean and fuel-free. Moreover, wind 
is indigenous and enough wind blows across the globe to cope with the ever increasing electricity demand. This report 
demonstrates that wind technology is not a dream for the future – it is real, it is mature and it can be deployed on a 
large scale. Thanks to twenty years of technological progress, wind turbines have come a long way and a wind farm 
today acts much more like a conventional power station. Moreover, wind power generation is increasingly competi -
tive with conventional fossil fuel sources and already today is on a par with new coal or gas ﬁred power stations. 
Already now, wind energy is rapidly developing into a mainstream power source in many countries of the world, 
with over 60,000 MW of installed capacity world wide and an average annual market growth rate of 28%. Wind 
energy could provide as much as 29% of the world’s electricity needs by 2030, given the political will to promote 
its large scale deployment paired with far-reaching energy efﬁciency measures. 
The political choices of the coming years will determine the world’s environmental and economic situation for 
many decades to come. While the industrialised world urgently needs to rethink its energy strategy, the developing 
world should learn from past mistakes and build their economies on the strong foundation of sustainable energy 
supply. For the sake of a sound environment, political stability and thriving economies, now is the time to commit 
to a truly secure and sustainable energy future, built on clean technologies and promoting regional development 
and the creation of millions of new jobs. The world cannot afford to stick to the ‘conventional’ energy development 
path, relying on fossil fuels, nuclear and other outdated technologies from past centuries. Wind can and has to play 
a leading role in the world’s energy future.
 
 
ARTHOUROS ZERVOS    SVEN TESKE  
Chairman  –  Global Wind Energy Council   Renewable Director  –  Greenpeace International


4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

5The Global Status of Wind Power
The global market for wind power has been expanding faster 
than any other source of renewable energy. From just 
4,800 MW in 1995 the world total has multiplied more than 
twelve-fold to reach over 59,000 MW at the end of 2005. 
The international market is expected to have an annual 
turnover in 2006 of more than € 13 billion, with an estimated 
150,000 people employed around the world. The success of 
the industry has attracted investors from the mainstream 
ﬁnance and traditional energy sectors.  
In a number of countries the proportion of electricity 
generated by wind power is now challenging conventional 
fuels. In Denmark, 20% of the country’s electricity is 
currently supplied by the wind. In Spain, the contribution has 
reached 8%, and is set to rise to 15% by the end of the 
decade. These ﬁgures show that wind power is already able to 
provide a signiﬁcant input of carbon-free electricity. In 2005, 
the global wind energy sector registered another record year, 
with a total of 11,531 MW of new capacity installed. This 
represented a 40.5% increase on an annual basis and a 24% 
cumulative growth. 
Wind power is now established as an energy source in over 
50 countries around the world. Those with the highest totals 
in 2005 were Germany (18,428 MW), Spain (10,027 MW), 
the USA (9,149 MW), India (4,430 MW) and Denmark  
(3,122 MW). A number of other countries, including Italy, the 
UK, the Netherlands, China, Japan and Portugal, have reached 
the 1,000 MW mark.
Although the wind power industry has up to now been most 
dynamic in the countries of the European Union, this is 
changing. The United States and Canada are both ex-
periencing a surge of activity, whilst new markets are opening 
up in Asia and South America. A new frontier for wind power 
development has also been established in the sea, with 
offshore wind parks beginning to make a contribution. Drivers for Wind Energy 
The growth of the market for wind energy is being driven by a 
number of factors. These have combined in a number of 
regions of the world to encourage political support for the 
industry’s development.
Security of supply:  In the absence of committed energy 
efﬁciency measures, the International Energy Agency (IEA) 
predicts that by 2030, the world’s energy needs will be 
almost 60% higher than now. At the same time, supplies of 
fossil fuels are dwindling. Some of the major economies of 
the world are having to rely increasingly on imported fuel, 
sometimes from regions of the world where conﬂict and 
political instability threaten the security of that supply. By 
contrast, wind energy is a massive indigenous power source 
which is permanently available, with no fuel costs, in virtually 
every country in the world.
Environmental concerns:  The impetus behind wind power 
expansion has come increasingly from the urgent need to 
combat global climate change. This is now accepted to be the 
greatest environmental threat facing the world. Under the 
1997 Kyoto Protocol, OECD member states are committed to 
cut their CO₂ emissions by an average of 5.2%. In the 
developing world, more immediate concern comes from the 
direct environmental effects of burning fossil fuels, particu -
larly air pollution.
Other environmental effects resulting from the range of fuels 
currently used to generate electricity include the dangers of 
fossil fuel exploration and mining, pollution caused by 
accidental oil spills and the health risks associated with 
radiation. Exploiting renewable sources of energy such as 
wind power avoids these risks and hazards. 
Economics:  As the global market has grown, wind power has 
seen a dramatic fall in cost. A modern wind turbine annually 
produces 180 times more electricity at less than half the cost 
per unit (kWh) than its equivalent twenty years ago. At good 
locations wind can compete with the cost of both coal and 
gas-ﬁred power. The competitiveness of wind power has been 
further enhanced by the recent rise in the price of fossil fuels. 
If the “external costs” associated with the pollution and 
health effects resulting from fossil fuel and nuclear genera -
tion were fully taken into account, wind power would work 
out even cheaper.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

6Wind energy also provides economic beneﬁt through the 
employment which the industry generates. In the developing 
world, off-grid wind power opens up economic opportunities 
to dispersed communities.
Technology and industry:  Since the 1980s, when the ﬁrst 
commercial wind turbines were deployed, their capacity, 
efﬁciency and visual design have all improved dramatically. A 
modern wind turbine annually produces 180 times more elec -
tricity at less than half the cost per unit (kWh) than its 
equivalent twenty years ago. The largest turbines being 
manufactured now are of more than 5 MW capacity, with 
rotor diameters of over 100 metres. Modern turbines are 
modular and quick to install, whilst wind farms vary in size 
from a few megawatts up to several hundred.
Wind energy has become big business. The major wind 
turbine manufacturers are commissioning multi-million 
dollar factories around the world in order to satisfy demand. 
The World’s Wind Resources and 
Grid Integration
Studies of the world’s wind resources have conﬁrmed that 
these are extremely large and well distributed across almost 
all regions and countries. Lack of wind is unlikely to be a 
limiting factor on global wind power development.   
As the industry expands, large quantities of wind powered 
electricity will need to be integrated into the global grid 
network. The variability of the wind is not an issue which will 
hinder this development, however. 
The already established control methods and backup capacity 
available for dealing with variable demand and supply are more 
than adequate to handle the additional variable supply of wind 
power at penetration levels up to around 20%. Above that, some 
changes may be needed in power systems and their method of 
operation. Improved forecasting techniques and increased 
geographical dispersion of wind farms - ensuring that the wind is 
always blowing somewhere - will both help integration. 
The potential for incorporating large amounts of wind power 
generation can be seen from the example of Denmark, where 
20% of total electricity consumption can already be met by 
the wind. The DENA study in Germany concluded that wind power could triple its power production by 2015, providing 
14% of net electricity consumption, without any additional 
need for reserve or balancing power stations.
The Environmental Impacts of 
Wind Power
The construction and operation of wind power, often in areas 
of open countryside, raises issues of visual impact, noise and 
the effect on local wildlife. These issues are usually addressed 
through an environmental impact assessment. 
Visual impact:  Wind turbines are tall structures likely to be 
visible over a relatively wide area. While some people express 
concern about the effect wind turbines have on the land -
scape, others see them as elegant and graceful, symbols of a 
less polluted future. 
Birds:  Can be affected by wind energy development through 
loss of habitat, disturbance to their breeding areas and by 
death or injury caused by the rotating turbine blades. Studies 
from Europe and the United States have shown, however, 
that the average rate of collision has been no more than two 
birds per turbine per year. These ﬁgures should be set against 
the millions of birds killed each year by power lines, pesti -
cides and road vehicles.
Noise:  Compared to road trafﬁc, trains, construction 
activities and other sources of industrial noise, the sound 
generated by wind turbines in operation is comparatively low. 
Better design and better insulation have made more recent 
wind turbine models much quieter. The approach of regula -
tory authorities has been to ensure that the turbines are 
positioned far enough away from nearby homes to avoid 
unacceptable disturbance.  
Global Wind Energy Outlook 
Scenario
The Global Wind Energy Outlook Scenario examines the 
future potential for wind power up to the year 2050. Three 
different scenarios for wind power are assumed – a Reference 
scenario based on ﬁgures from the International Energy 
Agency, a Moderate version assuming that current targets for 
renewable energy are successful, and an Advanced version 

7assuming that all policy options in favour of renewables have 
been adopted. These are then set against two scenarios for 
global energy demand. Under the Reference scenario, growth 
in demand is again based on IEA projections; under the High 
Energy Efﬁciency version, a range of energy efﬁciency 
measures result in a substantial reduction in demand.  
The results show that wind energy can make a major 
contribution towards satisfying the global need for clean, 
renewable electricity within the next 30 years and that its 
penetration in the supply system can be substantially 
increased if serious energy efﬁciency measures are imple -
mented at the same time. Under the Reference wind power 
scenario, wind energy would supply 5 % of the world’s 
electricity by 2030 and 6.6 % by 2050. Under the Moderate 
scenario, wind energy’s contribution would range from 
15.6 % in 2030 to 17.7 % by 2050. Under the Advanced 
scenario, wind energy’s contribution to world electricity 
demand would range from 29.1 % in 2030 up to 34.2 % by 
2050.
All three scenarios assume that an increasing proportion of 
new wind power capacity is installed in growing markets such 
as South America, China, the Paciﬁc and South Asia.
THE COSTS AND BENEFITS OF THESE SCENARIOS 
INCLUDE:
Investment:  The annual investment value of the wind energy 
market in 2030 will range from €21.2 billion under the 
Reference scenario to €45 bn under the Moderate scenario 
and up to €84.8 bn under the Advanced scenario.
Generation costs:  The cost of producing electricity from 
wind energy is expected to fall to 3-3.8 €cents/kWh at a 
good site and 4-6 €cents/kWh at a site with low average 
wind speeds by 2020.  
Employment:  The number of jobs created by the wind energy 
market will range from 480,000 in 2030 under the Reference 
scenario to 1.1 million under the Moderate scenario and to 
2.1 million under the Advanced scenario.  
Carbon dioxide savings:  Savings will range from an annual 
535 million tonnes  CO₂ in 2030 under the Reference 
scenario to 1,661 million tonnes under the Moderate scenario 
to 3,100 million tonnes under the Advanced scenario. Energy Policy Issues and 
Recommendations
Renewable technologies are disadvantaged by the failure to 
penalise conventional fuels for the economic cost of their 
pollution and other hazards - and by distortions in the world’s 
electricity markets created by massive ﬁnancial and struc -
tural support to conventional technologies. Without political 
support, wind power cannot establish its positive contribu -
tion towards environmental goals and security of supply.
ACTION IS NEEDED IN THE FOLLOWING AREAS:
Targets for renewable energy:  Setting targets will encourage 
governments to develop the necessary regulatory frame -
works to expand renewables, including ﬁnancial frameworks, 
grid access regulation, planning and administrative proce -
dures.
Speciﬁc policy mechanisms:  The market for generated 
power needs to be clearly deﬁned in national laws, including 
stable, long term ﬁscal measures that minimise investor risk 
and ensure an adequate return on investment.
Electricity market reform:  Reforms needed in the electricity 
sector to encourage renewable energy include the removal of 
barriers to market entry, removing subsidies to fossil fuels 
and nuclear and internalising the social and environmental 
costs of polluting energy.
International action on climate change:  Targets for a 
continuing reduction in greenhouse gas emissions must be 
established beyond the present Kyoto period of 2008-12.
Reform of international ﬁnancing:  Multi-lateral ﬁnancing 
mechanisms should include a deﬁned and increasing 
percentage of lending directed to renewable energy projects, 
coupled with a rapid phase out of support for conventional, 
polluting energy projects.
Action by international bodies:  The G8 bloc of countries and 
the UN Commission on Sustainable Development should 
support global renewables development.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

8
THE GLOBAL STATUS OF WIND POWER

9THE GLOBAL STATUS OF WIND POWER
Over the past decade the global market for wind power has 
been expanding faster than any other source of renewable 
energy. Since the year 2000 the average annual increase in 
cumulative installed capacity has been 28%. From just 
4,800 MW in 1995 the world total has multiplied more than 
twelve-fold in ten years to reach over 59,000 MW by the end 
of 2005.
The result is an international industry which is expected to 
have an annual turnover in 2006 of more than 13 billion 
Euros. A substantial manufacturing industry has been created, 
with an estimated 150,000 people employed around the 
world. Such has been the success of the industry that it has 
attracted an increasing number of investors from the 
mainstream ﬁnance and traditional energy sectors.  
In a number of countries the proportion of electricity 
generated by wind power is now challenging conventional 
fuels. In Denmark, 20% of the country’s electricity is 
currently supplied by the wind. In northern Germany, wind 
can contribute 35% of the supply. In Spain, Europe’s ﬁfth 
largest country, the contribution has reached 8%, and is set 
to rise to 15% by the end of the decade. 
These ﬁgures show that wind power is already able to provide 
a signiﬁcant input of carbon-free electricity. Record Year in 2005
Last year, the global wind energy sector registered another 
record year. During 2005, a total of 11,531 MW of new 
capacity was installed in more than 30 countries. This 
represented a 40.5% increase on an annual basis and a 24% 
cumulative growth. At the end of 2005, the world’s total 
installed wind power capacity stood at 59,084 MW.  
Wind power is now established as an energy source in over 
50 countries around the world. Those countries with the 
highest total installed capacity are Germany (18,428 MW), 
Spain (10,027 MW), the USA (9,149 MW), India (4,430 MW) 
and Denmark (3,122 MW). A number of other countries, 
including Italy, the UK, the Netherlands, China, Japan and 
Portugal, have reached the 1,000 MW mark.
Although the wind power industry has up to now been most 
dynamic in the countries of the European Union, this is 
beginning to change. The United States and Canada are both 
experiencing a surge of activity, whilst new markets are 
opening up in Asia and South America. In Asia, both China 
and India registered a record level of expansion during 2005.
Whilst most wind power development has so far been on 
land, pressures of space and the attraction of greater 
productivity from a better wind regime have taken developers 
offshore. Establishing wind energy projects in the sea has 
opened up new demands, including the need for stronger 
foundations, long underwater cables and larger individual 
turbines, but offshore wind parks are expected to contribute 
an increasing proportion of global capacity, especially in 
northern Europe.
010.00020.00030.00040.00050.00060.000
[ MW ]
1995
4,8001996
6,1001997
7,6001998
10,2001999
13,6002000
17,4002001
23,9002002
31,1002003
39,3412004
47,6202005
59,08 4GLOBAL CUMULA TIVE WIND POWER CAP ACITY

10Another way to manage the growth in demand for wind 
energy in areas with limited available land has been through 
“repowering”. This involves replacing older, less efﬁcient wind 
turbines with a smaller number of more powerful recent 
models. Repowering is already gaining pace in a number of 
countries in which the wind industry has been established for 
ten years or more. These include Denmark, the UK, Germany 
and the US. 
Europe
The European Union still leads the world, with over 
40,500 MW of installed wind capacity at the end of 2005, 
representing 69% of the global total. This has already 
achieved, ﬁve years ahead of time, the target set by the 
European Commission for 40,000 MW by 2010.  
Wind energy expansion in the EU has been driven by individu -
al member states’ policies to encourage renewable energy. 
These incorporate a range of ﬁnancial incentives, including 
investment grants and premium tariffs, with the aim of 
making a contribution towards the reduction of greenhouse 
gas emissions. In 2001 an EU directive on renewable energy 
set each member state a target for the proportion of 
renewable energy it should achieve by 2010. The overall 
European target is for 21% of electricity supply.  
The European Wind Energy Association (EWEA) predicts that 
by 2010, wind energy alone will save enough greenhouse gas 
emissions to meet one third of the European Union’s Kyoto 
obligation. EWEA’s current targets are for 75,000 MW of wind capacity in Europe by 2010, 180,000 MW by 2020 and 
300,000 MW by 2030.
The leading country for wind energy in Europe is Germany . 
Encouraged by successive laws, most recently the 2000 
Renewable Energy Sources Act (updated in 2004), generators 
of wind power have been paid a premium tariff for their 
output, gradually reducing over a 20 year contract period. 
This policy mechanism has proved extremely successful, 
attracting a large number of small business investors, and 
resulting in double digit annual growth rates since the 1990s.
Wind projects also receive preferential treatment under 
German land planning law, with each local authority 
expected to designate zones where wind parks will be encour -
aged. Wind power currently provides about 5.5% of German 
electricity, with an installed capacity at the end of 2005 of 
18,428 MW. 
Although the rate of development on land in Germany has 
already started to slow down, mainly due to a shortage of 
available sites, this will be compensated for by the repower -
ing of older turbines and by a new offshore market in the 
North and Baltic Seas. A study by the German Environment 
Ministry (BMU) estimates that offshore wind power could 
reach a level of 12,000-15,000 MW by 2020.
Spain  has rapidly increased its wind power capacity since the 
mid-1990s, encouraged by a national premium tariff and 
policy based on regional industrial regeneration. In many 
provinces prospective developers have only been able to 
access project sites if they ﬁrst commit to establishing a 
manufacturing base in the region. This has resulted in the 
TOP 10 NEW INSTALLED CAPACITY ( JAN.-DEC. 2005)
German yUS
SpainIndiaPortugalChinaItalyUKFranceAustralia Rest of the worl dTOP 10 NEW INST ALLED CAP ACITY ( JAN.-DEC. 2005 )
New capacity MW %
US 2,431 21,1
Germany 1,808 15,7
Spain 1,764 15,3
India 1,430 12,4
Portugal 500 4,3
China 498 4,3
Italy 452 3,9
UK 446 3,9
France 367 3,2
Australia 328 2,8
Top 10 – Total 10,024 86,9
Rest of the world 1,507 13,1
World total 11,531 100,0

11relatively poor but windy province of Navarra, for example, 
achieving major economic development and a contribution 
from wind power now approaching 60% of its electricity 
supply. In both the more densely populated provinces of 
Castilla la Mancha and Galicia, the level has reached more 
than 20%. 
Most of the wind turbines deployed in Spain are manufac -
tured domestically. Last year a near record 1,764 MW of wind 
turbines were commissioned, a 20% increase on 2004, and 
saving the emission of an additional 19 million tonnes of carbon 
dioxide. This took the Spanish total to just over 10,000 MW, 
enough to satisfy 8.25% of the country’s electricity demand. The 
Spanish government’s target is to reach more than 20,000 MW 
by 2010.
Denmark  has been the pioneer of the European wind turbine 
manufacturing industry and continues to have the highest 
penetration of wind power in its supply system. More than 
3,000 MW of capacity was operating by the end of 2005. 
When the wind blows strongly, wind energy supplies more 
than half the electricity in the western half of the country. 
Projections by the national Transmission System Operator 
Energinet show that by 2010, electricity consumption in 
western Denmark could be regularly satisﬁed by a mixture of 
wind and small combined heat and power stations, without 
the need for centralised generation. In the 1990s, Denmark 
also pioneered the development of offshore wind farms, and 
still has the largest sea-based wind park in the world.  
These market leaders are now being joined by a second wave 
of countries, including Portugal, France, the UK, Italy, the 
Netherlands  and Austria . In Portugal, strong government 
policy supported by a ﬁxed tariff payment system has seen 
wind capacity grow from 100 MW in 2000 to over 1,000 MW 
by the end of 2005. In Italy, which introduced a national 
target for renewable energy linked to a green certiﬁcate 
trading system in 2001, wind capacity grew by 452 MW in 
2005 to reach more than 1,700 MW. 
The potential of the ten new states which joined the 
European Union in 2004 has still to be realised, but a number 
of them, including Poland, Hungary  and the Baltic States , 
are expected to take off in the next few years. North America
In 2005, nearly a quarter of new global capacity was installed 
in North America, where the total increased by 37%. Wind 
energy gained momentum in both the United States and 
Canada. 
The birthplace of large scale wind power deployment in 
California during the 1980s and early 1990s, the  
United States  is experiencing a revival which could soon see 
it match the success of the European market leaders. With 
large open spaces available for development, many US states 
have an excellent wind regime and a growing demand for 
energy that avoids the volatility of fossil fuel prices.
The US industry shattered all previous annual records in 2005 
to install nearly 2,500 MW of new capacity. This brought the 
country’s total wind generating capacity up to more than 
9,100 MW. The industry is expected to turn in an even better 
performance in 2006, with new installations likely to top 
3,000 MW.
Spreading out from its Californian base, there are now utility-
scale developments across 31 US states. New wind farms 
completed in 2005 include twelve projects of 100 MW or 
more, ranging geographically from the 140 MW Maple Ridge 
project in New York to the 150 MW Hopkins Ridge project in 
Washington state, in the Paciﬁc Northwest. The largest single 
project completed last year was the 210 MW Horse Hollow 
wind energy center in Texas. Texas added some 700 MW of 
wind in 2005 – the largest amount of any state – bringing it 
close to long-time national leader California.
Growth in the US market is largely due to the current three 
year window of stability provided by the federal incentive for 
wind energy, the Production Tax Credit (PTC). For the ﬁrst 
time in the credit’s history, the US Congress extended the 
PTC before it expired, taking it through to the end of 2007.  
As a result, the wind industry is looking forward to several 
record-breaking years in a row. THE GLOBAL STATUS OF WIND POWER

12Failure to renew the PTC on time has previously seen a 
“roller-coaster” US market, with fallow years of falling 
investor conﬁdence followed by brief boom periods. The 
American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) is currently 
lobbying for a longer term extension of the incentive. With 
stable, supportive policies, wind energy could provide at least 
6% of US electricity by 2020, according to the AWEA, a share 
similar to that of hydropower today. However a share of 
more than 20% wind power is possible in the longer term.  
Thanks to a mixture of federal incentives and initiatives by 
individual provinces to increase the contribution from 
renewable energy, wind capacity in Canada  increased by an 
impressive 54% in 2005 and now stands at 683 MW. This is 
enough to power more than 200,000 Canadian homes.
An important contributor to Canada’s vibrant market has 
been the federal government’s Wind Power Production 
Incentive (WPPI). In 2005, the WPPI was extended to 2010, 
and with the funds available increased to support up to 
4,000 MW of capacity. Several provinces have also imple -
mented policies to encourage wind projects, including utility 
mandates for up to 2,000 MW of new wind farms.
As a result of these policy measures, 2006 is expected to see 
at least 500 MW of wind projects commissioned. The 
Canadian Wind Energy Association estimates that more than 
8,000 MW could be in place by 2015.Asia
The Asian continent is developing into one of the main power -
houses of wind energy development, accounting for 19% of new 
installations in 2005. With a growth rate of over 46%, total 
capacity in the region reached nearly 7 ,000 MW. 
The strongest Asian market remains India , with the installation of 
over 1,430 MW of new capacity last year taking its total to 
4,430 MW. This pushed it into fourth position in the international 
wind power league table. The Indian Wind Turbine Manufacturers 
Association (IWTMA) expects between 1,500 and 1,800 MW to 
be commissioned every year for the next three years.
Incentives are provided to the wind energy sector by the 
Indian government in the form of tax breaks and tax 
reductions. The 2003 Electricity Act also established State 
Electricity Regulatory Commissions in most states with a 
mandate to promote renewable energy through preferential 
tariffs and a minimum obligation on distribution companies 
to source a certain share of their electricity supply from 
renewables. Tariffs for grid connected wind farms vary from 
state to state.
Over the past few years, both the government and the wind 
power industry have succeeded in injecting greater stability 
into the Indian market. This has encouraged larger private 
and public sector enterprises to invest. It has also stimulated 
a stronger domestic manufacturing sector; some companies 
now source more than 80% of the components for their 
turbines in India. This has resulted in both more cost effective 
production and additional local employment.
The geographical spread of Indian wind power has so far been 
concentrated in a few regions, especially the southern state 
of Tamil Nadu, which accounts for more than half of all 
installations. This is beginning to change, with other states, 
including Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan and Andhra 
Pradesh, starting to catch up. With the potential for up to 
65,000 MW of wind capacity across the country (IWTMA 
estimate), progress in India should be further accelerated 
over the next decade.
With its large land mass and long coastline, China  is rich in 
wind energy potential. The Chinese Meteorology Research 
Institute estimates the land-based exploitable wind resource 
to have the potential for 253 GW of capacity. A further 750 
GW could be provided by offshore projects. 


13The ﬁrst Chinese wind farm went on line in 1986 as a 
demonstration project. By the end of 2005, total installations 
in mainland China had reached 1,260 MW, representing an 
annual growth of 60%.
Chinese government policy has been to encourage the 
localisation of wind turbine manufacture, thus reducing costs 
so that wind power can compete with fossil fuel generation. 
China’s power generation industry is currently dominated by 
coal-ﬁred power stations, which cause air pollution and other 
environmental problems. To establish a domestic turbine 
manufacturing industry, the National Development and 
Reform Commission (NDRC) therefore promoted the idea of 
Wind Power Concessions for large scale commercial 
development. Under the concession process local authorities 
invite investors, both international and domestic, to develop 
100 MW size wind farms at potential sites, with a tendering 
procedure aimed at bringing down the generating cost and 
increasing the proportion of locally made components. One 
rule is that 70% of components must be made in China.
Most recently, the wind power market in China has been 
signiﬁcantly boosted by a new Renewable Energy Law, which 
came into force at the beginning of 2006. The aim of this law 
is to establish a national target for renewable development 
and to adopt a national supportive tariff system. As a result, a 
large number of international companies have launched joint 
ventures with Chinese companies and are setting up 
manufacturing and assembly outlets. The current goal for wind power in China is to reach 
5,000 MW by the end of 2010. Looking further ahead, 30 GW 
of wind power has been proposed by the Chinese government 
in its long term planning up to 2020. By the end of that year 
it is estimated that, in order to satisfy growing demand, total 
power capacity in China will have reached 1,000 GW. Wind 
generated electricity would by then represent 1.5% of total 
power production.
The wind energy industry in Japan  has also been expanding, 
partly spurred by a government requirement for electricity 
companies to source an increasing percentage of their supply 
from renewables (Renewable Portfolio Standard-type law), 
partly by the introduction of market incentives. These include 
both a premium price for the output from renewable plants 
and capital grants towards clean energy projects. The result 
has been an increase in Japan’s installed capacity from 
461 MW at the end of ﬁscal year 2002 to more than 
1,000 MW by March 2006.
The ofﬁcial government target for wind power in Japan is 
3,000 MW by 2010. The main factors which could delay this 
being achieved are the relatively low level of the RPS 
percentage target and the difﬁculties encountered by some 
wind projects because of turbulent and unstable weather 
conditions, especially in mountainous regions.
South Korea  and Taiwan  have also experienced strong 
growth in 2005, with close to 100 MW of installed capacity 
each by the end of the year. The Philippines  are estimated to 
have the highest wind energy potential in the Southeast 
Asian region, although only one wind farm of 25 MW had 
been installed by December 2005. The Philippines govern -
ment has set a target of 417 MW within ten years, while the 
US-based National Renewable energy Laboratory has 
concluded that the country could support over 70,000 MW 
of installed capacity, delivering more than 195 billion kWh 
per year.THE GLOBAL STATUS OF WIND POWER


14Latin America
Although there has been little activity in Latin America to 
date, a number of governments are in the process of 
implementing renewable energy laws or programmes, and 
wind energy is expected to develop at a strong rate in the 
coming years.
High oil prices, electricity shortages and air pollution 
problems have put pressure on the government in Brazil  to 
look for sustainable solutions through ethanol, biomass, 
hydroelectricity, wind and solar power. Wind power matches 
well the proﬁle of the country’s existing hydroelectric plants, 
especially in the north-east, where high winds coincide with 
low rainfall and provide a high load factor. According to a 
wind atlas published by the Brazilian Ministry for Mines and 
Energy (MME) in 2001,,the country’s total wind potential is 
estimated at 143 GW, even when only sites with wind speeds 
above 7 m/s (metres per second) are considered.
In 2002 the Brazilian government introduced the PROINFA 
programme to stimulate the development of biomass, wind 
and small hydro generation. Its initial target was to imple -
ment 3,300 MW of projects by the end of 2006. Power from 
renewable generators is bought by the Brazilian state-
controlled electricity utility Eletrobrás under 20 year power 
purchase agreements, with a guaranteed purchase price and 
project ﬁnancing available through the Brazilian National 
Development Bank (BNDES). Domestic suppliers must 
account for 60% of the equipment and construction costs. 
Due to its limited market perspective, with a short timescale 
for the programme and no follow-up in sight, PROINFA did 
not, however, trigger the desired investment in additional 
manufacturing plants. With an effective monopoly in 
electricity supply, considerable bureaucracy and lack of 
infrastructure, the cost of installing wind power has been 
relatively high (about US$2,000/kW). Progress has therefore 
been slow, and the ﬁrst PROINFA wind farms are only now 
beginning to be built. Total wind power capacity in Brazil is 
expected to increase from 28 MW in 2005 to about 200 MW 
in 2006. 
Despite having only two small wind farms in operation, the 
Mexican Wind Energy Association projects that Mexico  could 
see at least 3,000 MW of capacity installed over the period 
2006-2014. One reason is the passage through the Mexican 
Congress in December 2005 of a Renewable Energy Utilisa -tion Law aimed at establishing a programme with a target for 
renewables to supply 8% of national power production by 
2012 (excluding large hydro). The law also provides for the 
creation of a trust to support renewable energy projects, rural 
electriﬁcation, biofuels and technological R&D.
Other countries with potential for wind energy in Latin 
America and the Caribbean are Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, 
Nicaragua, Uruguay, Colombia, the Dominican Republic and 
Jamaica. 
Australasia
Australia  enjoys one of the best wind resources in the world, 
resulting in phenomenal capacity factors in many regions 
with predominantly open farmland. Growth of the country’s 
installed capacity almost doubled in 2005, with the addition 
of 328 MW, taking the total to 708 MW. At the same time 
approximately 6,000 MW of projects are in various stages of 
pre-construction development.
The main national incentive for wind energy is the Mandatory 
Renewable Energy Target, which has a modest goal for 9,500  
GWh of renewables generation by 2010 – a little over 1% of 
Australia’s electricity demand. The Australian Wind Energy 
Association (Auswind) has called for this to be increased to 
10%. 
Although some individual states are planning to introduce 
more ambitious incentive schemes, such as the Victoria state 
government’s target for 10% of renewable energy capacity by 
2010, Auswind argues that federal policy needs to recognise 
that wind energy is a mature technology which requires 
speciﬁc mechanisms to address the price gap between it and 
that of conventional fossil fuel generation. The industry 
believes that nationally, at least 600 MW of new annual 
capacity is required for the renewable energy industry to 
continue growing and for Australia to maintain a wind energy 
manufacturing base.
Although only 168 MW of wind capacity was installed by the 
end of 2005, New Zealand  is equally poised to become a 
dynamic market. After a quiet period, almost 1,000 MW of 
projects have consent to start construction, with the 
potential for 2,000 MW of future capacity to follow on.

15Africa
The potential for large scale wind power development in 
Africa is concentrated in the north and the south, with 
relatively low wind speeds experienced in the central belt. 
In the north, there has been development in Morocco , with 
64 MW installed and a national action plan to install 
600 MW by 2010, whilst Tunisia  is waiting for its ﬁrst 60 MW 
project to come to fruition. The most successful country has 
been Egypt , where several large wind farms have been 
constructed within an 80 km 2 designated zone at Zafarana on 
the Gulf of Suez. Most of these have been completed with 
the support of European government aid agencies. A further 
area of 700 km 2 at Gabal El-Zayt on the Gulf has now been 
earmarked to host a 3,000 MW wind farm. This site enjoys an 
excellent average wind speed of 10.5 metres/sec. 
From a current level of 145 MW, the Egyptian government’s 
New and Renewable Energy Authority is looking for the 
country to install 850 MW by 2010. By 2020-25 the total 
could have reached 2,750 MW.
In the south, South Africa  saw its ﬁrst small installation in 
2002, but larger projects have yet to be encouraged by the 
right market incentives. 
Offshore
The possibility of locating wind turbines in the sea bed has 
opened up a new frontier for wind power, especially in the 
countries of northern Europe, where the availability of 
relatively shallow coastal waters has combined with the need 
to ﬁnd space for much larger projects than are possible on 
land.
The pioneer in offshore wind farming has been Denmark , 
which has installed the two largest wind parks in the sea – 
160 MW at Horns Rev in the North Sea and 158 MW at 
Nysted in the Baltic. Two further large developments at the 
same sites are now progressing.The UK has also taken on a leading role, with 214 MW 
already built in four locations, a further 1,000 MW+ with 
agreement to proceed across eight sites, and even larger 
individual projects (of up to 1,000 MW each) planned within 
three strategic offshore areas identiﬁed by the UK govern -
ment. 
Other offshore wind farms have been built around the coasts 
of Sweden  and Ireland , with the total installed capacity in 
Europe reaching 680 MW at the end of 2005. Further 
developments are planned or under construction off the 
coasts of the Netherlands, Belgium, France  and Spain . In the 
United States , offshore sites are progressing through the 
planning stages off the east coast and off Texas in the Gulf of 
Mexico.   
Installing wind turbines in the sea has proved more expensive 
than anticipated, however, and a number of projects are 
currently on hold whilst their economics are re-assessed. One 
factor which is expected to improve the viability of offshore 
wind farms is the commercial deployment of the new 
generation of larger capacity turbines (over 5 MW). Another 
issue to be resolved is how the costs of building new grid con -
nection cables out to sea will be shared between the 
developers and the electricity supply industry.THE GLOBAL STATUS OF WIND POWER


16
DRIVERS FOR WIND ENERGY

17DRIVERS FOR WIND ENERGY
The growth of the market for wind energy is being driven by a 
number of factors, including the wider context of energy 
supply and demand, the rising proﬁle of environmental issues 
and the impressive improvements in the technology itself. 
These factors have combined in a number of regions of the 
world to encourage political support for the industry’s 
development.
Security of Supply
Global demand for energy is increasing at a breathtaking 
pace. The International Energy Agency (IEA) predicts that by 
2030, the world’s energy needs will be almost 60% higher 
than now. Two-thirds of this increase will occur in China, India 
and other rapidly developing economies; these countries will 
account for almost half of global energy consumption by 
2030.
If this sharp increase in world energy demand actually takes 
place, it would require signiﬁcant investment in new 
generating capacity and grid infrastructure, especially in the 
developing world. The IEA estimates that the global power 
sector will need to build some 4,800 GW of new capacity 
between now and 2030. This will require investment of 
approximately US$2 trillion (€1.7 trillion) in power generation 
and US$1.8 trillion in transmission and distribution networks.
Industrialised countries face a different but parallel situation. 
Whilst demand is increasing, the days of overcapacity in 
electricity production are coming to an end. Many older 
power plants will soon reach the end of their working lives. 
The IEA predicts that by 2030, over 2,000 GW of power 
generation capacity will need to be built in the OECD 
countries, including the replacement of retiring plants.
Without energy efﬁciency measures, electricity demand in 
the European Union is expected to increase by 51% between 
2000 and 2030, requiring investments in power generation 
of around €625 billion (US$ 760 billion). About half of this is 
needed for the replacement of existing power plants.The potential effect of energy saving on global demand could 
be considerable, however. According to the study by Ecofys 
and DLR used in this report, electricity demand could increase 
by only 30% by 2030, if a wide range of technologies and 
initiatives were introduced. Although this ‘High energy 
efﬁciency’ scenario recognises the limitations set by cost and 
other obstacles, global electricity demand would be 39% 
lower in 2030 than currently estimated by the IEA’s Reference 
scenario.
Just as energy demand continues to increase, in the absence 
of such efﬁciency measures, supplies of the main fossil fuels 
used in power generation, especially gas, are dwindling. One 
result is that some of the major economies of the world are 
having to rely increasingly on imported fuel, sometimes from 
regions of the world where conﬂict and political instability 
threaten the security of that supply.
In Europe, sources of indigenous oil and gas, mainly from the 
North Sea, are in rapid decline. At present, 50% of Europe’s 
energy supplies are imported. Within two decades this is 
expected to increase to 70%. Even uranium, which currently 
supplies the fuel for over 30% of European electricity, has a 
global lifetime estimated at no more than 40 years, whilst 
the EU countries contain less than 2% of the world’s uranium 
reserves. 
Driven by these pressures, the last two years have seen 
unprecedented increases in the prices of both oil and gas. Oil 
has risen from a range of $25 - $35 a barrel in 2004 to a peak 
of more than $70, with the expectation that the price will 
remain high for some years to come. Rising gas wholesale 
costs have seen domestic electricity prices increase across 
Europe; in the UK average domestic energy bills have risen 
since 2003 by 63% for gas and 44% for electricity. 
Analysts point out that the cumulative increase in real crude 
oil prices since 2002 is close to that of the oil shocks of the 
1970s, which produced two global recessions and an 
unprecedented surge in inﬂation. Increasingly, governments 
around the world are waking up to the threat that the current 
shaky supply situation is posing to their economic growth.

18By contrast to the uncertainties surrounding supplies of 
conventional fuels, and volatile prices, wind energy is a 
massive indigenous power source which is permanently 
available in virtually every country in the world. There are no 
fuel costs, no geo-political risk and no supply dependence on 
imported fuels from politically unstable regions. 
Environmental Concerns
The impetus behind wind power expansion has come increas -
ingly from the urgent need to combat global climate change. 
This is now accepted to be the greatest environmental threat 
facing the world. The UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change projects that average temperatures around the world 
will increase by up to 5.8°C over the coming century. This is 
predicted to result in a wide range of climate shifts, including 
melting of the polar ice caps, ﬂooding of low-lying land, storms, 
droughts and violent changes in weather patterns. Responsibility 
for climate change lies with the excessive build-up of green -
house gases in the atmosphere, a trend encouraged by the 
world’s growing industrialisation. Within energy use, the main 
culprit is fossil fuels, whose combustion produces carbon dioxide, 
one of the main greenhouse gases. 
A shift in the way the world produces and consumes energy is 
therefore essential. Alongside more efﬁcient use of energy, 
renewable sources of energy offer the potential for deep cuts 
in carbon dioxide emissions.The main international driver for combating climate change 
has been the 1997 Kyoto Protocol. This set national targets 
for OECD member states to cut their CO₂ emissions by an 
average of 5.2% from their 1990 levels by 2012. Combating 
climate change is only a secondary driver for wind energy in 
the developing world, however. More immediate concern 
comes from the direct environmental effects of burning fossil 
fuels, particularly air pollution. This is a major issue in 
countries like India and China, which use large quantities of 
coal for power generation. 
Other environmental effects resulting from the range of fuels 
currently used to generate electricity include the landscape 
degradation and dangers of fossil fuel exploration and mining, 
the pollution caused by accidental oil spills and the health 
risks associated with radiation produced by the routine 
operation and waste management of the nuclear fuel cycle. 
Exploiting renewable sources of energy, including wind 
power, avoids these risks and hazards.  
Economics
As the global market has grown, wind power has seen a 
dramatic fall in cost. A modern wind turbine annually 
produces 180 times more electricity and at less than half the 
cost per unit (kWh) than its equivalent twenty years ago. At 
good locations wind can compete with the cost of both coal 
and gas-ﬁred power. 


19The cost of wind power generation falls as the average wind 
speed rises. Analysis by industry magazine Windpower 
Monthly (Jan 2006) shows that at a site with an average 
wind speed of more than 7 metres per second, and a capital 
cost per installed kilowatt of approximately € 1,000, wind is 
already cheaper than gas, coal and nuclear.
The competitiveness of wind power has been further 
enhanced by the recent rise in the price of fossil fuels, in 
particular the gas used to fuel power stations. In the United 
States, this has made wind generated electricity an increas -
ingly attractive option for power utilities faced with rising 
costs. Against the volatility of conventional electricity costs, 
wind offers an energy source which has no fuel element and 
is unaffected by world trade issues. 
Direct cost comparisons between wind power and other 
generation technologies are misleading, however, because 
they do not account for the “external costs” to society and 
the environment derived from burning fossil fuels or from 
nuclear generation. These external costs, including the effects 
of air pollution and radiation emissions, are not included in 
electricity prices. 
The pan-European study, known as the “ExternE” project, 
conducted across all 15 original EU member states, has 
assessed these costs for a range of fuels. Its latest results, 
published in 2002, showed wind power as having the lowest 
range of these hidden costs - 0.15 to 0.25 € cents/kWh – 
compared to 2 to 15 € cents/kWh for coal. The study 
concluded that the cost of electricity from coal or oil would double, and that from gas increase by 30%, if their external 
costs associated with the environment and health were taken 
into account.
The polluting effect of fossil fuels has now been reﬂected 
through carbon reduction measures such as the European 
Union’s emissions trading scheme, which sets a limit on the 
amount of carbon dioxide which can be emitted by all major 
industrial enterprises. 
Employment and Local 
Development
Wind energy also provides economic beneﬁt through the 
employment which the industry generates. Manufacturing 
wind turbines and their components offers major job 
opportunities, often building on existing engineering skills 
and raw materials. In rural areas, wind energy can bring 
investment and jobs to isolated communities; hosting wind 
farms provides farmers with a steady income whilst they 
continue to graze or crop their land.  
Employment levels vary from country to country, but the 
German Wind Energy Association (BWE) estimates the 
number of jobs created in Germany by the end of 2005 at 
64,000. The Global Wind Energy Council estimates total 
worldwide employment at more than 150,000.
A recent study in the US by the government’s National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory concluded that investment in DRIVERS FOR WIND ENERGY


20wind power had a greater economic impact on the rural 
regions where it was developed - through new jobs, income 
and taxes - than a fossil fuel power station.
In the developing world, wind power is attractive as a means 
of providing a cheap and ﬂexible electricity supply to 
dispersed communities, often through off-grid stand-alone 
systems. Its effect on economic development can be 
dramatic. Supplying enough power for just basic lighting and 
a television or computer can make a substantial difference to 
domestic life, educational opportunities and the viability of 
small businesses. 
Technology and Industrial 
Development
Since the 1980s, when the ﬁrst commercial wind turbines 
were deployed, their capacity, efﬁciency and visual design 
have all improved enormously.
The most dramatic improvement has been in the increasing 
size and performance of wind turbines. From machines of just 
25 kW twenty-ﬁve years ago, the commercial size range sold 
today is typically from 750 up to 2,500 kW (2.5 MW). Each 
2 MW turbine produces more energy than 200 of the 1980s 
vintage machines. Wind turbines have also grown larger and taller. The 
generators in the largest modern turbines are 100 times the 
size of those in 1980. Over the same period, their rotor 
diameters have increased eight-fold. Manufacture of wind 
turbines has beneﬁted from increasing understanding of their 
aerodynamics and load factors and from the economic 
beneﬁts of mass production techniques.  
Complete wind turbines and their support components are 
manufactured in factories now spread throughout Europe and 
the world. The leading turbine manufacturers are based in 
Denmark, Germany, Spain, the United States, India and Japan.
The largest turbines being manufactured today are of more 
than 5 MW capacity, with rotor diameters of over 100 me -
tres. One result is that many fewer turbines are required to 
achieve the same power output, saving land use. Depending 
on its siting, a 1 MW turbine can produce enough electricity 
for up to 650 households. Overall, wind turbines have a 
design lifetime of 20-25 years.
Modern turbines are modular and quick to install; the 
construction process can take a matter of months. This is of 
particular importance for countries in need of a rapid increase 
in electricity generation. Wind farms can vary in size from a 
few megawatts up to several hundred. The largest wind farm 
in the world is the 300 MW Stateline development which 
links the two states of Oregon and Washington in the north-
western United States.   


21The variability of the wind has produced far fewer problems 
for electricity grid management than sceptics had antici -
pated. On windy winter nights, for example, wind turbines 
can account for the majority of power generation in the 
western part of Denmark, and the grid operators are able to 
manage this successfully. 
As its economic attraction has increased, wind energy has 
become big business. The major wind turbine manufacturers 
are now commissioning multi-million dollar factories around 
the world in order to satisfy demand.
Most importantly, the wind energy business is attracting 
serious interest from outside investors. In 2002, for instance, 
turbine manufacturer Enron Wind was bought by a division of 
General Electric, one of the world’s largest corporations. This 
lead was followed by Siemens, which took over Danish 
manufacturer Bonus Energy in 2004. On the electricity 
supply side, several large conventional power companies 
have now become major owners of wind farms. These include 
Florida Power and Light in the United States and the Spanish 
utility Iberdrola, both with more than 3,500 MW of capacity.     
Just as signiﬁcant is the decision by a number of oil compa -
nies to take a stake in wind power. Shell’s renewables division, 
for example, has already invested in 740 MW of wind power 
capacity, mainly in the US. These acquisitions are evidence 
that wind is becoming established in the mainstream of the 
energy market.THE ADVANTAGES OF WIND POWER
•  Low cost – can be competitive with nuclear, coal and gas 
on a level playing ﬁeld
•  The fuel is free, abundant and inexhaustible
•  Clean energy - no resulting carbon dioxide emissions
•  Provides a hedge against fuel price volatility
•  Security of supply - avoids reliance on imported fuels
•  Modular and rapid to install
•  Provides bulk power equivalent to conventional sources
•  Land friendly - agricultural/industrial activity can continue 
around itDRIVERS FOR WIND ENERGY


22
THE WORLD’S WIND RESOURCES  
AND GRID INTEGRATION

23Wind Resource Assessments
Few studies have been made of the world’s wind resources, 
with the most detailed research conﬁned to the continent of 
Europe and the US. However, those assessments which have 
been carried out conﬁrm that the world’s wind resources are 
extremely large and well distributed across almost all regions 
and countries. Lack of wind is unlikely to be a limiting factor 
on global wind power development. When speciﬁc analysis 
has been produced on individual countries or regions, this has 
often shown an even greater resource than the global picture 
suggests.   
According to Michael Grubb and Neils Meyer in “Renewable 
Energy Sources for Fuels and Electricity” (1994), the world’s 
wind resources have the capacity to generate 53,000 TWh of 
electricity per year. This is almost three times the Interna -
tional Energy Agency’s (IEA) ﬁgure for global electricity 
consumption in 2003 (13,663 TWh).
A study by the German Advisory Council on Global Change 
(WBGU), “World in Transition – Towards Sustainable Energy 
Systems” (2003) calculated that the global technical 
potential for energy production from both onshore and 
offshore wind installations was 278,000 TWh per year. The 
report then assumed that only 10–15% of this potential 
would be realisable in a sustainable fashion, and arrived at a 
ﬁgure of approximately 39,000 TWh per year as the 
contribution from wind energy in the long term. This 
represented 35% of the 1998 ﬁgure for total world primary 
energy demand (112,000 TWh) used by the study.
The WBGU calculations of the technical potential were based 
on average values of wind speeds from meteorological data 
collected over a 14 year period (1979–1992). They also 
assumed that advanced multi-megawatt wind energy 
converters would be used. Limitations to the potential came 
through excluding all urban areas and natural features such 
as forests, wetlands, nature reserves, glaciers and sand dunes. 
Agriculture, on the other hand, was not regarded as competi -
tion for wind energy in terms of land use.
More recently, researchers from the Global Climate and 
Energy Project at Stanford University, California estimated 
that the world’s wind resources can generate more than 
enough power to satisfy total global energy demand. After 
collecting measurements from 7,500 surface and 500 balloon-launch monitoring stations to determine global wind 
speeds at 80 metres above ground level, they found that 
nearly 13% had an average wind speed above 6.9 metres per 
second (Class 3), more than adequate for power generation. 
North America was found to have the greatest wind power 
potential, although some of the strongest winds were 
observed in Northern Europe, whilst the southern tip of 
South America and the Australian island of Tasmania also 
recorded signiﬁcant and sustained strong winds.
The study did not take into account uncertainties such as 
long-term variations and climatic effects, or practical 
considerations such as site availability, access and transmis -
sion. Translated into electricity output, however, and using as 
little as 20% of the potential resource for power generation, 
the report concluded that wind energy could satisfy the 
world’s electricity demand seven times over.
Looking in more detail at the solar and wind resource in 13 
developing countries, the SWERA (Solar and Wind Energy 
Resource Assessment) project, supported by the United 
Nations Environment Programme, has found the potential, 
among other examples, for 7,000 MW of wind capacity in 
Guatemala and 26,000 MW in Sri Lanka. Neither country has 
yet started to seriously exploit this large resource.
Variability and Grid Integration
Wind power is often described as an “intermittent” energy 
source, and therefore unreliable. In fact, at a system level, 
wind does not start and stop at irregular intervals, so the 
term “intermittent” is misleading. The output of the 
aggregated wind power capacity is variable, just as the power 
system itself is inherently variable.
Electricity ﬂows – both supply and demand – are inﬂuenced by 
a large number of planned and unplanned factors. Changing 
weather makes people switch their heating and lighting on and 
off, millions of consumers expect instant power for TVs and 
computers. On the supply side, when a large power station 
goes ofﬂine, whether by accident or planned shutdown, it does 
so instantaneously, causing an immediate loss of many 
hundreds of megawatts. By contrast, wind energy does not 
suddenly trip off the system. Variations are smoother because 
there are hundreds or thousands of units rather than a few THE WORLD’S WIND RESOURCES AND GRID INTEGRATION

24large power stations, making it easier for the system operator 
to predict and manage changes in supply. There is little overall 
impact if the wind stops blowing in one particular place, 
because it is always blowing somewhere else. 
Power systems have always had to deal with these sudden 
output variations from large power plants, and the proce -
dures put in place can be applied to deal with variations in 
wind power production as well. The issue is therefore not one 
of variability in itself, but how to predict, manage and 
ameliorate this variability, and what tools can be used to 
improve efﬁciency.
The challenge in many parts of the world is that there is no 
regulatory or physical grid structure in place to allow the full 
exploitation of the vast global wind reserves. These will have 
to be developed at signiﬁcant cost, although large invest -
ment would be involved whichever generation option was 
chosen.
In the present situation wind power is disadvantaged in 
relation to conventional sources, whose infrastructure has 
been largely developed under national vertically integrated 
monopolies which were able to ﬁnance grid network 
improvements through state subsidies and levies on 
electricity bills. But whilst a more liberalised market has 
closed off those options in some countries, numerous 
distortions continue to disadvantage renewable generators in 
the power market – from discriminatory connection charges 
to potential abuse of their dominant power by major 
companies.
Grid Integration
One of the biggest mistakes often made during public 
discussion about integrating wind energy into the electricity 
network is that it is treated in isolation. An electricity system 
is in practice much like a massive bath tub, with hundreds of 
taps (power stations) providing the input and millions of plug 
holes (consumers) draining the output. The taps and plugs are 
opening and closing all the time. For the grid operators, the 
task is to make sure there is enough water in the bath to 
maintain system security. It is therefore the combined effects 
of all technologies, as well as the demand patterns, that 
matter.The present levels of wind power connected to electricity 
systems already show that it is feasible to integrate the 
technology to a signiﬁcant extent. Experience with more than 
40 GW installed in Europe, for example, has shown where 
areas of high, medium and low penetration levels take place 
in different conditions, and which bottlenecks and challenges 
occur. 
For small penetration levels, grid operation will not be 
affected to any signiﬁcant extent. Wind power supplies less 
than 3% of overall EU electricity demand at present, 
although there are large regional and national variations. The 
already established control methods and backup capacity 
available for dealing with variable demand and supply are 
more than adequate to handle the additional variable supply 
of wind power at penetration levels up to around 20%. Above 
that, some changes may be needed in power systems and 
their method of operation.
The integration of large amounts of wind power is often 
dismissed as impossible, and many grid operators are 
reluctant to make changes to their long established proce -
dures. In Denmark, however, 21% of total electricity 
consumption was met by wind power in 2004. In the western 
half of the country, up to 25% of demand is met by wind 
power and, on some occasions, it has been able to cover 
100% of instantaneous demand.
“Seven or eight years ago, we said that the electricity 
system could not function if wind power increased above 
500 MW. Now we are handling almost ﬁve times as much. 
And I would like to tell the government and the parliament 
that we are ready to handle even more, but it requires that 
we are allowed to use the right tools to manage the 
system.“ 
[HANS SCHIOETT, CHAIRMAN OF ELTRA,  
THE TSO (TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OPERATOR)  
FOR WEST DENMARK, IN 2003

25THE WORLD’S WIND RESOURCES AND GRID INTEGRATION
Issues for Integrating Wind Power 
Despite these successful experiences, a number of issues still 
have to be addressed if large quantities of wind power are to 
be successfully integrated into the grid network. These issues 
relate to system operation, grid connection, system stability 
and infrastructure improvements.
SYSTEM OPERATION
At ﬁrst sight wind energy appears to present a difﬁcult 
challenge for the power system, often resulting in high 
estimates for ancillary service costs or assumptions that wind 
capacity must be “backed up” with large amounts of 
conventional generation. However, such assessments often 
overlook key factors. These include:
•  Grid systems are designed to routinely cope with varying 
and uncertain demand, and unexpected transmission and 
generation outages.
•  Wind power output can be aggregated at a system level, 
resulting in signiﬁcant smoothing effects, which increase 
with large scale geographic distribution of wind farms.
•  Forecasting of wind power output in both hourly and day 
ahead timeframes.
Wind power will still have an impact on power system 
reserves, the magnitude of which will depend on the power 
system size, generation mix, load variations, demand size 
management and degree of grid interconnection. Large 
power systems can take advantage of the natural diversity of 
variable sources, however. They have ﬂexible mechanisms to 
follow the varying load and plant outages that cannot always 
be accurately predicted. 
The need for additional reserve capacity with growing wind 
penetration is in practice very modest, and up to signiﬁcant 
wind power penetrations, unpredicted imbalances can be 
countered with reserves existing in the system. Several 
national and regional studies indicate additional balancing 
costs in the order of 0 to 3 €/MWh for levels of wind power 
up to 20%.In Germany, the level of reserve capacity being kept available 
has decreased at the same time as wind power has increased. 
Between 2002 and 2004, the level of “control power” kept 
available fell from 8.3 GW to 7.3 GW. Over the same period an 
additional 6 GW of wind capacity was installed. 
SOURCE: “OFFSHORE WIND ENERGY:  
IMPLEMENTING A NEW POWERHOUSE FOR EUROPE”,  
GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL 2005
Steady improvements are being made in forecasting tech -
niques. Using increasingly sophisticated weather forecasts, 
wind power generation models and statistical analysis, it is 
possible to predict generation from ﬁve minute to hourly 
intervals over timescales up to 72 hours in advance, and for 
seasonal and annual periods. Using current tools, the forecast 
error 1 in predicted wind power for a single wind farm is 
between 10 and 20 % for a forecast horizon of 36 hours. For 
regionally aggregated wind farms the forecast error is in the 
order of 10% for a day ahead and 5% for 1-4 hours in advance.
The effects of geographical distribution can also be signiﬁ -
cant. Whereas a single turbine can experience power swings 
from hour to hour of up to 60% of its capacity, monitoring by 
the German ISET research institute has shown that the 
maximum hourly variation across 350 MW of aggregated 
wind farms in Germany does not exceed 20%. Across a larger 
area, such as the Nordel system covering four countries 
(Finland, Sweden, Norway and Eastern Denmark), the 
greatest hourly variations would be less than 10%. 
1 RMSE normalised to installed wind power capacity

26GRID CONNECTION AND SYSTEM STABILITY
Connecting wind farms to the transmission and distribution 
grids causes changes in the local grid voltage levels, and 
careful voltage management is essential for the proper 
operation of the network. All network system operators 
therefore lay down “grid codes” which deﬁne the ways in 
which generating stations connecting to the system must 
operate in order to maintain stability. These vary from 
country to country, but cover such issues as voltage quality 
and frequency control.
In response to increasing demands from TSOs, for example to 
stay connected to the system during a fault event, the most 
recent wind turbine designs have been substantially im -
proved. Most of the MW-size turbines being installed today 
are capable of meeting the most severe grid code require -
ments, with advanced features including fault-ride-through 
capability. This enables them to assist in keeping the power 
system stable, when large faults occur. Modern wind farms 
are moving towards becoming wind energy power plants that 
can be actively controlled. INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS
Transmission and distribution grid infrastructure will need to 
be upgraded in order to accommodate large amounts of wind 
power effectively. Expansion of wind power is not the only 
driver, however. Extensions and reinforcements are needed to 
accommodate other power sources required to meet a 
rapidly growing electricity demand. 
On costs, a number of country-speciﬁc studies have indicated 
that the grid extension/reinforcement costs caused by 
additional wind generation are in the range of 0.1 to 
4.7€/ MWh, the higher value corresponding to a wind 
penetration of 30% in the UK system. If these costs were 
properly “socialised” (paid for by the whole of society), the 
share for each consumer would be small. Added to this, 
increasing the share of wind power in electricity supply is 
likely to have a beneﬁcial effect on the cost of power to end 
users, especially when the beneﬁts of carbon dioxide 
reductions, health effects and environmental degradation are 
taken into account.


27THE WORLD’S WIND RESOURCES AND GRID INTEGRATION
Recent Studies
A number of recent studies have concluded that a large 
contribution from wind energy to power generation needs is 
technically and economically feasible, and in the same order 
of magnitude as the contributions from conventional 
technologies developed over the past century. The barriers to 
increasing wind power penetration are not inherently 
technical, they conclude, but mainly a matter of regulatory, 
institutional and market modiﬁcations.
A study by the German Energy Agency (DENA) - “Planning 
for grid integration of wind energy in Germany onshore 
and offshore up to the year 2020” (2005)  - concluded that:
•   Wind energy in Germany could triple its power production 
to 77 TWh in 2015, providing 14% of net electricity 
consumption, without any need to build additional reserve 
or balancing power stations. By 2015 there would be 
26 GW of wind capacity installed on land and 10 GW 
offshore. 
•  Only minor expansion of the grid would be required. An 
additional 850 km of extra high voltage lines would need 
to be built by 2015, and a further 400 km upgraded. This 
represents only about 5% of the existing network, and 
takes into account the expected expansion in offshore 
wind farms. The estimated investment cost of €1.1 billion 
would increase the price of electricity for consumers by 
less than €1 per household per annum.
A detailed technical report by the European Wind Energy 
Association (EWEA) - “Large scale integration of wind 
energy in the European power supply” (2005)  - concluded 
that: 
•  It is technically feasible for wind power to cover a 
signiﬁcant share (up to 20%) of electricity demand in the 
large interconnected power systems of Europe whilst 
maintaining a high degree of system security, and at 
modest additional cost. 
•  The efﬁciency and economics of integrating wind power 
strongly depend on the ability to apply short term 
forecasts and on market rules.•  For large scale penetration of wind power, upgrades to the 
transmission grid infrastructure, including interconnec -
tions, are needed. However, the beneﬁts of these upgrades 
will apply to the entire power system. Additional grid 
reinforcement costs, as determined in several national 
wind integration studies, are modest even at high wind 
penetrations (0.1 – 4.5€/MWh).
•  Modern wind energy technology can comply with grid 
requirements for maintaining supply security. Grid codes in 
the European member states need to be developed with 
the speciﬁc technology in mind and must be implemented 
with care in order to avoid unnecessary costs.
•  Adding wind power to the existing system is contributing 
favourably to security of supply by virtue of reduced fuel 
dependence, technology diversiﬁcation, indigenous 
production and wind power’s capacity credit – the 
proportion of its output which can provide ﬁrm supply.
A report by the International Energy Agency – “Variability 
of Wind Power and Other Renewables: Management 
Options and Strategies” (2005)  – conﬁrmed that the 
barriers to greater penetration of renewables into the existing 
grid were economic and regulatory rather than technical. 
Electricity markets in the OECD countries alone will need 
investments of $1.8 trillion in transmission and distribution 
networks in the period up to 2030, the report concluded. “A 
forward-looking policy should aim to integrate these 
investment needs with renewable energy related investments 
and thus create an integrated strategy to face future 
challenges in the transmission, distribution and inter-
connection ﬁeld.”


28The construction and operation of wind power installations, often in 
areas of open countryside, raises issues of visual impact, noise and the 
potential effects on local ecology and wildlife. Many of these issues are 
addressed during consultation with the local planning authority, from 
whom consent must be obtained to proceed with a development, and in 
most cases through a detailed environmental impact assessment. 
THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS  
OF WIND POWER

29THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF WIND POWER
The construction and operation of wind power installations, 
often in areas of open countryside, raises issues of visual 
impact, noise and the potential effects on local ecology and 
wildlife. Many of these issues are addressed during consulta -
tion with the local planning authority, from whom consent 
must be obtained to proceed with a development, and in 
most cases through a detailed environmental impact 
assessment. 
Visual Impact
Wind turbines are tall structures which ideally need to 
operate in an exposed site where they can make best use of 
the prevailing wind. This means they are likely to be visible 
over a relatively wide area. Whether this has a detrimental 
effect is a highly subjective issue. Being visible is not the 
same as being intrusive. While some people express concern 
about the effect wind turbines have on the beauty of our 
landscape, others see them as elegant and graceful, or 
symbols of a better, less polluted future. 
The landscape is largely human-made and has evolved over 
time. Changes to the visual appearance of the countryside, 
such as lines of electricity pylons, which were once consid -
ered intrusions, are now largely accepted as part of the view. 
In comparison to other energy developments, such as 
nuclear, coal and gas power stations, or open cast coal 
mining, wind farms have relatively little visual impact. 
Nevertheless, most countries with a wind power industry 
have established rules which exclude certain areas, such as 
national parks or nature reserves, from development. Others 
have identiﬁed priority areas where wind power is speciﬁcally 
encouraged.
Some wind turbines are located in industrial areas or close to 
other infrastructure developments, such as motorways, 
where they may be considered less intrusive. Large wind 
farms of 100 or more turbines can also be located in the sea. 
It is also worth emphasising that wind turbines are not 
permanent structures. Once removed, the landscape can 
quickly return to its previous condition. Noise
Generally speaking, the sound output of wind turbines can be 
subdivided into mechanical and aerodynamic noise. The 
components emitting the highest sound level are the 
generator, the yaw drive which turns the nacelle of the 
turbine to face the wind, the gearbox and the blades. Some of 
the sound generated by these components is regular and 
some of it irregular, but all of it (except, that generated by 
the yaw mechanism) is present only while the turbine is 
actually operating. Even then, compared to road trafﬁc, 
trains, construction activities and many other sources of 
industrial noise, the sound generated by wind turbines in 
operation is comparatively low (see table).
Better design and better insulation have made more recent 
wind turbine models much quieter than their predecessors. 
The approach of regulatory authorities to the issue of noise 
and wind farms has generally been to ﬁrstly calculate the 
ambient (existing) sound level at any nearby houses and then 
to ensure that the turbines are positioned far enough away to 
avoid unacceptable disturbance.  
COMPARATIVE NOISE LEVELS FROM DIFFERENT SOURCES
Source/activity Indicative noise level dB(A)
Threshold of pain 140
Jet aircraft at 250m 105
Pneumatic drill at 7m 95
Truck at 48 kph at 100m 65
Busy general ofﬁce 60
Car at 64 kph at 100m 55
Wind development at 350m 35-45
Quiet bedroom 35
Rural night-time background 20-40
Source: “Wind Power in the UK”, Sustainable Development Commission, 2005
Wildlife – Birds
Birds can be affected by wind energy development through 
loss of habitat, disturbance to their breeding and foraging 
areas and by death or injury caused by the rotating turbine 
blades. Compared to other causes of mortality among birds, 
however (see table), the effect of wind power is relatively 
minor. One estimate from the United States is that commer -
cial wind turbines cause the direct deaths of only 0.01 - 
0.02% of all of the birds killed annually by collisions with 
man-made structures and activities.

30OECD NORTH AMERICA
TOTAL CAPACITY IN GW 
2005 2010 2020 2030
Reference-Scenario 9,839 16.804 43.304 94,204
Moderate-Market growth 9.839 29,100 166,855 333,717
Advanced Market growth 9,839 35,639 283,875 570,178
LATIN AMERICA
TOTAL CAPACITY IN GW 
2005 2010 2020 2030
Reference-Scenario 213  3,200 6,198 10,298
Moderate-Market growth 213 3,217 53,606 122,819
Advanced Market growth 213 3,238 99,627 198,062
AFRICA
TOTAL CAPACITY IN GW 
2005 2010 2020 2030
Reference-Scenario 229 700 1,999 5,099
Moderate-Market growth 229 700 8,044 20,246
Advanced Market growth 229 700 16,803 47,567EUROPE
TOTAL CAPACITY IN GW 
2005 2010 2020 2030
Reference-Scenario 40,783 77,000 142,000 186,000
Moderate-Market growth 40,783 77,159 175,400 294,000
Advanced Market growth 40,783 77,159 241,279 385,663
DEFINITIONS OF REGIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH IEA 
CLASSIFICATION
OECD-Europe: Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, 
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, 
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, 
United Kingdom
OECD N. America:  Canada, Mexico, United States
OECD Paciﬁc:  Japan, Korea, South, Australia, New Zealand
Transition Economies:  Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
Bulgaria, Croatia, Estonia, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Macedonia, Georgia, 
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latria, Lithunia, Moldova, Romania, Russia, Slovenia, 
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Cyprus, Gibraltar, Malta
South Asia:  Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka
Latin America:  Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, 
Bermuda, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Domenica,  
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, French Guiana, Grenada, Guadeloupe, 
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Martinique, Netherlands Antilles, 
Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Puerto Rico, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguila,  
Saint Lucia, St. Vincent-Grenadines and Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, 
Venezuela 
 
 
 
 
East Asia: Afghanistan, Bhutan, Brunei, Cambodia, Fiji, French Polynesia, Indonesia, 
Kiribati, Democratic People‘s Republic of Korea, Laos, Malaysia, Maldives, Myanmar, 
New Caledonia, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Samoa, Singapore,  
Solomon Islands, Thailand, Vietnam, Vanuatu
Africa:  Algeria, Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,  
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Cote d‘Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, 
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malati, 
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, 
Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia,  
South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, United Republic of Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, 
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Middle East:  Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Qatar,  
Saudi Arabia, Syria, United Arab Emirates, Yemen
China

31MIDDLE EAST
TOTAL CAPACITY IN GW 
2005 2010 2020 2030
Reference-Scenario 35 500 2,400 3,700
Moderate-Market growth 35 500 8,587 17,749
Advanced Market growth 35 500 24,221 47,437SOUTH ASIA
TOTAL CAPACITY IN GW 
2005 2010 2020 2030
Reference-Scenario 4,430 6,013 6,300 9,300
Moderate-Market growth 4,430 14,033 38,557 74,989
Advanced Market growth 4,430 17,200 60,918 125,568TRANSITION ECONOMIES
TOTAL CAPACITY IN GW 
2005 2010 2020 2030
Reference-Scenario 110 300 7,000 12,000
Moderate-Market growth 110 363 7,462 27,712
Advanced Market growth 110 308 13,217 115,539CHINA
TOTAL CAPACITY IN GW 
2005 2010 2020 2030
Reference-Scenario 1,349 4,502 11,402 24,602
Moderate-Market growth 1,349 7,217 40,738 5,655
Advanced Market growth 1,349 7,217 168,731 328,087
EAST ASIA
TOTAL CAPACITY IN GW 
2005 2010 2020 2030
Reference-Scenario 30 1,000 4,895 6,595
Moderate-Market growth 30 1,117 27,274 59,047
Advanced Market growth 30 1,117 70,577 142,243
OECD PACIFIC
TOTAL CAPACITY IN GW 
2005 2010 2020 2030
Reference-Scenario 2,065 2,500 5,300 12,100
Moderate-Market growth 2,065 3,065 33,859 90,267
Advanced Market growth 2,065 4,960 91,667 143,881

32Well publicised reports of bird deaths, especially birds of prey, 
at sites including the Altamont Pass near San Francisco and 
Tarifa in southern Spain, are not indicative of the day to day 
experience at the thousands of wind energy developments 
now operating around the world. 
As a general rule, birds notice that new structures have 
arrived in their area, learn to avoid them, especially the 
turning blades, and are able to continue feeding and breeding 
in the location. Problems are most likely to occur when the 
site is either on a migration route, with large ﬂocks of birds 
passing through the area, or is particularly attractive as a 
feeding or breeding ground. This can be avoided by careful 
siting procedures. Modern wind turbines, with their slower 
turning blades, have also proved less problematic than earlier 
models.
A 2001 study by ecological consultants WEST for the 
National Wind Coordinating Committee estimated that 
33,000 birds were killed that year in the United States by the 
15,000 turbines then in operation – just over two birds per 
turbine. The majority of the fatalities had occurred in 
California, where older, faster rotating machines were still in 
operation; these are steadily being replaced by more modern, 
slower rotating turbines.
In Europe, a 2003 study in the Spanish province of Navarra - 
where 692 turbines were then operating in 18 wind farms - 
found that the annual mortality rate of medium and large 
birds was just 0.13 per turbine. In Germany, records of bird deaths from the National 
Environmental ofﬁce Brandenburg showed a total of 278 
casualties at wind farms over the period 1989 to 2004. Only 
ten of the birds were species protected by European Union 
legislation. By the end of the period Germany had over 
16,500 wind turbines in operation 1.
The UK’s leading bird protection body, the Royal Society for 
the Protection of Birds, says that the most signiﬁcant long-
term threat to birds comes from climate change. Changes in 
the climate will in turn change the pattern of indigenous 
plant species and their attendant insect life, making once 
attractive areas uninhabitable by birds. According to the 
RSPB, “recent scientiﬁc research indicates that, as early as the 
middle of this century, climate change could commit one 
third or more of land-based plants and animals to extinction, 
including some species of British birds.” Compared to this 
threat, “the available evidence suggests that appropriately 
positioned wind farms do not pose a signiﬁcant hazard for 
birds,” it concludes.
Collaborative work between the wind power industry and 
wildlife groups has also been aimed at limiting bird casual -
ties. In the Altamont Pass, for example, operators have 
agreed to turn off their turbines during busy migratory 
periods. 
1  German Federal Government „Kleine Anfrage der Abgeordneten Dr. Christel Happach-Kasan 
et. all;  Drucksache 15/5064 - Gefährdung heimischer Greifvogel- und Fledermausarten durch 
Windkraftanlagen


33THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF WIND POWER
In the UK, the solution adopted at the Beinn an Tuirc wind 
farm in Scotland was to create a completely new habitat for 
the Golden Eagles which hunted there, providing a fresh 
source of their favourite prey, the grouse.
Fossil fuels and birds
As a result of a single oil shipping accident, the Exxon Valdez oil 
spill in Alaska’s Prince William Sound, more than 500,000 
migratory birds were killed, about 1,000 times the estimated 
annual total in California’s wind power plants. A study at a 
coal-ﬁred power plant in Florida, which had four smokestacks, 
recorded an estimated 3,000 bird deaths in a single evening 
during the autumn migration period.
SOURCE: UNION OF CONCERNED SCIENTISTS/  
FLORIDA ORNITHOLOGICAL SOCIETY
 
MAIN CAUSES OF BIRD DEATHS IN THE UNITED STATES  
Cause Estimated deaths per year
Utility transmission and 
distribution lines130-174 million
Collision with road vehicles 60-80 million
Collision with buildings 100-1,000 million
Telecommunications towers 40-50 million
Agricultural pesticides 67 million
Cats 39 million
Source: American Wind Energy AssociationWildlife – Bats 
Like birds, bats are endangered by many human activities, 
from pesticide poisoning to collision with structures to loss 
of habitat. Despite publicity given to bat deaths around 
wind farms, mainly in the United States, studies have shown 
that wind turbines do not pose a signiﬁcant threat to bat 
populations. A review of available evidence by ecological 
consultants WEST concluded that “bat collision mortality 
during the breeding season is virtually non-existent, despite 
the fact that relatively large numbers of bat species have 
been documented in close proximity to wind plants. These 
data suggest that wind plants do not currently impact 
resident breeding populations where they have been studied 
in the US.”  
The overall average fatality rate for US wind projects is 
3.4 bats per turbine per year, according to a 2004 report by 
WEST. No nationally endangered or threatened bat species 
have been found.  
Monitoring of wind farms in the US indicates that most deaths 
involve bats that are migrating in late summer and autumn. 
One theory is that migrant bats, which are not searching for 
insects or feeding, turn off their “echolocation” navigation 
system in order to conserve energy. The American Wind Energy 
Association (AWEA) has now joined forces with Bat Conser-
vation International, the US Fish and Wildlife Service and the 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory to look at why these 
collisions occur and how they can be prevented.


34A number of national wind energy industry associations have 
adopted guidelines for how prospective developers should 
approach the issue of both birds and bats. The Australian 
Wind Energy Association (Auswind), for example, “strongly 
recommends… scientiﬁcally rigorous study of the activities 
over all seasons of birds and bats…” This should include 
targeted investigations that are “necessary to obtain general 
data on bird and bat use of sites and their surrounding 
region” to enable the developer and their regulators to assess 
the risk of collisions.
In general, wind farming is popular with farmers, because 
their land can continue to be used for growing crops or 
grazing livestock. Sheep, cows and horses are not disturbed 
by wind turbines. The ﬁrst wind farm built in the UK, Delabole 
in Cornwall, is home to a stud farm and riding school, and the 
farmer, Peter Edwards, often rides around the turbines on his 
horse.Offshore Wind Farms
In most European coastal states national regulations have 
been established covering the procedures required to obtain 
building permits for offshore wind farms. The project 
developer has to assess in qualitative and quantitative terms 
the expected environmental impacts on the marine environ -
ment. These procedures ensure that projects comply with 
international and EU law, conventions and regulations 
covering habitat and wildlife conservation.
Within the structure of an environmental impact assessment, 
an initial baseline study is conducted before any impacts can 
occur. Subsequent monitoring is necessary to record any 
changes within the marine environment which may have 
been caused by anthropogenic factors. The monitoring phase 
may go on for several years, and evaluations and conclusions 
are updated annually to assess changes over time.
POTENTIAL IMPACTS OF OFFSHORE WIND FARMS 
INCLUDE ²:
Electromagnetic ﬁelds:  Magnetic ﬁelds emanating from 
power transmission cables can affect marine animals. 
Connections for offshore wind farms are therefore based on 
multi-conductor cable systems to avoid this phenomenon.


35THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF WIND POWER
Noise:  Construction operations, especially the ramming of 
turbine foundations into the sea bed, can disturb marine 
wildlife. However at the Horns Rev site in the North Sea off 
Denmark, for example, monitoring has shown that neither 
seals nor harbour porpoises, both active in the area, have 
been forced to make any substantial changes to their 
behaviour. Both ﬁsh and benthic communities have in fact 
been attracted to the foundations of the wind turbines after 
their construction, the latter using them as hatchery or 
nursery grounds.  
On the noise produced by operating offshore wind turbines, 
information currently available indicates that this lies in the 
same range of frequencies as that generated by sources such 
as shipping, ﬁshing vessels, the wind and waves. 
Birds:  As on land, sea birds have generally learned to live with 
the presence of offshore wind turbines. At the Utgrunden and 
Yttre Stengrund wind farms off Sweden, for example, 
research shows that very few waterfowl, including Eider 
ducks, ﬂy close enough to the turbines to risk collision. One 
estimate is that one waterfowl is killed per wind turbine per 
year.At the much larger Nysted wind farm off the coast of 
Denmark, radar plotting research found that ﬂocks of 
migrating sea birds mostly ﬂew round the outside of the 
block of 72 turbines. 
At a nine turbine development along the sea wall at Blyth in 
Northumbria, UK, 1-2 collisions have been recorded per 
turbine per year. 
ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS
Against the potential negative effects of wind power develop -
ment must be set the beneﬁts resulting from switching to a 
renewable source of energy. Wind energy is one of the most 
environmentally benign ways of producing the electricity we 
need to power our daily lives. If we don’t switch to cleaner 
forms of energy, climate change will severely and irrevocably 
alter much of our landscape as well as the animal and plant 
life it contains.
2  Offshore Wind - Implementing a new Power House for Europe is a strategic blueprint that out -
lines how offshore wind farms will be able to supply about 10% of Europe‘s electricity sector by 
2020. The report represents a crucial tool in the race to cut greenhouse emissions. It also high -
lights the urgency for political, technical and environmental actions to build up an environ -
mental friendly powerhouse. The full report is available under: http://www.greenpeace.org/
international/press/reports/offshore-wind-implementing-a#


36
THE “GLOBAL WIND ENERGY OUTLOOK”  
SCENARIO

37THE “GLOBAL WIND ENERGY OUTLOOK” SCENARIO
The initial sections of this report have described the current 
status of wind energy development around the world, the 
range of drivers behind its expansion, and the environmental 
and grid supply issues which need to be resolved in order for 
this expansion to continue. Although the progress of wind 
power has been driven most strongly by the urgent need to 
combat the dangers of global climate change, this is now 
being supported by increasing concerns over security of 
energy supply, in particular the rising cost of fossil fuels. In 
the developing world, a further attraction of wind energy is 
that it can help satisfy the pressing requirement for new 
electricity supply with speed and ﬂexibility.      
Against that background this second part of the report now 
examines the future potential of wind power. Through the 
Global Wind Energy Outlook scenario the horizon is opened 
up to the year 2050 against a range of projections for both 
the wind energy industry’s expected development and the 
anticipated global growth in demand for electricity.
This exercise has been carried out as a collaboration between 
the Global Wind Energy Council (GWEC), Greenpeace 
International and the German Aerospace Centre (DLR), the 
largest engineering research organisation in Germany (see 
“Global Wind Energy Outlook – Research Background”). 
Projections on the future pattern of wind energy develop -
ment have been extrapolated from a larger study of global 
sustainable energy pathways up to 2050 conducted by DLR 
for Greenpeace and the European Renewable Energy Council 
(EREC).  
The Scenarios
Three different scenarios are outlined for the future growth of 
wind energy around the world. The most conservative 
“Reference”  scenario is based on the projection in the latest 
(2005) World Energy Outlook report from the International 
Energy Agency (IEA). This projects the growth of all renew -
ables, including wind power, up to 2030. The IEA assessment 
has then been extended up to 2050 using input from the DLR 
study.
The “Moderate”  scenario takes into account all policy 
measures to support renewable energy either under way or 
planned around the world. It also assumes that the targets 
set by many countries for either renewables or wind energy are successfully implemented. The assumption here is that 
the success achieved in Europe in meeting the goals for wind 
energy implementation set by the European Union will be 
repeated globally.    
The most ambitious scenario, the “Advanced”  version, 
follows a similar development path to that outlined in the 
series of Wind Force 10 and 12 reports produced since 1999 
by the European Wind Energy Association (EWEA), the Global 
Wind Energy Council (GWEC) and Greenpeace. These 
examined how feasible it would be for 10%, and later 12%, of 
the world’s electricity to come from wind power by 2020.  
The assumption here is that all policy options in favour of 
renewable energy, along the lines of this report’s recommen -
dations, have been selected, and the political will is there to 
carry them out.  
Up to 2010 the ﬁgures for installed capacity are closer to 
being predictions than scenarios. This is because the data 
available from the wind energy industry shows the expected 
growth of worldwide markets over the next ﬁve years.  
After 2010 the pattern of development is clearly much more 
difﬁcult to anticipate. Nonetheless, the scenarios still show 
what could be achieved if the wind energy market is given the 
encouragement it deserves.   
Energy Efficiency Projections
These three scenarios for the global wind energy market are 
then set against two trajectories for the future growth of 
electricity demand. Most importantly, these projections do 
not just assume that growing demand by consumers will 
inevitably need to be matched by supply options. On the 
basis that demand will have to be reduced if the threat of 
climate change is to be seriously tackled, they take into 
account an increasing element of energy efﬁciency.
The more conservative of the two global electricity demand 
projections is again based on data from the IEA’s 2005 World 
Energy Outlook, extrapolated forwards to 2050. This is the 
“Reference”  projection. It does not take into account any 
possible or likely future policy initiatives, and assumes, for 
instance, that there will be no change in national policies on 
nuclear power. The IEA’s assumption is that “in the absence of 
new government policies, the world’s energy needs will rise 
inexorably”. Global demand would therefore almost double 

38from the baseline 13,423 TWh in 2003 to reach 25,667 TWh 
by 2030 and continue to grow to 37,935 TWh by 2050.
The IEA’s expectations on rising energy demand are then set 
against the outcome of a study on the potential effect of 
energy efﬁciency savings developed by DLR and the Ecofys 
consultancy. This describes an ambitious development path 
for the exploitation of energy efﬁciency measures. It focuses 
on current best practice and available technologies in the 
future, and assumes that continuous innovation takes place. 
Under the “High energy efﬁciency”  projection, input from 
the DLR/Ecofys models shows the effect of energy efﬁciency 
savings on the global electricity demand proﬁle. Although 
this assumes that a wide range of technologies and initiatives 
have been introduced, their extent is limited by the potential 
barriers of cost and other likely roadblocks. This still results in 
global demand increasing by less than 30 % to reach 
17,786 TWh in 2030. By the end of the scenario period in 
2050, demand is 39 % lower than under the Reference 
scenario. Core Results
The results of the Global Wind Energy Outlook scenarios 
show that even under the conservative IEA view of the 
potential for the global market, wind energy could be 
supplying 5 % of the world’s electricity by 2030 and 6.6 % by 
2050. This assumes that the “High Energy Efﬁciency” 
projection has been introduced.
Under the Moderate wind energy growth projection, 
coupled with ambitious energy saving, wind power could 
be supplying 15.6 % of the world’s electricity by 2030 and 
17 .7 % by 2050.
Under the Advanced wind energy growth projection, 
coupled with ambitious energy saving, wind power could 
be supplying 29. 1 % of the world’s electricity by 2030 and 
34.2 % by 2050. 
At the levels of penetration envisaged under the Advanced 
scenario any wind energy output which could not be used for 
electricity generation would be freed up either for storage or 
to supply new sectors such as transport. Considerable 
research and development effort is currently being devoted 
to advancing and improving both these technologies.
These results show not only that wind energy can make a 
major contribution towards satisfying the global need for 
clean, renewable electricity within the next 30 years but that 
its penetration in the supply system can be substantially 
increased if serious energy efﬁciency measures are imple -
mented at the same time. 
SUMMARY OF GLOBAL WIND ENERGY OUTLOOK SCENARIO FOR 2030
Global  
ScenarioCumulative  
wind power  
capacity (GW)Electricity  
output (TWh)Percentage of world 
electricity (High 
Energy Efﬁciency)Annual installed 
capacity [GW]Annual  
investment  
(€ bn)Jobs [million] Annual CO₂  
saving  
(million tonnes)
Reference 364 892 5 % 24.8 21.2 0.48 535
Moderate 1,129 2,769 15.6 % 58.3 45.0 1.14 1,661
Advanced 2,107 5,176 29.1 % 129.2 84.8 1.44 3,100
SUMMARY OF GLOBAL WIND ENERGY OUTLOOK SCENARIO FOR 2050
Global  
ScenarioCumulative  
wind power  
capacity (GW)Electricity  
output (TWh)Percentage of world 
electricity (High 
Energy Efﬁciency)Annual installed 
capacity [MW]Annual  
investment   
(€ bn)Jobs [million] Annual CO₂  
saving  
(million tonnes)
Reference 577 1,517 6.6 % 34.3 28.8 0.65 910
Moderate 1,557 4,092 17.7 % 71.0 54.2 1.39 2,455
Advanced 3,010 7,911 34.3 % 168.6 112.0 2.80 4,747

39THE “GLOBAL WIND ENERGY OUTLOOK” SCENARIO
Detailed Results
A more detailed analysis of the Global Wind Energy Outlook 
scenario shows that a range of outcomes is possible for the 
global wind energy market, depending on the choice of 
demand side options and different assumptions for growth 
rates on the wind power supply side.   
Under the basic Reference wind energy scenario , a 15 % 
annual growth rate of wind power capacity is assumed until 
2010, followed by 10 % until 2014. After that it declines 
rapidly, falling to 3 % per annum by 2031. 
The result is that by the end of this decade, cumulative global 
capacity would have reached almost 113 Gigawatts (GW).  
By 2020, global capacity would be over 230 GW and by 2030 
almost 364 GW. By the end of the scenario period in 2050 
the capacity of worldwide wind power would be more than 
577 GW. The annual rate of installation of new capacity 
would by then be running at 34 GW.
The relative penetration of wind energy in the global 
electricity supply system varies according to which demand projection is applied. Under the Reference projection, wind’s 
contribution would increase from 1.5 % in 2010 up to 4 % in 
2050. Under the “High Energy Efﬁciency” projection it would 
increase from 1.8 % in 2010 to 6.6 % in 2050.
Under the Moderate wind energy scenario  growth rates are 
expected to be substantially higher than under the Reference 
version. Up to 2010, the annual growth rate is 19 %, from 
2011 to 2014 it is 16 %, and from 2015 to 2020 it is 15 %. It 
then declines to 10 % until 2025 before falling to 5 %.  
The result is that by 2020, global wind power capacity would 
have reached a level of 560 GW and by 2030 almost 
1,129 GW. By the end of the scenario period in 2050 the 
capacity of worldwide wind power would have reached 
almost 1,557 GW. The annual rate of installation of new 
capacity would by then be running at almost 71 GW.
In terms of penetration in the global electricity supply 
system, wind energy’s contribution would increase under the 
Reference demand projection scenario from 1.8 % in 2010 to 
10.8 % in 2050. Under the High Energy Efﬁciency projection 
it would increase from 2.2 % in 2010 to 17.7 % in 2050.
3 DIFFERENT WIND MARKET DEVELOPMENT SCENARIOS - WITH DIFFERENT WORLD ELECTRICITY DEMAND DEVELOPMENTS
2005 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050
WIND MARKET GROWTH - IEA PROJECTION (“REFERENCE”)
Wind power penetration of Worlds electricity in % - Reference (IEA Demand Projection) % 0.8 1.5 2.7 3.5 4.1 4.0
Wind power penetration of Worlds electricity in % - High Energy Efﬁciency % 0.8 1.8 3.6 5.0 6.3 6.6
MODERATE WIND MARKET GROWTH
Wind power penetration of Worlds electricity in % - Reference % 0.8 1.8 6.6 10.8 11.8 10.8
Wind power penetration of Worlds electricity in % - High Energy Efﬁciency % 0.8 2.2 8.6 15.6 18.1 17.7
ADVANCED WIND MARKET GROWTH
Wind power penetration of Worlds electricity in % - Reference % 0.8 2.1 12.1 20.1 22.1 20.9
Wind power penetration of Worlds electricity in % - High Energy Efﬁciency % 0.8 2.4 16.5 29.1 34.0 34.20,05,010,015,020,025,030,035,040,0 [ % ]
2005 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050ELECTRICITY DEMAND PR OJECTION: 
HIGH ENER GY EFFICIENC YELECTRICITY DEMAND PR OJECTION: 
REFERENC E
Reference wind mark et gr owthModerate wind mark et gr owthAdvanced wind market growt h
Reference wind mark et gr owthModerate wind mark et gr owthAdvanced wind market growt hWIND POWER PENETRA TION OF WORLDS ELECTRICITY SUPPL Y 

40Under the Advanced wind energy scenario , an even more 
rapid expansion of the global wind power market is envis-
aged. Growth rates are faster in the ﬁ  rst two decades. Up to 
2015, a growth rate in annual wind power capacity of 20  % 
is assumed, falling to 17 %. It then reduces to approx 10 % for 
the ﬁ  ve years to 2025, before falling below 5 %. The result is 
that by the end of this decade, global capacity would have 
reached almost 154 GW. By 2020, global capacity would be almost 1,073 GW and by 2030 almost 2,110 GW. By the end 
of the scenario period in 2050 the capacity of worldwide 
wind power would be more than 3,010 GW. The size of the 
annual market for new wind power capacity would by then be 
150 GW. 
In terms of penetration in the global electricity supply 
system, under the Reference demand projection, wind’s contribution would increase from 2.1 % in 2010 up to 20.9 % in 2050. Under the “High Energy Efﬁ  ciency” projection it 
would increase from 2.4 % in 2010 to 34.3 % in 2050. Regional Breakdown
All three scenarios for wind power are broken down by region 
of the world based on the methodology used by the IEA, with a further differentiation in Europe. For the purpose of this 
report, the regions are deﬁ  ned as European Union (current EU 
member states, plus Romania and Bulgaria), the rest of 
Europe (non-EU countries), the Transition Economies (former 
Soviet Union states, apart from those now part of the EU), 
North America, Central and South America, East Asia, South 
Asia, China, the Middle East, Africa and the Paciﬁ  c (including 
Australia, South Korea and Japan). 
A regional break-down of the wind power capacity and output 
(TWh) expected in each region of the world by 2010, 2020 and 
2030 is shown on page 41. This shows that Europe would continue to dominate the world market under the least ambitious Reference scenario.  By 2030 Europe would still have 
GLOBAL CUMULATIVE CAPACITY [MW] AND ELECTRICITY GENERATION [TWh]
Year 2005 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050
Reference [MW] 59,078 112,818 230,658 363,758 482,758 577,257
[TWh] 124 247 566 892 1,269 1,517
Moderate [MW] 59,078 136,543 560,445 1.128,707 1.399,133 1.556,901
[TWh] 124 299 1,375 2,768 3,677 4,092
Advanced [MW] 59,078 153,759 1.072,928 2.106,656 2.616,210 3.010,302
[TWh] 124 337 2,632 5,167 6,875 7,9110500,0001,000,0001,500,0002,000,0002,500,0003,000,000
2005 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050Reference Moderate Advanced [ MW ]GLOBAL CUMULATIVE WIND POWER CAPACITY
GWEC_A4_0608_1.indd   Abs1:40 GWEC_A4_0608_1.indd   Abs1:40 30.08.2006   13:47:57 Uhr 30.08.2006   13:47:57 Uhr

41THE “GLOBAL WIND ENERGY OUTLOOK” SCENARIO
51 % of the global wind power marker, followed by North Ameri -
ca with 26 %. The next largest region would be China with 7 %.
The two more ambitious scenarios envisage much stronger 
growth in regions outside the currently dominant European 
Union. Under the Moderate scenario , Europe’s share will 
have fallen to 26 % by 2030, with North America contribut -
ing a dominant 30 % and major contributions coming from 
Central and South America (11 %), China (8 %), the Paciﬁc 
region (8 %) and South Asia, which includes India (7 %).
Under the Advanced scenario , an even stronger input would 
come from Asia and South America, with China’s share of the 
world market increasing to 16% by 2030, South America’s 
share rising to 9% and the Paciﬁc region’s to 7%. Europe’s 
share would make up only 19% of the world’s total wind 
capacity. Given the slow pace of progress so far, and 
continuing market barriers, a less important contribution is 
expected from the Transition Economies than had previously 
been envisaged.  
In all three scenarios it is assumed that an increasing share of 
new capacity is accounted for by the replacement of old plant. 
This is based on a 20 year average lifetime for a wind turbine. 
Turbines replaced within the timescale of the scenarios are 
assumed to be of the same installed capacity as the original 
models. The result is that an increasing proportion of the 
annual level of installed capacity will come from repowered  
turbines. These new machines will contribute to the overall 
level of investment, manufacturing output and employment. 
As replacement turbines their introduction will not however 
increase the total ﬁgure for global cumulative capacity.
REGIONAL BREAK DOWN: REFERENCE SCENARIO [GW]
EuropeTransition
Economie sNorth 
AmericaCentral and 
South AmericaEast AsiaSouth AsiaChinaMiddle EastAfrica Paciﬁc 2%
3%1%1%
5%
3%
2%
3%
19%
3% 62%51%1%1%
7%
3%
2%
3%
26%
3%2020
2030REFERENCE SCENARIO (GW) 2020 / 2030
2 0 2 0
Europe 142 GW
Transition Economies 7 GW
North America 43 GW
Central and South America 6 GW
East Asia 5 GW
South Asia 6 GW
China 11 GW
Middle East 2 GW
Africa 2 GW
Paciﬁc 5 GW
2 0 3 0
Europe 186 GW
Transition Economies 12 GW
North America 94 GW
Central and South America 10 GW
East Asia 7 GW
South Asia 9 GW
China 25 GW
Middle East 4 GW
Africa 5 GW
Paciﬁc 12 GW

42REGIONAL BREAK DOWN: MODERATE SCENARIO [GW]
Europe
Transition
Economies
North Americ aCentral and 
South AmericaEast AsiaSouth AsiaChinaMiddle EastAfricaPaciﬁc 6%
8%1%
2%
7%
7%
5%
10%
30%1%31%
26% 2%2%
8%
7%
5%
11%
30%2%2020
2030MODERA TE SCENARIO (GW) 2020 / 2030
2 0 2 0
Europe 174 GW
Transition Economies 7 GW
North America 167 GW
Central and South America 54 GW
East Asia 27 GW
South Asia 39 GW
China 41 GW
Middle East 9 GW
Africa 8 GW
Paciﬁc 34 GW
2 0 3 0
Europe 295 GW
Transition Economies 28 GW
North America 334 GW
Central and South America 123 GW
East Asia (excl.Korea) 59 GW
South Asia 75 GW
China 87 GW
Middle East 18 GW
Africa 20 GW
Paciﬁc 90 GW
REGIONAL BREAK DOWN: ADVANCED SCENARIO [GW]
Europe
Transition
Economies
North Americ a Central and South AmericaEast Asia 
(excl.Korea)South AsiaChinaMiddle EastAfricaPaciﬁc (incl. S.Korea) 9%
7%2%
2%
16%
6%
7%
9%25%1%23%
19% 2%2%
16%
6%
7%
9%27%5%2020
2030ADVANCED SCENARIO (GW) 2020 / 2030
2 0 2 0
Europe 245 GW
Transition Economies 13 GW
North America 284 GW
Central and South America 100 GW
East Asia 71 GW
South Asia 61 GW
China 169 GW
Middle East 24 GW
Africa 17 GW
Paciﬁc 90 GW
2 0 3 0
Europe 392 GW
Transition Economies 116 GW
North America 570 GW
Central and South America 198 GW
East Asia (excl.Korea) 142 GW
South Asia 126 GW
China 328 GW
Middle East 47 GW
Africa 48 GW
Paciﬁc 140 GW

43THE “GLOBAL WIND ENERGY OUTLOOK” SCENARIO
Main Assumptions and Parameters
1. GROWTH RATES
Market growth rates in this scenario are based on a mixture 
of historical ﬁgures and information obtained from analysts 
of the wind turbine market. Growth rates of up to 20 % per 
annum, as envisaged in the Advanced version of the scenario, 
are high for an industry which manufactures heavy equip -
ment. The wind industry has experienced much higher growth 
rates in recent years, however. Since the year 2000 the 
average annual increase in global cumulative installed 
capacity has been 28 %.
It should also be borne in mind that whilst growth rates 
eventually decline to single ﬁgures across the range of 
scenarios, the level of wind power capacity envisaged in 30 
years’ time means that even small percentage growth rates 
will by then translate into large ﬁgures in terms of annually 
installed megawatts. 
2. TURBINE CAPACITY
Individual wind turbines have been steadily growing in terms 
of their installed capacity – the maximum electricity output 
they could achieve when operating at full power. The average 
capacity of wind turbines installed globally in 2005 was 
1.2 MW. At the same time the largest turbines being prepared 
for the market are now reaching more than 5 MW in capacity. 
This scenario makes the conservative assumption that the 
average size will gradually increase from today’s ﬁgure to 
2 MW in 2013 and then level out. It is possible however that 
this ﬁgure will turn out to be greater in practice. As the 
average capacity of turbines increases, fewer will be needed 
in total to satisfy a given penetration of global electricity 
demand.    
3. CAPACITY FACTOR
The capacity factor of a wind turbine is an indication of how 
efﬁciently it is operating. The percentage refers to the 
average proportion of the year during which they will be 
generating electricity at the equivalent of full capacity. From 
an average capacity factor today of 24 %, the scenario 
assumes that improvements in both wind turbine technology 
and the siting of wind farms will result in a steady increase. 
Capacity factors are also much higher out to sea, where winds are stronger and more predictable. The growing size of 
the offshore wind market, especially in Europe, will therefore 
contribute to an increase in the average.  
The scenario projects that the average global capacity factor 
will increase to 28 % by 2012 and then 30 % by 2036.  
4. CAPITAL COSTS AND PROGRESS RATIOS
The capital cost of producing wind turbines has fallen steadily 
over the past 20 years as manufacturing techniques have 
been optimised, turbine design has been largely concentrated 
on the three-bladed downwind model with variable speed 
and pitch blade regulation, and mass production and 
automation have resulted in economies of scale.
The general conclusion from industrial learning curve theory 
is that costs decrease by some 20 % each time the number of 
units produced doubles. A 20 % decline is equivalent to a 
progress ratio of 0.80. 
Studies of the past development of the wind power industry 
show that progress through R&D efforts and by learning have 
already resulted in a 15-20 % price reduction – equivalent to 
a progress ratio of 0.85 to 0.80. In the calculation of cost 
reductions in this report, experience has been related to num -
bers of units, i.e. turbines and not megawatt capacity. The 
increase in average unit size is therefore also taken into 
account.
The progress ratio assumed in this study starts at 0.90 up 
until 2010. After that it is reduced to 0.92. Beyond 2025, 
when production processes are assumed to have been 
optimised and the level of global manufacturing output has 
reached a peak, it goes down to 0.98.
The reason for this graduated assumption, particularly in the 
early years, is that the manufacturing industry has not so far 
gained the full beneﬁts from series production, especially due 
to the rapid upscaling of products. Neither has the full 
potential of future design optimisations been utilised. Even 
so, the cost of wind turbine generators has still fallen 
signiﬁcantly, and the industry is recognised as having entered 
the “commercialisation phase”, as understood in learning 
curve theories.

44Capital costs per kilowatt of installed capacity are taken as an 
average of € 1,000 in 2005. They are then assumed to fall 
steadily to € 912 in 2010 and to € 784 by 2025. From then 
onwards the scenario assumes a leveling out of costs. All 
ﬁgures are given at 2005 prices. 
Costs and Benefits
1. INVESTMENT
The relative attraction to investors of the wind energy market 
is dependent on a number of factors. These include the 
capital cost of installation, the availability of ﬁnance, the 
pricing regime for the power output generated and the 
expected rate of return.
The investment value of the future wind energy market 
envisaged in this scenario has been assessed on an annual 
basis. This is based on the assumption of a gradually 
decreasing capital cost per kilowatt of installed capacity, as 
already explained.
 In the Reference scenario  the annual value of global 
investment in the wind power industry reaches € 10.7 billion 
in 2010, increases to € 21.2 bn by 2030, with a peak at 
€ 28.8 bn in 2050.
In the Moderate scenario  the annual value of global 
investment in the wind power industry reaches € 18.2 billion 
in 2010, increases to € 62.4 bn by 2020 with a peak at 
€ 74.9 bn in 2040.
In the Advanced scenario  the annual value of global 
investment reaches € 23.2 billion in 2010, peaks at € 141 bn 
by 2020 and decreases slowly to € 112.1 bn until 2050.  
All these ﬁgures take into account the value of repowering 
older turbines.
Although these ﬁgures may appear large, they should be seen 
in the context of the total level of investment in the global 
power industry. During the 1990s, for example, annual invest -
ment in the power sector was running at some € 158-186 
billion each year.2. GENERATION COSTS
Various parameters need to be taken into account when 
calculating the generation costs of wind power. The most 
important of these are the capital cost of wind turbines (see 
above) and the expected electricity production. The second is 
highly dependent on the wind conditions at a given site, 
making selection of a good location essential to achieving 
economic viability. Other important factors include operation 
and maintenance (O&M) costs, the lifetime of the turbine 
and the discount rate (the cost of capital).
The total cost per generated kWh of electricity is traditionally 
calculated by discounting and levelising investment and 
O&M costs over the lifetime of a wind turbine, then dividing 
this by the annual electricity production. The unit cost of 
generation is thus calculated as an average cost over the 
lifetime of a turbine, which is normally estimated at 20 years. 
In reality, however, the actual costs will be lower at the 
beginning of a turbine’s operation, due to lower O&M costs, 
and increase over the lifespan of the machine.
Taking into account all these factors, the cost of generating 
electricity from wind energy currently ranges from approxi -
mately 4-5 €cents/kWh at high wind speed sites up to 
approximately 6-8 €cents/kWh at sites with low average 
wind speeds. 
However, over the past 15 years the efﬁciency of wind 
turbines has improved considerably thanks to better 
equipment design, better siting and taller turbines. As a 
result, efﬁciency has been increasing by 2% to 3% annually. 
Furthermore, it can be assumed that as a result of optimised 
production processes, the investment costs for wind turbines 
will decrease as described above. 
As a result, it is expected that by 2020, the costs of producing 
electricity will have fallen to 3-3.8 €cents/kWh at a good site 
and 4-6 €cents/kWh at a site with low average wind speeds. 
By 2050, these costs could be as low as 2.8-3.5 €cents/kWh 
and 4.2-5.6 €cents/kWh respectively.

45THE “GLOBAL WIND ENERGY OUTLOOK” SCENARIO
Annual Installation [ GW ]
Reference
Moderate
AdvancedCost € / kW Reference Moderate AdvancedCOSTS AND CAPACITIES
6006507007508008509009501,000
05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,000
2005 2010 2050 2040 2030 2020
INVESTMENT AND EMPLOYMENT
2005 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050
REFERENCE
Annual Installation [MW] 11,524 11,506 15,547 24,816 27,447 34,266
Cost € / kW 1,000 933 879 854 845 842
Investment € billion /year 11.524 10.732 13.662 21.205 23.185 28.841
Employment  Job-year 150,120 241,484 322,729 481,624 531,723 653,691
MODERATE
Annual Installation [MW] 11,524 19,906 77,365 58,260 97,737 70,957
Cost € / kW 1,000 912 807 773 766 764
Investment € billion /year 11.524 18.154 62.449 45.009 74.854 54.227
Employment  Job-year 150,120 390,408 1.310,711 1.141,016 1.663,578 1.386,085
  
ADVANCED
Annual Installation [MW] 11,524 25,831 186,825 117,014 142,260 156,423
Cost € / kW 1,000 899 756 725 719 717
Investment € billion /year 11.524 23.220 141.249 84.827 102.229 112.090
Employment  Job-year 150,120 492,384 2.899,776 2.143,587 2.506,871 2.795,873
GWEC_A4_0608_1.indd   Abs1:45 GWEC_A4_0608_1.indd   Abs1:45 30.08.2006   13:48:09 Uhr 30.08.2006   13:48:09 Uhr

46These calculations do not take into account the so-called 
‘external costs’ of electricity production. It is generally agreed 
that renewable energy sources such as wind have environ -
mental and social beneﬁts compared to conventional energy 
sources such as coal, gas, oil and nuclear. These beneﬁts can 
be translated into costs for society, which should be reﬂected 
in the cost calculations for electricity output. Only then can a 
fair comparison of different means of power production be 
established. The ExternE project, funded by the European 
Commission, has estimated the external cost of gas at 
around 1.1-3.0 €cents/kWh and that for coal at as much as 
3.5-7.7 €cents/kWh.
Furthermore, these calculations do not take into account the 
fuel cost risk related to conventional technologies. Since wind 
energy does not require any fuel, it eliminates the risk of fuel 
price volatility which characterises other generating 
technologies such as gas, coal and oil. As a result, a generat -
ing portfolio containing substantial amounts of wind energy 
will reduce the risks of future higher energy costs by reducing 
society’s exposure to price increases for fossil fuels. In an age 
of limited fuel resources and high fuel price volatility, the 
beneﬁts of this are immediately obvious.
In addition, the avoided costs for the installation of conven -
tional power production plant and avoided fossil fuel costs 
are not taken into consideration. This would further improve 
the cost analysis for wind energy.
3. EMPLOYMENT
The employment effect of this scenario is a crucial factor to 
weigh alongside its other costs and beneﬁts. High unemploy -
ment rates continue to be a drain on the economies of many 
countries in the world. Any technology which demands a 
substantial level of both skilled and unskilled labour is 
therefore of considerable economic importance, and likely to 
feature strongly in any political decision-making over 
different energy options.
A number of assessments of the employment effects of wind 
power have been carried out in Germany, Denmark and the 
Netherlands. The assumption made in this scenario is that for 
every megawatt of new capacity, the annual market for wind 
energy will create employment at the rate of 16 jobs through 
manufacture and component supply. A further 5 jobs will be 
contributed by wind farm development, installation and indirect employment. As production processes are optimised, 
this level will decrease, falling to 11 manufacturing jobs and 5 
in development and installation by 2030. In addition, 
employment in regular operations and maintenance work at 
wind farms will contribute a further 0.33 jobs for every mega -
watt of cumulative capacity.
Under the Reference scenario  this means that more than 
241,000 jobs would be created by 2010, over 481,000 jobs 
by 2030 and almost 653,000 jobs by 2050. In the Moderate 
scenario  these numbers would increase to more than 
390,000 jobs by 2010, almost 1.1 million by 2030 and then 
leveling out at about 1.4 million by 2050. Under the 
Advanced scenario , the results show increases in the 
employment level to 2.9 million jobs by 2020, leveling out to 
2.8 million by 2050.
4. CARBON DIOXIDE SAVINGS   
A reduction in the levels of carbon dioxide being emitted into 
the global atmosphere is the most important environmental 
beneﬁt from wind power generation. Carbon dioxide is the 
gas largely responsible for exacerbating the greenhouse 
effect, leading to the disastrous consequences of global 
climate change.
At the same time, modern wind technology has an extremely 
good energy balance. The CO₂ emissions related to the 
manufacture, installation and servicing over the average 
20 year lifecycle of a wind turbine are “paid back” after the 
ﬁrst three to six months of operation.
The beneﬁt to be obtained from carbon dioxide reductions is 
dependent on which other fuel, or combination of fuels, any 
increased generation from wind power will displace. 
Calculations by the World Energy Council show a range of 
carbon dioxide emission levels for different fossil fuels.  On 
the assumption that coal and gas will still account for the 
majority of electricity generation in 20 years’ time – with a 
continued trend for gas to take over from coal – it makes 
sense to use a ﬁgure of 600 tonnes per GWh as an average 
value for the carbon dioxide reduction to be obtained from 
wind generation.
This assumption is further justiﬁed by the fact that more than 
50 % of the cumulative wind generation capacity expected 
by 2020 will be installed in the OECD regions (North 

47THE “GLOBAL WIND ENERGY OUTLOOK” SCENARIO
America, Europe and the Paciﬁc). The trend in these countries 
is for a signiﬁcant shift from coal to gas. In other regions the 
CO₂ reduction will be higher due to the widespread use of 
inefﬁcient coal burning power stations.
Taking account of these assumptions, the expected annual 
saving in CO₂ from the Reference scenario  will be 
339 million tonnes in 2020, rising to 910 million tonnes in 
2050. The cumulative saving over the whole scenario period 
would be 22,800 million tonnes.
Under the Moderate scenario  the saving would be 825 mil -
lion tonnes of CO₂ annually in 2020, rising to 2,455 million 
tonnes in 2050. The cumulative saving over the scenario 
period would be just over 62,150 million tonnes. 
Under the Advanced scenario , the annual saving in 2020 
would increase to 1,582 million tonnes and by 2050 to 
4,700 million tonnes. The cumulative saving over the whole 
scenario period would be 113,600 million tonnes.0,020.000,040.000,060.000,080.000,0100.000,0120.000,0140.000,0
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050Reference
Moderate
AdvancedMio.t CO2CUMULA TIVE CO2 REDUCTION  [MIO TCO2 ]
CO₂ EMISSIONS
REFERENCE
Year Annual CO₂ reduction  
[Mio tCO₂]Cumulative  
CO₂ reduction  
[Mio. tCO₂]
2003 50.8 50.8
2004 60.0 110.8
2005 74.5 185
2006 90.8 276
2007 104 381
2008 119 499
2009 133 632
2010 148 781
2015 253 1,851
2020 339 3,375
2025 437 5,366
2030 535 7,847
2035 623 10,786
2040 761 14,405
2045 836 18,434
2050 910 22,836MODERATE
Year Annual CO₂ reduction  
[Mio tCO₂]Cumulative  
CO₂ reduction  
[Mio. tCO₂]
2003 50.8 50.8
2004 60.0 110.8
2005 74.5 185
2006 93.7 279
2007 111 391
2008 131 522
2009 153 675
2010 179 854
2015 412 2,413
2020 825 5,593
2025 1,320 11,229
2030 1,661 18,918
2035 1,891 27,948
2040 2,206 38,639
2045 2,345 50,100
2050 2,455 62,165
ADVANCED
Year Annual CO₂ reduction  
[Mio tCO₂]Cumulative  
CO₂ reduction  
[Mio. tCO₂]
2003 50.8 50.8
2004 60.0 110.8
2005 74.5 185
2006 95.2 281
2007 116 396
2008 140 536
2009 168 704
2010 202 906
2015 576 2,916
2020 1,579 8,363
2025 2,340 18,540
2030 3,100 32,521
2035 3,475 49,147
2040 4,125 68,970
2045 4,436 90,528
2050 4,747 113,640

48Global Wind Energy Outlook – 
Research Background
THE GERMAN AEROSPACE CENTRE
The German Aerospace Centre (DLR) is the largest engineer -
ing research organisation in Germany. Among its specialities 
is development of solar thermal power station technologies, 
the utilisation of low- and high-temperature fuel cells, 
particularly for electricity generation, and research into the 
development of high-efﬁciency gas and steam turbine power 
plants.
The Institute of Technical Thermodynamics at DLR (DLR-ITT) 
is active in the ﬁeld of renewable energy research and 
technology development for efﬁcient and low emission 
energy conversion and utilisation. Working in co-operation 
with other DLR institutes, industry and universities, research 
is focused on solving key problems in electrochemical energy 
technology and solar energy conversion. This encompasses 
application oriented research, development of laboratory and 
prototype models as well as design and operation of 
demonstration plants. System analysis and technology 
assessment supports the preparation of strategic decisions in 
the ﬁeld of research and energy policy. 
Within DLR-ITT, the System Analysis and Technology 
Assessment Division has long term experience in the 
assessment of renewable energy technologies. Its main 
research activities are in the ﬁeld of techno-economic 
utilisation and system analysis, leading to the development 
of strategies for the market introduction and dissemination 
of new technologies, mainly in the energy and transport 
sectors. 
SCENARIO BACKGROUND
DLR was commissioned by Greenpeace International and 
EREC to conduct a study on global sustainable energy 
pathways up to 2050. This study, due to be published in early 
2007, will result in energy scenarios with emissions that are 
signiﬁcantly lower than current levels. Part of this study 
examines the future potential for renewable energy sources; 
together with input from the wind energy industry and 
analysis of regional projections for wind power around the 
world, this forms the basis of the Global Wind Energy 
Outlook scenario.  The energy supply scenarios adopted in this report, which both 
extend beyond and enhance projections by the International 
Energy Agency, have been calculated using the MESAP/PlaNet 
simulation model used for a similar study by DLR covering the 
EU-25 countries (“Energy revolution: A sustainable pathway to 
a clean energy future for Europe”, September 2005 for 
Greenpeace International). This model has then been further 
developed by the Ecofys consultancy to take into account the 
future potential for energy efﬁciency measures. 
ENERGY EFFICIENCY STUDY
The aim of the Ecofys study was to develop low energy 
demand scenarios for the period 2003 to 2050 on a sectoral 
level for the IEA regions as deﬁned in the World Energy 
Outlook report series. Energy demand was split up into 
electricity and fuels. The sectors which were taken into 
account were industry, transport and other consumers, 
including households and services.
The Ecofys study envisages an ambitious overall development 
path for the exploitation of energy efﬁciency potential, focused 
on current best practice as well as technologies available in the 
future, and assuming continuous innovation in the ﬁeld. The 
result is that worldwide ﬁnal energy demand is reduced by 
47% in 2050 in comparison to the reference scenario. Energy 
savings are fairly equally distributed over the three sectors. The 
most important energy saving options are the implementation 
of more efﬁcient passenger and freight transport and improved 
heat insulation and building design. These together account for 
46 % of the worldwide energy savings.


49THE “GLOBAL WIND ENERGY OUTLOOK” SCENARIO
In this report, the “Reference” energy demand projection is 
based on the IEA’s World Energy Outlook 2004, including its 
assumptions on population and GDP growth, extrapolated 
forward to 2050. It takes account of policies and measures 
that were enacted or adopted by mid-2004, but does not 
include possible or likely future policy initiatives. It is 
assumed that there will be no changes in national policies on 
nuclear power.
Two low energy demand projections are then developed 
based on the IEA reference scenario - an “Ambitious” energy 
efﬁciency scenario (which is not used in this report) and a 
more economic “Constraint” version (descripted as the “High 
Energy Efﬁciency” projection for the purposes of this report). 
The ﬁrst takes into account the technical potential whilst the 
second introduces an economic element. In the Ambitious 
version the assumption is made that the best available 
technologies are introduced and there is continuous 
innovation in the ﬁeld of energy efﬁciency. In the Constraint 
version the potential for advanced energy saving measures is 
tempered by the constraints of cost and other barriers to 
implementation. ECOFYS ENERGY EFFICIENCY MODEL
STEP 1: REFERENCE SCENARIO
Development of a reference energy demand scenario for the 
period 2003-2050 per region and per sector.
STEP 2: LIST OF MEASURES
Establishment of possible energy savings options per sector.
STEP 3: ENERGY SAVINGS POTENTIAL
Determination of the energy savings potential per year (2010, 
2020, 2030, 2040 and 2050) and per sector. A distinction is 
made between the economic and the technical energy savings 
potential, leading to two low energy demand scenarios: 
Ambitious:  This is an ambitious energy efﬁciency scenario 
focused on current best practice and technologies available in 
the future. It assumes continuous innovation in the ﬁeld of 
energy efﬁciency.
Constraint (=“High Energy Efﬁciency” Scenario):  This 
scenario assumes more moderate energy savings, taking into 
account the implementation constraints of energy efﬁcient 
technologies in terms of costs and other barriers.


50
ENERGY POLICY ISSUES  
AND RECOMMENDATIONS

51ENERGY POLICY ISSUES AND RECOMMENDATIONS
At a time when governments around the world are in the 
process of liberalising their electricity markets, wind power’s 
increasing competitiveness should lead to a higher demand 
for wind turbines. Distortions in the world’s electricity 
markets, however, created by decades of massive ﬁnancial, 
political and structural support to conventional technologies, 
have placed wind power at a competitive disadvantage. New 
wind projects have to compete with old nuclear and fossil 
fuel power stations producing electricity at marginal cost, 
because the interest and depreciation on the investment has 
already been paid for by consumers and taxpayers. Renew -
able technologies are also disadvantaged by the failure to 
penalise conventional fuels for the economic cost of their 
pollution and other hazards. Without political support, 
therefore, wind power cannot establish its positive contribu -
tion towards environmental goals and security of supply. 
This chapter presents a summary of the current political 
frameworks which support wind power and the barriers that 
need to be overcome in order to unlock the technology’s 
potential to become a major contributor to future global 
energy supply. Over 48 countries have already introduced 
some kind of policy or law to promote renewables, including 
14 developing countries.
More than 25 years of wind power experience around the 
world has shown that successful frameworks for the 
development and deployment of wind energy must include 
appropriate measures in each of these ﬁve vital areas:
•  Legally binding targets for renewable energy
•  Well designed payment mechanisms
•  Grid access and strategic development of grids
•  Appropriate administrative procedures
•  Public acceptance and support
Legally binding Targets for 
Renewable Energy
Setting targets serves as an important catalyst for govern -
ments to develop the necessary regulatory frameworks to 
expand renewables, including ﬁnancial frameworks, grid 
access regulation, planning and administrative procedures. 
However, targets have little value if they are not accompa -
nied by policies which compensate for distortions in 
electricity markets, eliminate market barriers and create an 
environment which attracts investment capital.An increasing number of countries have established targets 
for renewable energy as part of their greenhouse gas 
reduction policies. To date, 49 countries have set targets, 
including eleven developing countries. These are either 
expressed as speciﬁc quantities of installed capacity or as a 
percentage of energy consumption. 
The most ambitious target has been set by the European 
Union. In 1997, a White Paper on Renewable Sources of 
Energy set the goal of doubling the share of renewable energy 
in the EU from 6% to 12% by 2010. This was followed by the 
2001 Renewable Electricity Directive, which detailed the aim 
(within the White Paper goal) of increasing the amount of 
renewable electricity from 14% in 1997 to 21% by 2010. Each 
European Union member state was allocated its own 
individual target. Although these targets are indicative (not 
binding), they have served as an important incentive for 
political initiatives throughout Europe to increase renewable 
energy’s share of electricity supply. Wind power is expected 
to contribute a substantial part of this increase. 
The next step would be for these targets to be made manda -
tory, and for their horizon to be extended beyond 2010. But 
although the European Parliament has proposed a mandatory 
target for 20% of EU energy by 2020, with a linked target for 
33% of electricity supply, this has not yet been accepted by 
the European Commission or the 25 member state govern -
ments. A ﬁrst step in this direction was taken in March 2006 
with reference by the EU Heads of State and Government to a 
15% target for renewable energy by the year 2015.
Specific Policy Mechanisms
A clear market for wind generated power must be deﬁned in 
order for a project developer to get involved. As with any 
other investment, the lower the risk to the investor, the lower 
the costs of supplying the product. The most important 
measures for establishing new wind power markets are 
therefore those where the market for generated power is 
clearly deﬁned in national laws, including stable, long term 
ﬁscal measures that minimise investor risk and ensure an 
adequate return on investment.
The main purpose of the wide range of available economic 
measures to encourage renewable energy is to provide 
incentives for improvements and cost reductions in environ -

52mental technologies. Markets need to be strong, stable and 
reliable, with a clear commitment to long-term expansion. A 
number of mechanisms have been introduced in different 
countries to further these aims.
Overall, there are two main types of incentives to promote 
deployment of renewable energy:
Fixed Price Systems where the government sets the electric -
ity price (or premium) paid to the developer/producer and 
lets the market determine the amount of capacity which will 
be built. Examples of countries which have adopted this 
system in Europe are Germany, Spain, France and Portugal.
Payments can be made to developers or producers in the 
form of: 
1.  Investment subsidies
2.  Fixed feed-in tariffs
3. Fixed premium payments
4.  Tax credits
Renewable Quota Systems where the government or other 
authority sets the quantity of renewable electricity it would 
like to see produced, and leaves it to the market to determine 
the price. This system operates in some states in the USA, 
where it is referred to as a Renewable Portfolio Standard, and 
in a number of EU countries, including the UK, Sweden, 
Belgium and Italy.Two types of renewable quota systems have been employed 
in national wind power markets: tendering systems and green 
certiﬁcate systems. Under the former, developers compete on 
price to construct projects within an allocated quota of 
capacity. Under the latter, operating projects are issued with 
green certiﬁcates according to their power output, the price 
of which varies according to supply and demand. 
Any policy measure adopted by a government, however, 
needs to be acceptable to the requirements of the invest -
ment community in order to be effective. There are two key 
issues here:
•  The price for renewable power must allow for risk return 
proﬁles that are competitive with other investment 
options.
•  The duration of a project must allow investors to recoup 
their investment.


53ENERGY POLICY ISSUES AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Electricity Market Reform
Essential reforms in the electricity sector are necessary if new 
renewable energy technologies are to be accepted on a larger 
scale. These reforms include:
REMOVAL OF ELECTRICITY SECTOR BARRIERS
Current energy legislation on planning, certiﬁcation and grid access 
has been built around the existence of large centralised power 
plants, including extensive licensing requirements and speciﬁca -
tions for access to the grid. This favours existing large scale 
electricity production and represents a signiﬁcant market barrier to 
renewables. It also fails to recognise the value of not having to 
transport decentralised power generation over long distances.
Distortions in the conventional power market include: 
1.  Institutional and legal barriers
2.  Regional and national dominant players
3.  Barriers to third party grid access 
4.  Limited interconnection between regional and national 
markets
5.  Discriminatory grid connection tariffs
6.  Lack of effective “unbundling” by companies of their 
production and transmission interests. 
One major challenge is to implement the necessary redesigns of 
the grid infrastructure, system management, grid regulation and 
grid codes so that they reﬂect the characteristics of renewable 
energy technologies. Cross-border electricity interconnectors are 
also vital for those markets that are not geographically isolated.
The reforms needed to address market barriers to renewables 
include:
•  Streamlined and uniform planning procedures and permitting 
systems and integrated least cost network planning;
•  Access to the grid at fair, transparent prices and removal of 
discriminatory access and transmission tariffs;
•  Fair and transparent pricing for power throughout a network, 
with recognition and remuneration for the beneﬁts of 
embedded generation;
•  Unbundling of utilities into separate generation and distribu -
tion companies;
•  The costs of grid infrastructure development and reinforce -
ment must be carried by the grid management authority 
rather than individual renewable energy projects;
•  Disclosure of fuel mix and environmental impact to end users to 
enable consumers to make an informed choice of power source.REMOVAL OF MARKET DISTORTIONS
In addition to market barriers there are also market distortions 
which block the expansion of renewable energy. These come in 
the form of direct and indirect subsidies, and the fact that the 
social and environmental effects of different generation 
technologies are currently excluded from the costs of electricity 
production.
A major barrier preventing wind power from reaching its full 
potential is the lack of pricing structures in the energy markets 
that reﬂect the full costs to society of producing energy. 
Furthermore, the overall electricity market framework is very 
different today from the one that existed when coal, gas, and 
nuclear technologies were introduced. For almost a century, 
power generation has been characterised by national monopo -
lies with mandates to ﬁnance investments in new production 
capacity through state subsidies and/or levies on electricity bills. 
As many countries move in the direction of more liberalised 
electricity markets, those options are no longer available. This 
places new generating technologies such as wind power at a 
competitive disadvantage. 


54Two developments could ease this situation:
Removal of subsidies to fossil fuel and nuclear power sources
Subsidies to fully competitive and polluting technologies are 
highly unproductive, seriously distort markets and increase the 
need to support renewables. Removing subsidies to conventional 
electricity would not only save taxpayers’ money and reduce 
current market distortions in the electricity market. It would also 
dramatically reduce the need for renewables support. Wind 
power would not need special provisions if markets were not 
distorted by the fact that it is still virtually free for electricity 
producers to pollute.
Subsidies artiﬁcially reduce the price of power, keep renewables 
out of the market place, and prop up increasingly uncompetitive 
technologies and fuels. Eliminating direct and indirect subsidies 
to fossil fuels and nuclear power would help move towards a 
level playing ﬁeld across the energy sector.
Conventional energy sources currently receive an estimated 
$250 billion in subsidies per year worldwide, according to the 
United Nations Development Programme. This heavily distorts 
markets. The UNDP World Energy Assessment gives the annual 
cost of global subsidies for fossil fuels and nuclear energy 
between 1995 and 1998 as $215 billion, compared with 
$9 billion for renewables and energy efﬁciency. 
Research and development funding can make a crucial difference 
as to whether a technology becomes commercially viable, 
particularly at the early stage of development. It also accounts 
for about 40% of continued cost reductions in the technology. According to the International Energy Agency report “Renewable 
Energy: Market and Policy Trends in IEA Countries” (2004), 
between 1974 and 2002, 92% of all R&D funding ($267 billion) 
was spent on non-renewables, largely fossil fuel and nuclear 
technologies, compared to 8% ($23 billion) for all renewable 
technologies.
Internalising the social and environmental costs  
of polluting energy
The real cost of energy production by conventional energy 
includes expenses absorbed by society, such as health impacts 
and local and regional environmental degradation – from 
mercury pollution to acid rain – as well as the global impact of 
climate change.
Hidden costs also include the waiving of nuclear accident 
insurance, which is either unavailable or too expensive to be 
covered by the nuclear operators. The costs of decommissioning 
nuclear plants, storage of high level nuclear waste and the health 
costs associated with mining, drilling and transportation are 
equally not added to the real economics of fossil and nuclear 
power.
Environmental damage should be avoided at source. Translated 
into energy generation that would mean that, ideally, produc -
tion of energy should not pollute and it is the energy producers’ 
responsibility to prevent it. If they do pollute they should pay an 
amount equal to the damage their production causes to society 
as a whole.


55ENERGY POLICY ISSUES AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The European Commission – through the ExternE project – has 
attempted to quantify the true costs, including environmental 
costs, of electricity generation. ExternE estimates that the cost 
of producing electricity from coal or oil would double, and from 
gas increase by 30%, if their external costs, in the form of 
damage to the environment and health, were taken into 
account. The study further estimates that these costs amount to 
1-2% of EU GDP, or between €85 billion and €170 billion/
annum, not including the additional costs of the impacts of 
human-induced climate change on human health, agriculture 
and ecosystems. If those environmental costs were levied on 
electricity generation, many renewables, including wind power, 
would not need any support to successfully compete in the 
marketplace.
As with other subsidies, such external costs must be factored 
into energy pricing if competition in the market is to be truly fair. 
This requires that governments apply a “polluter pays” system 
that charges the emitters accordingly, or applies suitable 
compensation to non-emitters. Adoption of polluter pays 
taxation to polluting electricity sources, or equivalent compen -
sation to renewable energy sources, and exclusion of renewables 
from environment-related energy taxation, is essential to help 
achieve fairer competition in the world’s electricity markets.International Action on Climate 
Change
Final ratiﬁcation of the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) in 
February 2005 was a vital ﬁrst step towards protecting the 
climate from dangerous anthropogenic climate change. As a 
legally binding international instrument, the Protocol heralds 
the beginning of carbon constrained economies. In time, this 
will mean an increased demand for low and carbon-free 
power production. Protecting the climate will demand more 
and deeper cuts in greenhouse gas emissions, which will 
further increase the market for renewable energy technolo -
gies such as wind power.
The international issue now is what objectives for reduction 
in greenhouse gases will follow on from the present 2008-12 
Kyoto target period. Meeting in March 2005, EU heads of 
state recommended that “reduction pathways… in the order 
of 15-30% by 2020, compared to the baseline envisaged in 
the Kyoto Protocol… should be considered.” At the Montreal 
UNFCC conference (COP-11) in December 2005 delegates 
agreed to start “a process to consider further commitments”. 
It is critical that the next round of emissions reductions be 
agreed soon, so that the market is clear that the strong signal 
sent by the entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol will 
continue beyond 2012.
Emissions trading in the form it currently operates, both at a 
European level and through the international mechanisms 
(Clean Development and Joint Implementation) established 
under Kyoto, is unlikely to provide a major boost for wind 
energy in the short term. The ﬁrst steps in emissions trading 
within the European Union have sent a good signal to 
markets about the costs of carbon-intensive energy produc -
tion, but they do not go far enough and need to be strength -
ened in the next round. In particular, free allocation of 
allowances should be replaced by 100% auctioning - to avoid 
market distortions and apply the polluter pays principle. 
Emissions trading should not be seen as a substitute for 
environmental taxes or policies to support renewable energy.


56Reform of International Financing
Demand for energy, particularly electricity, is increasing 
worldwide. This is especially the case in developing countries, 
which also rely heavily on export credit agencies (ECAs) and 
multi-lateral development banks to provide ﬁnancing for 
energy and other industrial projects. 
To be consistent with the emerging international regime for 
limiting greenhouse gas emissions, ECAs and other interna -
tional ﬁnancial institutions which support or underwrite 
projects around the world must have policies consistent with 
the need for limiting greenhouse gas emissions and climate 
change protection. At the same time there needs to be a 
transition plan and ﬂexible timeframes to avoid undue 
hardships on developing country economies overly reliant on 
conventional energy sources and exports, whilst also 
recognising that meeting the development goals for the 
world’s poorest nations will require subsidies for the 
foreseeable future.Policies to address these issues must include:
•  A deﬁned and increasing percentage of overall energy 
sector lending directed to renewable energy projects.
•  A rapid phase out of support for conventional, polluting 
energy projects.
Action by International Bodies
Against the backdrop of ever rising oil prices, political leaders 
have slowly started to acknowledge that the global energy 
challenge requires urgent action in three areas: securing 
global energy supply, meeting rising energy demand and 
tackling the threat of climate change. These issues are now 
higher on the political agenda than ever before. Moreover, a 
better understanding of energy issues and dramatic advances 
in modern technologies provide the opportunity for tackling 
the energy challenge in an efﬁcient and sustainable way. 
An opportunity for action is provided by international 
government meetings such as the G8 Summits, bringing 
together the leaders of the United States, Russia, Italy, Japan, 
Germany, France, Canada and the UK, and the UN’s Commis -
sion on Sustainable Development (CSD).
In July 2005, the G8 members, plus Brazil, China, India, 
Mexico and South Africa, agreed a dialogue on climate 
change, clean energy and sustainable development. These 
Partners, along with the World Bank and IEA, agreed to work 
together on a number of issues, including the deployment of 
renewable energy technology. The IEA has outlined a G8 
Gleneagles Programme, which focuses on the following areas: 
Alternative energy scenarios and strategies; Energy efﬁciency 
in buildings, appliances, transport and industry; Cleaner fossil 
fuels; Carbon capture and storage; Renewable energy; and 
Enhanced international co-operation. 
The IEA is to publish a report on Alternative Energy Technolo -
gies, and a report on progress on the work programme is to 
be provided at the G8 Summit in St Petersburg in July 2006 
and at the Gleneagles Dialogue Ministerial in Mexico in the 
autumn. 


57ENERGY POLICY ISSUES AND RECOMMENDATIONS
An earlier report by the G8 countries’ International Climate 
Change Task Force, “Meeting the climate challenge”, 
published in January 2005, made several recommendations in 
relation to both climate change and renewable energy. These 
included that:
•  A long-term objective be established to prevent global 
average temperature from rising more than 2°C (3.6°F) 
above the pre-industrial level, to limit the extent and 
magnitude of climate-change impacts.
•  G8 Governments establish national renewable portfolio 
standards to generate at least 25% of electricity from 
renewable energy sources by 2025, with higher targets 
needed for some G8 Governments.
•  Governments remove barriers to and increase investment 
in renewable energy and energy efﬁcient technologies and 
practice such measures as the phase-out of fossil fuel 
subsidies.
Implementation of these recommendations would support 
the achievement of the targets outlined in this report.
Energy for Sustainable Development and Climate Change are 
two of the thematic priorities of the 2006 and 2007 sessions 
of the UN Commission on Sustainable Development, which 
will review progress made by the world’s governments in 
implementing the agreements of the World Summit on 
Sustainable Development in 2002. These sessions provide a 
key opportunity for ministers from around the world to focus 
on the promotion of renewable energy.Policy Summary
NATIONAL POLICIES
1.  Establish legally binding targets for renewable energy
2.  Create legally based market deployment instruments
3.  Provide deﬁned and stable returns for investors by ensuring 
that
•  The price for renewable power should allow for risk return 
proﬁles that are competitive with other investment options
•  The duration of a project should allow investors to recoup 
their investment
4. Reform electricity markets by ensuring that
•  Electricity sector barriers to renewables are removed
•  Market distortions are removed
•  Subsidies to fossil fuel and nuclear power sources are 
halted
•  The social and environmental costs of polluting energy are 
internalised
INTERNATIONAL POLICIES
1.  Implement the Kyoto Protocol and post-2012 emission 
reduction targets
2.  Reform the operation of Export Credit Agencies,  
Multi-lateral Development Banks and International Finance 
Institutions by ensuring
•  A deﬁned and increasing percentage of overall energy 
sector lending is directed to renewable energy projects
•  A rapid phase out of support for conventional, polluting 
energy projects
3.  Implement key G8 task force recommendations


58R E F E R E N C E
YearCumulative  
[MW]  Growth ratesAnnual [MW]  
incl. RepoweringAnnual  
avg. WTG  
[MW]Capacity factor  
[%]Production          
[TWh]Wind power 
penetration of 
Worlds electricity 
in % - ReferenceWind power 
penetration of 
Worlds electricity 
in % - Efﬁciency
2005 59,078 17% 11,524 1,4 24% 124
2006 69,139 15% 10,061 1,4 25% 151
2007 79,510 13% 10,371 1,5 25% 174
2008 90,222 12% 10,713 1,5 25% 198
2009 101,311 11% 11,089 1,5 25% 222
2010 112,818 10% 11,506 1,5 25% 247 1.5 1.8
2015 171,738 7% 13,074 2,0 28% 421
2020 230,658 6% 15,547 2,0 28% 566 2.7 3.6
2025 297,208 4% 24,774 2,0 28% 729
2030 363,758 3% 24,816 2,0 28% 892 3.5 5.0
2035 423,258 3% 24,974 2,0 28% 1,038
2040 482,758 2% 27,447 2,0 30% 1,269 4.1 6.3
2045 530,007 2% 34,224 2,0 30% 1,393
2050 577,257 0% 34,266 2,0 30% 1,517 4.0 6.6
MODERATE
YearCumulative  
[MW]  Growth rateAnnual [MW]  
incl. RepoweringAnnual  
avg. WTG  
[MW]Capacity factor  
[%]Production          
[TWh]Wind power 
penetration of 
Worlds electricity 
in % - ReferenceWind power 
penetration of 
Worlds electricity 
in % - Efﬁciency
2005 59,078 21% 11,524 1,4 24% 124 0.8 0.8
2006 71,344 19% 12,266 1,4 25% 156
2007 84,837 18% 13,493 1,5 25% 186
2008 99,862 17% 15,025 1,5 25% 219
2009 116,637 17% 16,774 1,5 25% 255
2010 136,543 16% 19,906 1,5 25% 299 1.8 2.2
2015 279,682 15% 37,972 2,0 28% 686
2020 560,445 13% 77,365 2,0 28% 1,375 6.6 8.6
2025 897,014 6% 75,507 2,0 28% 2,200
2030 1.128,707 3% 58,260 2,0 28% 2,768 10.8 15.6
2035 1.285,087 2% 65,057 2,0 28% 3,152
2040 1.399,133 1% 97,737 2,0 30% 3,677 11.8 18.1
2045 1.487,253 1% 91,476 2,0 30% 3,909
2050 1.556,901 0% 70,957 2,0 30% 4,092 10.8 17.7
ADVANCED
YearCumulative  
[MW]  Growth rateAnnual [MW]  
incl. RepoweringAnnual  
avg. WTG  
[MW]Capacity factor 
[%]Production          
[TWh]Wind power 
penetration of 
Worlds electricity 
in % - ReferenceWind power 
penetration of 
Worlds electricity 
in % - Efﬁciency
2005 59,078 23% 11,524 1,4 24% 124 0.8 0.8
2006 72,449 20% 13,371 1,4 25% 159
2007 88,080 15,631 1,5 25% 193
2008 106,560 18,481 1,5 25% 233
2009 127,928 21,368 1,5 25% 280
2010 153,759 25,831 1,5 25% 337 2.1 2.4
2015 391,077 70,478 2,0 28% 959
2020 1.072,928 17% 186,825 2,0 28% 2,632 12.6 16.5
2025 1.589,792 8% 117,014 2,0 28% 3,899
2030 2.106,656 4% 117,014 2,0 28% 5,167 20.1 29.1
2035 2.361,433 2% 142,260 2,0 28% 5,792
2040 2.616,210 2% 142,260 2,0 30% 6,875 22.1 33.9
2045 2.813,256 1% 156,423 2,0 30% 7,393
2050 3.010,302 1% 156,423 2,0 30% 7,911 20.9 34.2

59R E F E R E N C E
YearCO₂ reduction  
[annual  
Mio tCO₂]CO₂ reduction  
[cumulative  
Mio tCO₂] Progress ratio Costs [€/MW] Investment [T€] Jobs Total
2005 74.5 185 90% 1,000 11.524,000 150,120
2006 90.8 276 90% 983 9.889,197 163,200
2007 104 381 90% 968 10.041,461 197,208
2008 119 499 90% 955 10.232,704 234,698
2009 133 632 90% 943 10.461,858 242,974
2010 148 781 90% 933 10.732,388 241,484
2015 253 1,851 92% 900 11.772,485 280,866
2020 339 3,375 92% 879 13.662,230 322,729
2025 437 5,366 94% 865 21.433,038 463,332
2030 535 7,847 94% 854 21.205,467 481,624
2035 623 10,786 96% 849 21.209,089 480,290
2040 761 14,405 96% 845 23.185,273 531,723
2045 836 18,434 98% 843 28.855,459 638,180
2050 910 22,836 98% 842 28.841,545 653,691
MODERATE
YearCO₂ reduction   
[annual  
Mio tCO₂]CO₂ reduction  
[cumulative  
Mio tCO₂] Progress ratio Costs [€/MW] Investment [T€] Jobs Total
2005 74.5 185 90% 1,000 11.524,000 150,120
2006 93.7 279 90% 979 12.011,158 194,809
2007 111 391 90% 961 12.963,314 252,185
2008 131 522 90% 944 14.179,355 316,841
2009 153 675 90% 928 15.564,006 350,120
2010 179 854 90% 912 18.154,695 390,408
2015 412 2,413 92% 857 32.546,652 711,520
2020 825 5,593 92% 807 62.449,022 1.310,711
2025 1,320 11,229 94% 784 59.164,707 1,304,506
2030 1,661 18,918 94% 773 45.009,206 1.141,016
2035 1,891 27,948 96% 769 49.996,767 1.227,882
2040 2,206 38,639 96% 766 74.854,172 1.663,578
2045 2,345 50,100 98% 765 69.973,078 1.614,825
2050 2,455 62,165 98% 764 54.227,304 1.386,085
ADVANCED
YearCO₂ reduction  
[annual  
Mio tCO₂]CO₂ reduction  
[cumulative  
Mio tCO₂] Progress ratio Costs [€/MW] Investment [T€] Jobs Total
2005 74.5 185 90% 1,000 11.524,000 150,120
2006 95.2 281 90% 977 13.068,143 199,300
2007 116 396 90% 956 14.947,434 261,405
2008 140 536 90% 936 17.301,934 381,523
2009 168 704 90% 917 19.603,796 434,676
2010 202 906 90% 899 23.220,095 492,384
2015 576 2,916 92% 827 58.320,108 1.238,311
2020 1,579 8,363 92% 756 141.249,518 2.899,776
2025 2,340 18,540 94% 738 86.317,305 1.996,795
2030 3,100 32,521 94% 725 84.827,690 2.143,587
2035 3,475 49,147 96% 722 102.653,895 2.428,819
2040 4,125 68,970 96% 719 102.229,545 2.506,871
2045 4,436 90,528 98% 718 112.243,052 2.732,703
2050 4,747 113,640 98% 717 112.090,129 2.795,873

1ABOUT GWEC  
GLOBAL REPRESENTATION FOR THE WIND ENERGY SECTOR
GWEC is the voice of the global wind energy sector. GWEC brings 
together the major national, regional and continental associations 
representing the wind power sector, and the leading international 
wind energy companies and institutions. With a combined 
membership of over 1,500 organisations involved in hardware 
manufacture, project development, power generation, ﬁnance and 
consultancy, as well as researchers, academics and associations, 
GWEC’s member associations represent the entire wind energy 
community.
THE MEMBERS OF GWEC REPRESENT: 
•  Over 1,500 companies, organisations and institutions in more than 
50 countries
•  All the world’s major wind turbine manufacturers 
•  99 % of the world’s nearly 60,000 MW of installed wind power 
capacity
GLOBAL WIND ENERGY COUNCIL (GWEC )
Renewable Energy House  
63-65 Rue d’Arlon  
1040 Brussels  
Belgium
T: 32 2 100 4029  
F: 32 2 546 1944  
www.gwec.net  
info@gwec.netGreenpeace is a global organisation that uses non-violent direct 
action to tackle the most crucial threats to our planet‘s biodiversity 
and environment. Greenpeace is a non-proﬁt organisation, present in 
40 countries across Europe, the Americas, Asia and the Paciﬁc. It 
speaks for 2.8 million supporters worldwide, and inspires many 
millions more to take action every day. To maintain its independence, 
Greenpeace does not accept donations from governments or 
corporations but relies on contributions from individual supporters 
and foundation grants.
Greenpeace has been campaigning against environmental degrada -
tion since 1971 when a small boat of volunteers and journalists sailed 
into Amchitka, an area north of Alaska, where the US Government 
was conducting underground nuclear tests. This tradition of ‘bearing 
witness’ in a non-violent manner continues today, and ships are an 
important part of all its campaign work.
GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL
Ottho Heldringstraat 5
1066 AZ Amsterdam
The Netherlands
T: 31 20 7182000
F: 31 20 5148151
www.greenpeace.org
sven.teske@int.greenpeace.org
Scenario by  GWEC, Greenpeace International, DLR and Ecofys
Text edited by  Crispin Aubrey,  Angelika Pullen, Arthouros Zervos, 
Sven Teske 
Design by  bitter Graﬁk & Illustration, Hamburg
Photos courtesy of  Elsam; Enercon; EWEA; Gamesa; Greenpeace; 
IVPC; JWEA; Lucky Wind; Npower Renewables Ltd; Petitjean;  
Shell Wind Energy;Vestas; Vicson Chua; Vision Quest Windelectric; 
Winter.
Printed on recycled paper