# Archivo original: hfcs-a-growing-threat.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:56 -03 2025

HFCs: A growing threat to the climate 1
 greenpeace.org
InternationalHFCs: A growing threat 
to the climate
The worst greenhouse gases 
you’ve never heard of....
Updated Edition, December 2009

2 HFCs: A growing threat to the climate
01 Introduction 05
02  The problem  
HFCs are a climate issue 06
03  The politics of F-gases: A tale of two treaties  
How HFCs came to be internationally controlled 10
04  The chemical industry  
False hopes and unacceptable risks 12
05  The solutions  
Environment friendly, business friendly 16
06  Greenpeace’s role  
Technology, business and politics 24
References 28
For more information contact:
supporter.services.int@greenpeace.org
Written by:
Paula Tejón Carbajal, David Kanter
Edited by:
Steve Erwood
Designed by:
Atomo Design
Acknowledgements:
Kert Davies, Liping Fan, Amy Larkin, Wolfgang Lohbeck, Janos Mate, Claudette Papathanasopoulos
Updated Edition, December 2009
JN 277Contents
Published by
Greenpeace International
Ottho Heldringstraat 5The NetherlandsTel: +31 20 7182000
Fax: +31 20 7182002
greenpeace.org

HFCs are  
‘super-greenhouse 
gases’ up to 
thousands of  
times more 
powerful than  
CO2. They pose  
a growing threat  
to the climate.
symbol HFC 125
Is part of the HFC 
mixtures used in 
supermarket refrigeration.
This HFC has a 20-year 
GWP of 6,350, which 
means that it is 6,350 
times more powerful than 
CO2 as a greenhouse gas 
over a 20-year period.
03 HFCs: A growing threat to the climate

symbol HFC 134a
Is used as a refrigerant and foaming agent. It has a 20-year GWP of 3,830, 
which means that it is 
3,830 times more powerful than CO
2 as a greenhouse 
gas over a 20-year period. 
04 HFCs: A growing threat to the climate

Introduction
As governments grapple with the urgent 
task of drastically cutting greenhouse gas emissions to avert dangerous climate change, there is a group of little-known but very powerful greenhouse gases which, if left unchecked, could hinder all of our efforts to tackle the issue.
We use these chemicals in our everyday 
lives for refrigeration and air-conditioning: they cool our drinks, our cars and our buildings. 
They are man-made fluorinated 
greenhouse gases - commonly known  as F-gases. 
By 2005, this group of ‘super-greenhouse gases’ was responsible for 17% of climate change impacts.
1
“Emissions of HFCs… if left unchecked 
could be equivalent to nearly half of global 
CO2 emissions by mid-century.”
New Y ork Times - July 31, 200901
F-gases are thousands of times more powerful than carbon dioxide 
(CO2).  Their major applications are in refrigeration and air-conditioning 
(where they are used as refrigerants, which accounts for 80% of their 
use2), foams, aerosols, fire extinguishers and solvents. It is these same 
heat-trapping properties that make most F-gases such good refrigerants which also make them extremely powerful greenhouse gases. (See 
‘How do scientists measure the impact of HFCs?’ on page 9 for more information on how the potency of greenhouse gases is measured).The most commonly known F-gases are the early, so-called first generation F-gases: the CFCs that destroyed the ozone layer and were banned by the Montreal Protocol.  However, in the race to save the 
ozone layer we accelerated the use of their second generation chemical 
cousins: HCFCs (now also being banned under the Montreal Protocol). 
Our focus today is on the third generation of F-gases: HFCs - 
powerful greenhouse gases developed by the chemical industry to solve the ozone crisis. They are already the refrigerants of choice in most 
industrialised countries. But if HFCs are used as substitutes for all the 
ozone-destroying chemicals they were designed to replace - and end up in the atmosphere - they will have a devastating impact on the climate. 
These chemicals could be one of the most dangerous and yet most 
avoidable chapters in our environmental history.
That’s the bad news.
The good news is that there are tried-and-tested environmentally safer 
technologies available to meet today’s needs. The time to implement 
these technologies is now, because developing countries are just now in the process of making technological choices for replacing HCFCs. The 
world is at a crossroads: we can go for HFCs and commit ourselves to 
catastrophic climate change, or we can go for environmentally-friendly alternatives and save the planet billions of tonnes of greenhouse gas 
emissions.
Greenpeace is therefore calling on governments and corporations in
industrialised countries to rapidly phase out the use of HFCs. At the 
same time, Greenpeace is urging developing countries to leapfrog the use of HFCs, and to immediately move to environmentally safer 
alternatives. This is one of the easiest and quickest ways to significantly 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and to avoid unnecessary damage  
to the climate.
05 HFCs: A growing threat to the climate

HFCs: A growing threat to the climate06F-gases are ‘super-greenhouse gases’. Molecule for molecule, some of 
them have the capacity to heat the planet thousands of times more than 
carbon dioxide. As a result, you don’t need much F-gas to do serious 
damage to the climate. It only takes about 300g of F-gas to keep one domestic refrigerator working. The release into the atmosphere of  
300 grams of HFC-134a, the most commonly used HFC today,  
is equivalent to the carbon emissions from driving a Volkswagen Golf, for example, from London to Moscow.
A rapidly growing threat
The use of F-gases around the world is expanding rapidly. While the first 
two generations of F-gases (CFCs and HCFCs) are being eliminated under 
the Montreal Protocol (the United Nations ozone agreement), the third generation, HFCs, is fast replacing them. This is despite the fact that HFCs 
are supposed to be regulated under the international climate framework, 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) – in fact, since the implementation of the UNFCCC’s Kyoto Protocol, 
HFC emissions have risen by 15% a year.
3
HFCs don’t deplete the ozone layer like their predecessors, but 
they are very powerful greenhouse gases.
If left unchecked, HFCs will counteract other 
global climate action
The consequences of the rapid growth in HFC emissions are 
shocking - a recent peer-reviewed report by top scientists shows that 
if we only focus on reducing CO2 and do nothing about HFCs, they 
will be responsible for between 28% and 45% of carbon-equivalent emissions by 2050. Even if we don’t act on CO
2, HFCs would still 
be responsible for between 10% and 20% of carbon-equivalent emissions by 2050.  
This graph shows that 
while CFC and HCFC emissions go down (the light-blue blocks), HFC emissions (the light-brown block) will overtake them by around 2025, and rapidly increase up towards 2050.Fig 1: Growing HFC emissions
2000     2010     2020     2030     2040     2050
YearEmissions (GtCO2-equ yr -1)high
lowGWP-weighted (100-yr)Global ODS and HFC emissions
HFCs
HCFCsCFCs
Without accelerated
HCFC phase-out10
8
64
2
0}This graph shows that 
the rapid growth in HFC consumption will come almost exclusively in developing countries. This is why it is crucial that developing countries leapfrog HFCs straight to environmentally safer technologies.Fig 3: Growing HFC marketThat translates into 5.5 to 8.8 billion tonnes of extra carbon-
equivalent emissions a year by 20504. 5.5 billion tons of CO2 is 
the equivalent of driving 43 million of those Volkswagen Golfs 
mentioned above to the Moon - and back! 8.8 billion tons of CO2  
is 8% more than what the USA is predicted to emit in 2010.5
Developing countries – a growing problem and 
a huge opportunity
In developing countries, demand for HCFCs - the refrigerants currently 
in use - increased annually by around 20% between 1989 and 20076. 
This increase in refrigerant consumption is set to continue up to, and 
possibly beyond, 2050. By then, consumption of HFCs in developing 
countries will be 8 times greater than in developed countries. That 
will translate into global consumption of HFCs being up to 3.5 times 
higher than the peak consumption of CFCs and HCFCs in 1989.7 The problem
HFCs are a climate issue 02
This graph compares CO2 
and HFC emissions up 
to 2050. The line that is most important is the one representing CO
2 emissions 
if they are kept below 450 ppm - the 2
oC threshold. If 
you compare that with HFC emissions in 2050, then HFCs are responsible for between 28% and 45%  
of carbon emissions.Fig 2: HFC vs. CO
2  emissions
2000     2010     2020     2030     2040     2050
YearEmissions (GtCO2-equ yr -1)
550 ppm
450 ppm
high
lowGWP-weighted (100-yr)Global CO2 HFC emissions
CO2 stabilization
scenarios
HFC range60
5040302010
0
2000     2010     2020     2030     2040     2050
YearConsumption (GtCO2-equ yr -1)
HFC rangehigh
lowGWP-weighted (100-yr)HFC consumption
Developing
countries
Developed 
countries10
8
6420SOUrCE: Velders et al, 2009
SOUrCE: Velders et al, 2009 SOUrCE: Velders et al, 2009

With strong international and national regulation and financing 
mechanisms, as well as the forward-thinking action of global 
corporations, the developing world can completely leapfrog HFCs. 
Containment: a shameful legacy
The main greenhouse gases we know (carbon dioxide, methane, etc.) 
are emitted as a by-product of a process – for example, burning coal 
releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. However, F-gas emissions 
happen differently. As they are made specifically for use in appliances, 
emissions occur through leaks, during maintenance, or when an 
appliance is scrapped at the end of its life. 
This means that if appliances using F-gases were much better built, 
properly serviced and responsibly disposed of at the end of their lives, then F-gases would hardly ever be released into the atmosphere.
But, industry itself says that 61% of the most popular HFC (HFC 
134a) ever produced is already in the atmosphere.The fact that 97% of all CFCs - the very first generation of F-gases - ever 
produced in developed countries are in the atmosphere does not 
bode well for HFC containment.
8 There has to be a sharp reversal of 
this dismal trend. 
For years, Greenpeace has called for a global network for the recapture, 
recycling and destruction of F-gases in order to avoid such emissions. 
Until such a network is in place, we have to assume that every kilo of 
F-gas that is produced will eventually be emitted into the atmosphere.
What’s what
CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons): the first and most 
well-known class of F-gases. They are both ozone-
depleting and powerful greenhouse gases. From 2010, 
CFC production or consumption anywhere in the world is illegal. They are regulated by the Montreal Protocol.
HCFCs (hydrochlorofluorocarbons): the second 
generation of F-gases, introduced as a temporary 
replacement for CFCs. Less ozone-depleting and not contributing to global warming as much as CFCs, 
they are still extremely potent. They will continue to 
be used until 2020 in developed countries and 2030 in developing countries. They are regulated by the 
Montreal Protocol.
HFCs (hydrofluorocarbons): the third generation 
of F-gases, yet another ‘temporary’ replacement for 
CFCs. Although HFCs do not deplete the ozone layer, 
they are extremely potent greenhouse gases, some 
even more powerful than CFCs. There is currently no international agreement to phase them out. They are 
included in the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) basket of controlled greenhouse gases.
HFOs (hydrofluoroolefins): the fourth(!) generation of 
F-gases, HFOs are actually just HFCs marketed under 
a different name to avoid the negative connotations of HFCs. According to the chemical industry that 
is manufacturing them, they do not damage the 
ozone layer and they have a minimal impact on the climate. However, there are other environmental and 
health risks of these chemicals that make their use 
unacceptably dangerous (see ‘The chemical industry: false hopes and unacceptable risks’ on page 12).
The Montreal Protocol: The Montreal Protocol is 
the UN-sponsored international ozone treaty.  It was 
signed in 1987 and has since reduced the production and consumption of 96 ozone-depleting chemicals 
by 97%. CFCs and HCFCs are regulated under this 
agreement.
The United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC): The international 
body that deals with global climate change. The 1997 Kyoto Protocol is an agreement that resulted from negotiations under the UNFCCC.
“[HFCs] were introduced to save the 
 ozone layer in the upper atmosphere 
 from destruction but scientists say they 
 are beginning to pose a serious threat 
 to the global climate.”
Financial Times - July 15, 2009
07 HFCs: A growing threat to the climate

symbol HFC 227ea
Is a refrigerant and medicine propellant. This HFC has a 20-year GWP 
of 4,930, which means 
that it is 4,930 times more powerful than CO
2 as a 
greenhouse gas over a 20-year period). 
HFCs: A growing threat to the climate08

How do scientists measure 
the impact of HFCs on the 
climate?
Global Warming Potential (GWP) 
Global Warming Potential (GWP) measures the 
potency of a greenhouse gas over a period of time 
(compared to carbon dioxide, which has a GWP of 1). The measurement of global warming potential 
changes depending on what timescale you use. For 
example, 20 years compared to 100 or 500 years. By convention, scientists and policy makers look at 
a 100-year time scale when converting the global 
warming potential of a HFC gas to the equivalent in CO
2. However, a lot of HFCs have a much shorter 
lifetime than 100 years, so their full impact on the 
climate is actually much better captured using a 20-
year time-scale.  For example, HFC 134a, the most commonly-used HFC, has an atmospheric lifetime 
of only 14 years. As a result it has a GWP of 1,430 
over 100 years, and 3,830 over 20 years.
9 It is clear 
that using a 20-year GWP would stress even more 
the need to take action to limit emissions from 
HFCs, and it shows that early action on HFCs will have an immediate, strong and positive impact in 
a world fast approaching the limits of dangerous 
climate change. 
Radiative forcing
Radiative forcing measures how much extra heat a greenhouse gas puts on every square metre of the 
planet. It’s the most direct measure of climate change. 
CFCs and HCFCs, which deplete ozone, and the HFCs that replaced them, contributed to 17% of net 
human-induced radiative forcing in 2005. This figure 
is much higher than many other data show, as most other reports (including those from the IPCC) only refer 
to the six gases covered by the Kyoto Protocol, and 
thus do not include CFCs and HCFCs.
What is the difference between GWP and 
radiative forcing? GWP measures the potency of a greenhouse gas 
over a specific period of time. It is independent of how 
much of a greenhouse gas there is in the atmosphere, because it looks at how ‘good’ a molecule of a 
particular greenhouse gas is at heating the planet over 
time. Radiative forcing measures the potency of a greenhouse gas over a specific area (one square metre) 
and it does change depending on how much of a 
greenhouse gas there is in the atmosphere. The more of a greenhouse gas there is per square metre, the 
more heat it will exert, the higher its radiative forcing.
© GREENPEACE / NICK COBBING
09 HFCs: A growing threat to the climate

10 HFCs: A growing threat to the climateThe politics of F-gases: A tale of two treaties
How HFCs came to be internationally controlled
F-gases and the Montreal Protocol
CFCs were first used as refrigerants in the 1930s. At the time they were 
considered the perfect chemicals: non-toxic to humans, non-flammable, 
and very cheap. However, in 1974 atmospheric scientists Sherwood 
Rowland and Mario Molina made the case that if CFCs rose high enough in the atmosphere, the chlorine contained in CFCs could break 
down ozone molecules that make up the stratospheric ozone layer.
10 
The ozone layer is what keeps harmful UV rays from hitting the planet, 
which would otherwise have devastating effects on ecosystems and 
massively increase the incidences of skin cancer and eye cataract  
cases in humans.11
Rowland and Molina’s theory was confirmed in 1985 when the British 
Antarctic Survey discovered an ozone hole over the Antarctic during the 
summer months.12 This spurred international action that first took shape 
in the 1986 Vienna Convention and then the 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. During the years leading 
up to the formation of the Montreal Protocol, the chemical corporations did everything in their power to deny that their CFC and HCFC products 
were environmentally dangerous, and they tried to stop and delay 
international action to reduce and eliminate the use of these substances. Since the Montreal Protocol came into existence, the chemical industry 
has tried to maintain the global monopoly it had with CFCs and HCFCs 
by promoting HFCs as the only viable alternatives.
Having reduced the production of 96 different ozone-depleting 
substances by 97% in the past two decades,
13 the Montreal Protocol 
is regarded as one of, if not the most, successful environmental treaties 
ever. It is also the only international treaty ever that every country in the 
world has signed.
5 things you need to know about 
HFCs and the F-gas family
 1    In 2005, CFCs, HCFCs and HFCs were responsible for 17%  
of direct global warming.
 2    While CFC and HCFC emissions go down, HFC emissions  
are going up – 15% a year.
 3    If we do everything to keep global warming below 2°C,  
but do nothing about HFCs, they will responsible for  
the equivalent of between 28% and 45% of carbon  
emissions by 2050.
 4    By 2050, developing countries will consume  
8 times more HFCs than developed countries.
 5    HFC 134a, the most abundant HFC in use  
today, is 3,830 times more powerful than CO2  
as a greenhouse gas over a 20-year period.03
“Because HFCs are used as replacements for ozone-deplet
-ing substances and have global warming potentials up to 
hundreds or thousands of times greater than CO
2, their soaring growth for use in refrigerators and air-conditioners 
threatens to negate the benefits that might be obtained 
from reducing other greenhouse gas emissions.”
www.foxbusiness.com - September 15, 2009© GREENPEACE / NICK COBBING

HFCs: A growing threat to the climate 11The chemical industry: blocking 
real solutions while harming the 
climate
Since the Montreal Protocol was signed, the chemical industry 
has introduced a series of unnecessary chemicals harmful to 
both the ozone layer and the climate. 
The Montreal Protocol could have achieved much more to protect 
the ozone layer and the climate had it not submitted to industry 
demands which paved the way for the large-scale global uptake of HCFCs and HFCs. From the very beginning, the Protocol could 
have done more to encourage the development and market penetration of environmentally safer technologies.
The chemical industry has never taken any moral or financial 
responsibility for the damage it has wrought to the ozone and now the climate. Yet it makes sense that when someone 
damages your property, they pay for its repair. In environmental 
terms, this is known as the ‘polluter pays’ principle. Greenpeace 
believes that governments should legally compel the 
chemical industry to contribute funds towards the cost  
of eliminating CFCs, HCFCs and HFCs. 
But this is not the whole story. Once the Montreal Protocol was in place, 
the question became: what should we replace CFCs with? The answer 
was obvious: natural substances that are environmentally-friendly and 
economically practical (see ‘The solution’ on page 16).
Greenpeace proved, as far back as 1992, that replacement of CFCs 
with natural refrigerants was possible (see ‘Technology: the Greenfreeze story’ on page 24). The chemical industry had a different view.
HFCs and the UNFCCC/Kyoto Protocol
The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change is the international climate agreement under which the Kyoto Protocol was negotiated. 
Under the Kyoto Protocol, developed countries are bound to reduce 
their emissions by 5.2% of 1990 by 2012.
14 While the Protocol is 
known for regulating CO2, it is also responsible for the reduction of five 
other greenhouse gases – three of them being F-gases: HFCs, PFCs 
(perfluorocarbons) and SF6 (sulphur hexafluoride).
Greenpeace was the main force behind the inclusion of HFCs and 
other F-gases into the Kyoto basket of greenhouse gases.Their inclusion is important and remains so, because as greenhouse 
gases they should be covered by the international climate framework. 
This puts the most pressure on their elimination.
HFCs: the link between the Montreal and  
Kyoto Protocols
HFCs are a bridge between the Montreal and Kyoto Protocols. They 
were introduced as replacements to CFCs and HCFCs under Montreal, 
but are regulated under Kyoto because they are purely greenhouse 
gases, not ozone depleters. This unique history means that the Montreal and Kyoto Protocols have a shared responsibility to phase out HFCs and 
must work in close cooperation to do so. 
See ‘Politics: Greenpeace’s policy demands’ on page 27 for our 
proposal of how HFCs should be regulated in 2010 and beyond.The ‘polluter pays’ principle
The ‘polluter pays’ principle is a tenet of environmental law 
which states that the party responsible for producing pollution 
should be responsible to pay for the damage done to the 
environment. It is mentioned in Principle 16 of the 1992  Rio Declaration on Environment and Development.
© GREENPEACE / BISSET

12 HFCs: A growing threat to the climateThe chemical industry
False hopes and unacceptable risks
HFOs: The new HFCs 
Given the number of applications using natural refrigerants around 
the world (see ‘The solutions’ on page 16), one would expect the 
chemical companies who introduced F-gases to finally invest in these 
environmentally-friendly chemicals. However, the chemical industry has come out with yet another F-gas alternative – a new generation of HFCs 
it calls HFOs (h ydrof luoroo lefins). This time, it says that not only are they 
ozone-friendly, they also have a low impact on the climate. What the 
chemical industry has kept quiet though is how risky and toxic these 
new chemicals can be in other areas of the environment and human 
health. Until these risks are taken care of, Greenpeace will oppose these chemicals, in line with the precautionary principle (see ‘The precautionary 
principle’ for definition). For the moment, they are only meant for car 
air-conditioning, but plans for other applications are in the pipeline even though HFC-free environmentally-friendly alternatives are already 
available. New chemicals will simply delay the deployment of the long-
term solutions - HFOs are wolves in sheep’s clothing. 
1 HFOs are only a short-term fix
HFC black marketThe chemical industry trumpets the use of HFOs as a ‘drop-in’ 
alternative, i.e. you can just ‘drop’– the new HFO into an old system 
without having to fundamentally change it. However, becauseHFOs are much more expensive than any of the F-gases currently 
on the market, the door is left open to a black market in older, more 
environmentally harmful, but less expensive F-gases. This would prolong the use of more harmful F-gases, even after they are phased out (which 
happened with CFC and HCFCs when they were first regulated).
Looking backwards: soon to be phased-out HCFCs  
used to make HFOs
HCFCs, which destroy the ozone layer and have a high global warming potential are used to make HFO 1234yf.
15 This means that ozone-
depleting and global warming chemicals that are soon going to be 
banned under the Montreal Protocol are the source of the refrigerants 
of the future. As opposed to natural refrigerant technology that is tried, tested and open for all to use and develop, the chemical details of HFO 
1234yf are shrouded in secrecy. There are human health concerns for 
developmental toxicity and lethality of HFO 1234yf when inhaled at high concentrations
16 Additionally, the substances that are released into the 
atmosphere as a result of its production are unknown.2 HFOs – an unnecessary risk to the  
environment and human health
Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA): a danger to aquatic ecosystems
When HFO 1234yf breaks down in the atmosphere it produces 
a substance called trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). In high enough 
concentrations, TFA is toxic in aquatic ecosystems.17 While TFA is 
a common by-product when other HFCs breakdown, HFO 1234yf 
produces 4 to 5 times as much TFA than the same amount of HFC 
134a does.18 This means that if HFO 1234yf and other HFOs become 
the refrigerants of choice, the concentration of TFA in fresh water bodies 
around the world could increase dramatically, with unknown effects on 
ecosystems and human health, as TFA concentration approaching a miligram per litre may be toxic to some aquatic life forms.
19
Hydrogen fluoride: a very toxic acid, fatal to humansHFO 1234yf is flammable, and when it burns, it releases hazardous 
substances such as hydrogen fluoride (HF), which is toxic and can be 
lethal in unventilated spaces (e.g. tunnels, cars with no open doors or 
windows, etc.) A normal charge of HFO1234yf can produce an amount 
of HF which is potentially lethal to a large number of people.
20 It would 
greatly increase the number of casualties from car crashes, particularly 
in confined and unventilated areas (such as indoor parking lots and 
tunnels). This risk makes the use of HFO 1234yf unacceptable.
Greenpeace does not consider the flammability of a refrigerant an inherent 
impediment to its use. Flammable refrigerants in mobile air-conditioners (MACs) can be safely used with the right systems. However, should the 
car industry opt for refrigerants that are flammable, then hydrocarbons are 
a superior choice to HFO 1234yf. They are already widely used in MACs in Australia and US.
21 Hydrocarbons are environmentally-friendly, more 
efficient, much cheaper, and immediately available.22
Top scientists still have unanswered questionsThe Scientific Assessment Panel to the Montreal Protocol recently 
raised its concerns about HFOs. These included the possibility of its 
break down products being high GWP HFCs or even ozone depleting substances, and the potential for low-level ozone pollution formation.
23
All this shows that the fluorocarbon industry is using the low GWP of these new chemicals as a front, glossing over other serious 
environmental and health issues.04

The precautionary principle
If an action or policy might cause severe or 
irreversible harm to the environment, in the absence 
of a scientific consensus that harm would not 
ensue, the burden of proof falls on those who would advocate taking the action.
In the context of HFOs, if there is a chance that 
a chemical will cause serious damage to the 
environment and/or human health, then the burden 
is on those who are promoting that chemical to make certain that it is safe. Until such a time, that 
chemical should not be put on the market.3 Natural refrigerants are the best available 
technology and HFO development will only 
delay their deployment. 
Tests by the German Federal Environment Agency (Umweltbundesamt 
- UBA) show CO2 as more efficient than HFC-134a in a standard vehicle 
at temperatures up to 35oC. 24 A leading manufacturer of CO2 mobile 
air-conditioning units has shown similar results at temperatures up to 
45oC25. Other tests have shown that MACs using CO2 show better 
efficiency under all climates and in all world regions26.
In addition to all of this, it is well-documented that as a drop-in replace ment, 
HFO 1234yf is less efficient than the current refrigerant in use, HFC-134a27, 
28, 29, 30
4 Greenpeace does not want to see history  
repeating itself; after three subsequent 
generations of destructive chemical products, it 
is time to opt for the only acceptable alternative: natural refrigerants
Low GWP and non-ozone damaging properties are not reason enough 
to support the new generation of HFCs or ‘HFOs’. Other serious 
environmental and health risks potentially make them just as dangerous as their predecessors. The way the chemical industry has marketed 
CFCs, HCFCs and HFCs over the past 70 years should teach us to be 
extremely sceptical of any industry assertions regarding new products. Therefore, governments should not base policies within the Montreal 
Protocol or the UNFCCC on industry claims, but on the independent 
testing of these products.
HFOs are just the beginning. 
There is a whole family of these gases waiting to be rolled out with untold environmental and health effects. New F-gases potentially containing 
chlorine (which is responsible for most of the ozone depletion in the 
stratosphere) are being tested.
 While scientists indicate that because of 
their short lifetime, these new chemicals won’t reach the stratosphere, 
there are certain to be unanticipated environmental impacts from 
increased chlorine in the atmosphere.
Finally, Greenpeace does not support countries providing public 
financial support to HFOs at the expense of funding natural refrigerants development and investment. 
For more information see Greenpeace’ s Position Paper on the 
chemical industry’s new generation of F-gases, available for download 
at www.greenpeace.org/international/hfo-position-paper
13 HFCs: A growing threat to the climate

Section header
Secondary section header
If the rapid  
growth in HFC  
consumption  
continues,  
developing  
countries will  
consume 8 times 
more than developed countries by 2050. This threat to the climate can be avoided if developing countries leapfrog HFCs straight to the long-term solutions: natural refrigerants.
HFCs: A growing threat to the climate14

Section header
Secondary section header
symbol HFC 23
HFC 23 is a by-product  of HCFC-22 production, a low temperature refrigerant and 
a firefighting agent.
This HFC has a 20-year GWP of 11,100, which means that it is 11,100 times more powerful than CO
2 as a greenhouse gas 
over a 20-year period. 
15 HFCs: A growing threat to the climate

16 HFCs: A growing threat to the climateThe solutions
Environment friendly, business friendly05
MOBILE AC 
32%DOMESTIC 1%
COMMERCIAL 45%
TRANSPORT 3% INDUSTR Y 4%STATIONAR Y AC 
15%DOMESTIC
COMMERCIAL
TRANSPOR T
INDUSTR Y
STAT IONAR Y AC
MOBILE ACBecause F-gases are such powerful greenhouse gases, a small 
amount seriously damages the climate. However, this works both 
ways: eliminating F-gases can also be an extremely effective way 
of tackling climate change. And, if you replace them with natural alternatives that are environmentally-friendly and economically 
practical, the climate benefits from eliminating F-gases are secured. 
What are natural refrigerants?
Natural refrigerants, as the name suggests, are substances that occur 
in nature and which can be used in refrigerators and air-conditioners. 
Greenpeace has championed them since the early 90s, along with 
other environmentally-friendly technologies. Natural refrigerants don’t harm the ozone layer or the climate, they are often cheaper and more 
energy efficient than their F-gas counterparts, and they have been 
proven to work in all applications.
31 
The three main natural refrigerants in use are hydrocarbons, ammonia and carbon dioxide (yes, that’s right, carbon dioxide). They do not deplete the ozone layer and have been proven to be more energy 
efficient than HFCs in countless case studies. Here are a few examples 
and how they compare to HFCs (see box top right).
SOUrCE: US EPA and ADEME Report: Determination of comparative HCFC and HFC emission profiles 
for the Foam and Refrigeration sectors until 2015; Part 1 – Refrigerant emission profiles (April 2004)Fig 4: HFC emissions in CO2  equivalents
Sectors that use refrigerants
Commercial refrigeration  Encompasses all refrigeration 
in the commercial sector: from vending machines, to refrigeration of fast-food restaurants and supermarkets. It will be the largest sector using HFCs in 2015.
Industrial refrigeration  This sector refers to very large 
installations such as warehouses, airports and dairy farms. HFC use is not so widespread in this area (only 4% of the total HFC market in 2015) because ammonia (a natural refrigerant) is cheaper and more energy efficient. In fact, over 90% of US industrial refrigeration uses ammonia as a refrigerant.
Mobile air-conditioning  All the air-conditioning used in 
vehicles.
Stationary air-conditioning  All air-conditioning in 
buildings, from offices to homes.
Domestic Refrigeration  All refrigerators and freezers used 
for domestic use
Transport  All refrigeration used to keep loads cool during 
transport (for example, supermarket trucks)Hydrocarbons: A well-known family of organic substances.  
The properties of certain hydrocarbons make them stand out as 
very efficient refrigerants. They are used as insulation foam blowing 
agents and in domestic refrigerators, small commercial cooling 
equipment like ice-cream coolers and vending machines, as well  
as in air-conditioning. 
Ammonia: Ammonia’s popularity has continued despite the advent 
of F-gases, which is a testament to its unique properties. On average, 
ammonia refrigeration systems cost 10-20% less to install than 
systems using competitive industrial refrigerants.  Ammonia is 3-10% 
more energy efficient than HFCs; as a result ammonia systems 
use less electricity. Ammonia systems are used in a wide range of 
applications, from air-conditioning for the International Space Station 
to cooling the Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympics bobsleigh run. 
Carbon dioxide: In spite of its notoriety as a greenhouse gas,  
CO2 has very positive characteristics as a refrigerant. It does 
not deplete the ozone layer and its GWP value is 1 (compared to thousands for a typical HFC). It is cheap and has good 
safety characteristics. Its properties permit the design of smaller 
components and more compact systems with its main uses being 
vehicle air-conditioning and supermarket refrigeration.
This pie chart shows which sectors using 
HFCs will have the most impact on the climate by 2015 in a business as usual scenario.  
The commercial sector is the biggest contributor (45%) which is why it is so important that companies take the  
lead in phasing out HFCs from  
all their applications.

HFCs: A growing threat to the climate 17Conclusion: It is clear that natural refrigerants make both environmental and financial sense, compared to HFCs.38  The Bad
Around 100 million domestic refrigerators are made every year. Over 
60% of them use HFC 134a as a refrigerant. That translates into the equivalent of approximately 22 million tonnes of CO
2 being put 
into new fridges every year, the same as the annual emissions of 4.5 
million cars. Due to the abysmal global failure of F-gas containment, 
we have to assume that all this HFC 134a will be in the atmosphere in 20 years time - a ticking time-bomb that could unleash a climate 
catastrophe.
  The Good
The other 40% of domestic refrigerators use technology pioneered 
by Greenpeace: Greenfreeze (see page 24). It uses hydrocarbons with GWPs close to zero and - contrary to the nay-sayers - it is 
the ultimate proof that natural refrigerants are capable of wide 
application.Domestic refrigerators
  The Bad
HFC 134a, nearly 4000 times more powerful than CO2 as a 
greenhouse gas, has been the standard refrigerant used in vending 
machines and coolers in recent years. Due to their high refrigerant 
leakage rates, vending machines and coolers using HFCs cause more harm to the climate than any other refrigeration application.
35
  The Good
Major companies are investing in natural refrigerant technology for their new vending machines and coolers. CO
2 technology in 
vending machines has shown to be on average 10% more energy efficient than equivalent HFC applications
36, while hydrocarbon 
technology in coolers has shown to be 10% more energy efficient.37 
So not only do natural refrigerants have a lower climate impact, 
they also consume less energy.Vending Machines and CoolersSupermarkets
  The Bad
The most frequently used HFCs in supermarket refrigeration are 
HFC 134a (3,830 times more powerful than CO2 over a 20-year 
period) and HFC 404A (6,010 times more powerful than CO2 over 
the same period).   
  The Good
Recently, a big supermarket chain compared the energy savings of a CO
2 refrigeration system to a R404A system in one of its outlets. 
It found that over a 1-year period, the CO2 system’s environmental 
impact was 60% less than the R404A system. That included not 
just the fact that CO2 – when used as a refrigerant - has much 
less of an impact on the climate (relative to r404A), but it is 
also more energy efficient, saving money on energy costs.32Mobile Air-conditioners (MACs)
  The Bad
In most vehicle air-conditioners, HFC 134a is the refrigerant of 
choice. Molecule for molecule, HFC 134a is 3,830 times more powerful as a greenhouse gas than CO
2 over a 20-year period.  
  The Good 
Ironically, CO2 causes less harm to the climate and is a more energy 
efficient refrigerant than HFC 134a. A recent study on CO2 in MACs 
showed energy savings of up to 10% to 12% using CO2 instead 
of HFC 134a.33 Even up to temperatures of 45oC, CO2 has been 
shown to consume less fuel per kilometre than HFC 134a.34
“[HFCs] are… low hanging fruit in the climate change challenge. By some 
estimates, action to freeze and then reduce this group of gases could buy the world the equivalent of a decades-worth of CO2 emissions”
Achim Steiner, Executive Director of the United  
Nations Environment Programme

As demand for air-
conditioning and refrigeration grows globally and new markets emerge, natural refrigerant technology is not only a business opportunity but a real sustainable solution for the climate
18 HFCs: A growing threat to the climate

HFCs: A growing threat to the climate 19
Global supermarket Global supermarket
Congratulations!
Walmart has developed a refrigeration system 
which reduces HFC leakage by up to 94%, a very impressive margin.
Criticism
While HFC leakage is an important factor, otherretailers with stores using CO
2 refrigeration  
systems have shown significant increases in en-ergy efficiency. Despite this, Walmart is consider -
ing the new generation of HFCs (so-called HFOs) recently developed by the chemical industry. See the section on HFOs for why Greenpeace is opposed to these new chemicals.
Challenge
Walmart should set a deadline by when all its new stores will be HFC-free. We encourage it to choose the long-term solution - natural refrigerants - as an alternative to HFCs. There should be no difference in the new refrigeration technology between its stores in industrialised and developing countries.Congratulations!
Carrefour has taken important steps in reporting 
and reducing HFC leakage in its stores.
Challenge
Carrefour has yet to choose its refrigeration strategy for the future. We encourage it to go for the long-term solution – natural refrigerants – and not be conned into short-term fixes (HFOs) that not only pose serious environmental and health risks but are not economically viable. Carrefour should set a deadline by when all its new stores in both industrialised and developing countries use natural refrigerant technology.Congratulations!
 Tesco has 5 stores using CO2 refrigeration 
systems in the UK, with another 6 planned for the 
end of the year. By the end of 2012, it plans to have 150 stores using CO
2 refrigeration systems.
 Outside the UK, it has stores and/or trials 
planned with CO2 refrigeration systems in 
Korea, Thailand, Hungary, the USA, Turkey and Malaysia. It has taken important steps to reduce HFC 
leakage - from 19% in 2006, to 14% in 2008. It has invested in a training programme for its 
engineers and plans to expand this into a more general educational programme. 
Challenge
Tesco should set a deadline by when all its new stores will use natural refrigerant technology. These high standards for refrigeration should be the same for its stores in developing as well as industrialised countries.Global & UK supermarketCorporate action Congratulations, criticism and challenges.
HFC emissions from commercial refrigeration will have the biggest impact on the climate by 2015 (45%). As a result, we have profiled the 
environmental strategies of 18 corporations that use HFCs to see how they are approaching this significant part of their carbon footprint.   
Our response is organised into the 3 Cs: congratulate, criticise, and challenge. December 2009 Update: While some of these 18 corporations have 
made steps towards going HFC-free, the recent actions of three of them merits special mention: the UK supermarket chains Sainsbury’s and Marks & Spencer have committed to going HFC-free in all their new supermarkets by the summer of 2010. Meanwhile, Coca-Cola has committed to going 
HFC-free in all its new vending machines and coolers by 2015. There is now no excuse for other supermarkets and corporations not to do the same.
Global supermarket UK supermarket
Congratulations!
Metro has 5 stores across Germany and 
Denmark using CO2 refrigeration technology. 
Criticism
Metro currently has no plans to expand the number of its stores using CO
2 refrigeration 
systems, and as a result has no plans to go HFC-free.
Challenge
As a top global retailer, Metro has a responsibility to set an example in the refrigeration sector. We encourage it to set a deadline by when it will use natural refrigerant technology in all its new stores, in industrialised countries and also in developing countries such as China and India.Congratulations!
Sainsbury’s has committed to going HFC-free 
in all its stores (both old and new) by 2030. This move alone is going to cut Sainsbury’s carbon footprint by 30% by 2030. From summer 2010, all its new stores will be using CO
2 refrigeration systems, a natural refrigerant 
technology. Sainsbury’s is leading the way in HFC-free refrigeration.
Challenge
Sainsbury’s has set the bar high, both for itself and all other companies for whom refrigeration is a big part of their carbon footprint. We urge Sainsbury’s to continue its leadership role and honour its commitment, strengthening it where possible.Congratulations!
Asda is working to reduce energy consumption 
and HFC leakage in its stores. It has also started to train its engineers in natural refrigerant technology.
Criticism
Asda’s initial commitment in 2007 to transition to natural refrigerants has been disappointingly delayed. 
Challenge
Asda should honour its commitment to go HFC-free. Training its engineers in the safe use of natural refrigerants and installing natural refrigerant systems in all new stores is an important step in this direction. UK supermarket
Updated, December 2009

20 HFCs: A growing threat to the climate
UK supermarket UK supermarket
Congratulations!
By the end of 2009, Morrison’s will have 20 
stores using CO2 refrigeration systems (out of 
418). It has set up a training programme for its refrigeration engineers in natural refrigerants. 
Challenge
CO2 is currently the standard system for its 
new stores in low temperature applications (e.g. freezer cabinets). However, for higher temperatures, it is still using HFCs. This is unnecessary – natural refrigerants can be  
used in both cascade refrigeration systems  
with CO
2 and stand-alone equipment. 
Greenpeace encourages it to commit to a  
fixed deadline by when it will be HFC  
free in all its new stores.Congratulations!
Marks & Spencer is showing real leadership 
on HFCs by honouring its commitment to go HFC-free. From 2010, all new Marks & Spencer supermarkets will use CO2 refrigeration systems, and by 2015 it will hall halved its carbon footprint arising from F-gases simply by improving maintenance to prevent leakage. It is also progressively phasing out HFCs in all its old stores, with a view to becoming HFC-free in all its stores, old and new, by 2030.
Challenge
Marks & Spencer has again set the bar high, and we urge it to honour its commitment. It should also share its expertise in training engineers to use natural refrigerants and its experiences with natural refrigerant technology with national and international supermarket chains. We encourage Marks & Spencer to take a leadership role in the spread of HFC-free technology.Congratulations!
Coca-Cola currently has 85,000 coolers and 
vending machines using natural refrigerant technology worldwide. Coca-Cola recently committed to going HFC-free in all its new vending machines and coolers by 2015.The company is committing to use its scale  
to aggregate demand and encourage supply as a means of accelerating the transition to HFC-free equipment.  
Challenge
To continue its efforts to honour its commitment to become 100% HFC-free in its point-of-sale equipment worldwide. We believe that, being one of the most recognisable brands in the world, Coca-Cola can set the standard in many markets, and use that market power to drive change in the transition to natural refrigerant technologies.Food & Beverage
Food & Beverage Food & Beverage
Congratulations!
Danone has 1000 coolers using hydrocarbon 
technology across a number of countries including Denmark, Mexico and Germany. 
Criticism
Danone has committed to using new HFCs, or HFOs in its coolers in 2010. Yet it has done no tests on the energy efficiency of these new HFCs, and independent testing obtained by Greenpeace shows that they are around 10% less energy efficient than old HFCs (see the section HFOs for more information on why Greenpeace is opposed to these new chemicals).
Challenge
Given the success of other global corporations, Danone should set a deadline by when all its new coolers use natural refrigerant technology.Congratulations!
Commitment to a full phase-out of all F-gas 
refrigerants. It is using hydrocarbons in several thousand of its coolers in Germany.
Criticism
It is yet to use natural refrigerants in commercial applications outside Western Europe. In order for developing countries to leapfrog HFCs straight to natural refrigerants, it is essential that Nestle introduce this technology in emerging markets.
Challenge
Nestle should set a deadline by when all its commercial applications use natural refrigerants.Criticism
Heineken has no information on the 
consumption and leakage of HFCs in its current equipment. This information is essential for transparency and to understand the scale of its contribution to climate change.
Challenge
Heineken says it is making a decision in the coming months on whether to go for hydrocarbon technology. We strongly urge it to do so. We encourage Heineken to set a deadline by when all its new commercial equipment will use natural refrigerant technology. Food & Beverage
Updated, December 2009 Updated, December 2009

HFCs: A growing threat to the climate 21Food & Beverage Food & Beverage Food & Beverage
Congratulations!
Pepsi has over 8000 vending machines using 
either hydrocarbon or CO2 technology around 
the world. It is one of the first companies to test CO
2 
vending machines and coolers in the United States.  Pepsi is the first global corporation to establish a schedule to go HFC-free across a whole country. From 2009, all new coolers in Turkey will be HFC-free, and old coolers will be gradually taken off the market. 
Challenge
Pepsi should step up its efforts globally and have a specific phase-out date for the elimination of HFCs in all its new applications.  
With one country now HFC-free, there’s 194 to go - and it’s time to fix the schedule!Congratulations!
Unilever has over 400,000 coolers that use 
hydrocarbon technology around the world, from South Africa to China, from Brazil to the United States. It is the first company to test coolers using hydrocarbons in the United States.
Challenge
To continue its efforts to become 100% HFC-free in its point-of-sale equipment worldwide and establish a concrete deadline to do so. Congratulations!
McDonald’s has one restaurant using natural 
refrigerant technology.
Criticism
It has yet to honour its commitment to go HFC-free in refrigeration equipment in its restaurants. Back in 2004, Greenpeace congratulated  McDonald’s on its commitment to move away from HFCs, but the progress of  other companies has left it lagging behind.
Challenge
If one restaurant can go HFC-free, all of them can. We encourage McDonald’s to make natural refrigerants the standard in all its new restaurants. 
Food & Beverage Food & Beverage Other
Congratulations!
Carlsberg has over 3,500 coolers using 
hydrocarbon technology in Denmark, Sweden 
and Switzerland. 
Challenge
This should only be a beginning. Greenpeace 
encourages Carlsberg to commit to a fixed deadline by when it will be HFC-free in all it new cooling equipment. Criticism
It has not made any commitment to reduce 
HFC usage in its equipment.
Challenge
AB-Inbev should ascertain the climate footprint of its cooler fleet and fix a schedule as soon as possible to become HFC-free in all its new equipment.Criticism
Ikea has abandoned the commitment it made in 
2006 to natural refrigerants by abandoning the Refrigerants, Naturally! coalition. (See page 26 for more information on Refrigerants, Naturally!)
Challenge
Ikea should set a deadline by when all  
its commercial applications will use natural refrigerant technology. The success of  
other global corporations proves that this  
is possible now. 


Denmark: From 1 January 2006 to 1 
January 2011 there is a general ban on the 
use, import or sale of fluorinated greenhouse 
gases (HFCs, PFCs and SF6). A gradual 
phase-out has been put in place for some 
applications. Products for export are not 
covered by the ban. 
Germany: Within Germany’s ‘Integrated 
Energy and Climate Protection Programme’ the country recently launched a funding 
programme to advance the development and market launch of commercial refrigeration
systems using natural refrigerants. The 
German Federal Ministry for Environment 
also instituted a Climate Protection Incentive Programme for commercial refrigeration 
plants, in order to advance development and 
market launch of particularly energy-efficient and ecological refrigeration systems using 
natural refrigerants. 
Switzerland: HFCs, PFCs and SF6 have 
been regulated since July 2003. The 
regulation encompasses licensing, reporting leak checks, servicing and end-of-life 
requirements for equipment containing more than 3kg of such refrigerants. The regulations 
are intended to reduce the contribution of 
synthetic greenhouse gas emissions to 2% 
by 2010.
Norway: The country’s main policy measure 
is a tax on imported HFCs and PFCs, which has been introduced explicitly as a GHG-
reduction measure. The tax is coupled to a 
refund scheme.
Sweden: Sweden has a long record of 
prohibiting HFCs in large quantities and the refrigerant charge per system has been 
limited to some 30 or 40kg for many years.Solutions
➤  There are natural refrigerants that can work in 
virtually all applications.
➤  On top of their environmental benefits, natural refrigerants are usually cheaper and more energy 
efficient than HFCs.
➤  The three main classes of natural refrigerants are hydrocarbons, ammonia and CO
2.
➤  Greenfreeze, the technology that Greenpeace 
pioneered, is used in over 350 million domestic refrigerators worldwide and dominates 40% of  
the global market.
➤  Developing countries are at a crossroads. With 
HCFCs (the second generation of F-gases) 
being phased out, developing countries have the opportunity to leapfrog HFCs and move directly to 
long-term solutions offered by natural refrigerants. 
They would thus avert the unnecessary  release of billions of tonnes of CO
2 equivalent greenhouse 
gas emissions, as well the need to yet again switch 
technologies in the not too distant future.
HFCs: A growing threat to the climate22Examples of National  
Post-HFC Legislation

Section header
Secondary section header
“Coca-Cola, Pepsi and Unilever have all developed 
Greenfreeze technology for their vending machines and 
coolers; Unilever, maker of Ben & Jerry’ s ice-cream, alone has deployed 2 million ice-cream coolers worldwide, in-
cluding 2,000 in Boston and W ashington on a test basis… This year W al-Mart began using a non-HFC refrigeration 
system in one of its Canadian stores, and is moving toward implementing the technology in the US, where its coolers 
are responsible for more greenhouse gases than its trucks.”
Newsweek - April 25 2009
23 HFCs: A growing threat to the climate

Greenpeace’s role 
Technology, business and politics06
24 Greenpeace InternationalThe US ban: progress under the EPA
The US Environmental Protection Agency (the EPA) is the body that 
controls which chemicals can and cannot be used as refrigerants 
in the US. Greenpeace has been helping companies for years to 
navigate the cumbersome approval process, and in 2008 we finally 
saw some (limited) progress. 
In September 2008, Ben & Jerry’s launched test Greenfreeze ice-
cream coolers around Washington DC and Boston. Soon after, 
GE announced the development of a line of refrigerators using Greenfreeze technology, hopefully to be launched in 2010 subject to EPA approval. In March 2009, just across the border in Mexico, 
Greenfreeze refrigerators made by Bosch were launched in Sears. 
Coca-Cola and PepsiCo are testing vending machines using natural refrigerants around the US.
North America is the only region in the world where people can’t buy 
a climate-friendly refrigerator. Greenpeace is tackling this head-on by 
challenging government bureaucracy and chemical industry tactics. When Greenfreeze technology is finally accepted in North America, 
this will open the door for the wider global application of natural 
refrigerants and a quicker transition to a safer, greener, planet.Technology: the Greenfreeze story
In the early 1990s, Greenpeace set out to find climate-friendly 
alternative technologies, convinced that there was a way to avoid 
the HFC route proposed by the chemical industry. The result was 
the creation of Greenfreeze technology, which uses hydrocarbons for both the blowing of the insulation foam and the refrigerant and 
are entirely free of ozone-depleting and global warming chemicals. 
Greenpeace then commissioned the manufacture of 10 prototypes  
of this technology. 
Greenpeace open-sourced the technology and has received no financial 
remuneration or royalty for developing the product. Greenpeace 
marketed, gathered orders, and pre-sold 70,000 refrigeration units (in 
three weeks) for an East German manufacturer in order to make the retooling of its factory worthwhile. Since March 15, 1993, when the first 
Greenfreeze refrigerator rolled off the assembly line, 350 million units 
have been sold in Europe, Russia, Asia and South America by leading brands including Whirlpool, Bosch, Panasonic, LG, Miele, Electrolux, 
and Siemens. Greenpeace’s achievement was recognised by the United 
Nations Environment Programme in 1997, when Greenfreeze received the prestigious UNEP Ozone Award.
There would be many more than the 350 million Greenfreeze 
refrigerators already around the world today if Greenfreeze technology 
wasn’t banned in North America.
The reason for the ban is because Greenfreeze uses hydrocarbons, 
which - despite being ozone and climate-friendly - are flammable. 
The chemical industry has, over the years, used this to argue that Greenfreeze is a ‘fringe’ option, while promoting its own ozone and 
climate-harming chemicals. However, major appliance manufacturers who operate around the globe use Greenfreeze - they would not deem hydrocarbons safe for the rest of the world but unsafe in North America.
This was clear in a recent Greenpeace survey of refrigerator 
manufacturers, where Bosch (the single biggest manufacturer of 
Greenfreeze refrigerators worldwide) reported not one recorded incident in all its 50 million refrigerators. A recent study stated that  there is 
a bigger chance of your washing machine exploding.
39 This shows 
beyond doubt that, with the correct safety  specifications, hydrocarbon flammability can be easily circumvented. 
350 million refrigerators (and counting) can’t be wrong.
“Greenfreeze dominates the market in Europe 
and is prominent in Japan and China. The 
technology is also in use in India, Brazil and 
Argentina. Factories around the world pro
- duce HFC-free fridges for domestic use and 
fridges with HFC for export to Canada and 
the United States because the new technology 
isn’t allowed in yet.”
The Globe and Mail (Canada) 
- September 9th 2009

HFCs: A growing threat to the climate 2516 years of Greenfreeze. 350 million worldwide. 40% of the global market.
Between 90% and 100% of domestic refrigerator production uses Greenfreeze
Mixed market of both Greenfreeze and other technologyOngoing tests but Greenfreeze still banned
Europe
since 1993Saxony, Germany
ﬁrst Greenfreeze refrigerator 1993
India
since 2004Turkey
     since 1997Russia     
since 2007
China     since 1997
Japansince 2001
Australia
since 1997Indonesia
since 1997Brazil
since 2004
map:Cubasince 1997
Mexicosince 2007
Peru
since 2002since 2008
Argentina

26 HFCs: A growing threat to the climate
“W e recognise that the accelerated 
phase-out of HCFCs mandated 
under the Montreal Protocol is 
leading to a rapid increase in the use of HFCs, many of which are 
very potent GHGs.”
The G8 Declaration - July 2008Business: Refrigerants, Naturally!
In 2004, with support from Greenpeace and UNEP , several major 
food and beverage companies launched Refrigerants, Naturally!, a 
multi-stakeholder initiative to develop HFC-free point-of-sale retail 
vending machines, display cases, beverage coolers, etc. In so doing, Refrigerants, Naturally! became the first corporate alliance 
with the explicit goal of replacing HFC technology in favour of natural 
refrigerants. The companies have, over the last years and together with their suppliers, developed and tested multiple innovative HFC-free 
refrigeration technologies.
Politics: Greenpeace’s policy demands
As the demand for fresh food, cold drinks and cool cars grows rapidly in 
emerging economies such as China and India, the right technology must 
be made available and ready to use. The overriding imperative for 
the coming years is that developing countries have strong policy and financial incentives to leapfrog HFCs and move straight to 
environmentally-friendly alternatives. 
The keys to this solution are clear.  We have two global conventions, the 
Kyoto Protocol (the international climate agreement) and the Montreal 
Protocol (the international ozone agreement), both of which could – and must - act swiftly to get rid of F-gases.  
Greenpeace is calling for a complete phase-out of HFCs by 2020. 
Furthermore, we believe that the UNFCCC and the Montreal 
Protocol both have important and unique collaborative roles to 
play in the phasing-out of HFCs. 
➤  This collaborative approach would include the following 
elements:  HFCs would remain within the regulated basket of gases 
under the UNFCCC, and HFC phase-out would be incorporated in 
the Copenhagen agreement.  
➤  The Montreal Protocol would limit the production and consumption of HFCs around the world. The UNFCCC would control emissions and 
facilitate funding and technology transfer to the developing countries.  
➤  Both Protocols would be amended to accommodate such collaboration. Such a dual approach will combine the political and scientific authority of the UNFCCC/Copenhagen process with the vast practical expertise and on-the-ground infrastructure of the Montreal 
Protocol. It recognises the importance of regulating all current and 
future industrial greenhouse gases under the UNFCCC framework, keeps the focus on HFCs as major greenhouse gases, continues 
to take into account their overall emissions and proportional 
contribution to global warming, and at the same time enables their systematic reduction towards an eventual phase-out through a 
Montreal Protocol structured and implemented regulatory framework 
on production and consumption. 
The first step the Parties to the Montreal Protocol must take 
is to mandate the Multilateral Fund to maximise the climate benefits of the accelerated HCFC phase-out by only funding 
HFC-free projects. This action is essential for developing countries 
to leapfrog HFCs straight to natural refrigerants and other not-in-kind alternatives.
Another equally important step in securing the climate benefits of  
the Montreal Protocol is the recovery and safe destruction of the 
millions of tonnes of ‘banked’ HFCs, CFCs and HCFCs sitting in old 
cooling equipment.
The entire HFC challenge is what could be termed a ‘low-hanging 
fruit’ in the fight to solve climate change – the business-as-usual, could mean a massive amount of unnecessary greenhouse gases 
being released into the atmosphere at the very time when we need  
to cut them the most. 

HFCs: A growing threat to the climate 27
What you can do
When it comes to HFCs, all you need to do to become a 
climate activist is make smart consumer choices.
Domestic refrigerators
Make sure you check the type of refrigerant used in your domestic 
refrigerator before you buy it. Look for the R600a sign that denotes 
the Greenfreeze technology pioneered by Greenpeace. Avoid refrigerants called R22 (ozone-depleting and 5,160 times more 
powerful than CO
2 over a 20-year period) and R134a (3,830  
times more powerful than CO2 over a 20-year period). Brands  
like Bosch currently use Greenfreeze technology in the majority  
of their refrigerators.
Air-conditioning
Avoid the refrigerants R134a and R22 and look out for air-
conditioners using natural refrigerants like R600a and R290. Italian manufacturer De Longhi currently sells room air-conditioners using 
R290, which are 10% more energy efficient than those using 
R134a. So, you can save money on energy bills as well!
Supermarkets
Supermarkets are one of the biggest emitters of HFCs. Try and choose a supermarket that uses natural refrigerants in  
its refrigeration systems.


28 HFCs: A growing threat to the climategreenpeace.orgGreenpeace is an independent global 
campaigning organisation that acts to change attitudes and behaviour, to protect and conserve the environment and to promote peace. 
 
Greenpeace InternationalOttho Heldringstraat 5The NetherlandsTel: +31 20 7182000
Fax: +31 20 7182002
 1 IPCC (2007): Report of Working Group 1 
 2  IPCC (2006): Special Report on Ozone and Climate (SROC), 
Ch.11 Table 11.2
 3  Proposed amendment to the Montreal Protocol submitted by the Federated States of Micronesia and Mauritius in July 2009
 4   The above information is taken from Velders et al. (2009): Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 106 no. 27 p.10949
 5   http://globalis.gvu.unu.edu/indicator_detail.cfm?country=US&indicatorid=197
 6  Velders et al., op. cit.
 7  Ibid.
 8   For HFC 134a, see http://afeas.org/data.php?page=emission_hfc134a. For CFCs, see both http://afeas.org/data.php?page=emission_cfc11 and http://afeas.org/data.php?page=emission_cfc12 
 9  IPCC/TEAP Special Report on Ozone and Climate Ch. 2, p. 160
10   Molina, M. J. and Rowland, F. S., Nature 249 (1974): Stratospheric Sink for Chlorofluoromethanes: Chlorine Atom-Catalysed Destruction of Ozone
11   NASA et al.: Twenty Questions and Answers About the Ozone Layer: 2006 Update -  Q3: Why do we care about atmospheric ozone?
12   Farman, J. C., Gardiner, B. G. & Shanklin, J. D. (1985): Nature 315, pages 207–210
13   http://climate21.wordpress.com/2009/09/03/use-montreal-protocol-to-limit-super-greenhouse-gases-in-face-of-resistence-to-kyoto/
14   http://unfccc.int/kyoto_protocol/items/2830.php
15  HCFC-225 ca (20-year GWP: 550, ODP: 0.07) and HCFC-225 cb (20 year GWP: 1700, ODP: 0.03) – US patent no. 7,470,828 B2 (30 December, 2008). Available from http://www.freepatentsonline.com/7470828.html 
16 REACH evaluation –HFC 1234yf
17  Boutonnet et al. (1999) “Environmental risk assessment of trifluoroacetic acid” Human and Ecological Risk Assessment, 5(1), 59–124.
18  EPA Proposed Ruling on HFO 1234yf p. 11-12 – 19 October, 2009. Available at http://www.epa.gov/ozone/downloads/NPRMHFO1234yf.pdf
19  IPCC/TEAP Special Report on Ozone and Climate, Chapter 2, p.22
20  R. Monfortte/ L. Caretto, FIAT: Safety Issues in the Application of a Flammable Refrigerant Gas in MAC Systems: the OEM Perspective, January 2009, copyright SAE International.
21  The Australian company HyChill (www.hychill.com.au) and American company OZ technology (www.oztechnologyinc.com) provide hydrocarbon refrigerants for mobile air conditioning.
22  Certain hydrocarbon blends show an increase in energy efficiency of up to 17% in mobile air conditioners compared to HFC134a - Wongwies S. et al. “Experimental investigation of hydrocarbon mixtures to replace HFC-134a in an automotive air conditioning system” Energy Conversion and Management 47 (2006) 1644–1659
23  Newman et al. (2009) “HCFCs and HFCs: An Update from the Scientific Assessment Panel”
24  Umwelt Bundes Amt. “Natural refrigerants – CO2-based air conditioning system put to practical testing” May 2009.
25  Wieschollek, F., Heckt, R., “Improved Efficiency for Small Cars with R744.” Visteon. Presentation prepared for VDA Alternative Refrigerant Winter , February 13-14, 2008, Saalfelden, Austria.
26  ARCRP2, Results in Green Mac LCCP (Lifetime), datasheet provided by Shecco
27  Monforte, R., Rose, B., L’Huillier, J-M., “Updated situation about alternative refrigerant evaluation.” Fiat Group Automobiles, PSA Peugeot Citroen, Renault. Presenation prepared for SAE 2008 Alternative Refrigerant Systems Symposium, June 10-12, 2008, Phoenix, AZ
28  Meyer, J., “R-1234yf Sysetm Enhancements nad Comparison ot R134a.” Visteon. Presentation prepared for SAE 2008 Alternative Refrigerant Systems Symposium, June 10-12, 2008, Phoenix, AZ.
29  Benouali, J., Karl, S., Petitjean, C. “A/C System Control Strategies for Major Refrigerant Options.” Valeo. Presentation prepared for SAE 2008 Alternative Refrigerant Systems Symposium, June 10-12, 2008, Phoenix, AZ.
30  Ikegami, T., Iguchi, M., Aoki, K., Iijima, K., “New Refrigerants Evaluation Results.” Toyota, Honda, Nissan, Valeo joint presentation prepared for the VDA Alternative Refrigerant Winter Meeting, February 13-14, 2008, Saalfelden, Austria.
31  Colbourne, D. (2009): Opportunities for the application of Natural Refrigerants. Natural Refrigerants. Pachai, A. C. et al. (2009): Achieving the green dream by the use of natural refrigerants
32  Campbell A, Missenden JF and Maidment GG, - Institute of Refrigeration. (2007). Carbon dioxide for Supermarkets p. 10
33   Hafner, A. & Nekså, P . (2006): Global environmental consequences of introducing R744 (CO2) mobile air conditioning. SINTEF Energy Research, 7th IIR Gustav Lorentzen Conference on Natural Working Fluids, Trondheim, Norway.
34 Visteon (2007). Op. cit.
35 TEAP XX/8 Task Force Report p.2, May 2009
36  Elefsen F, Nyvad J and Gerrard A. (2004). Field test of 75 R404A and R290 ice cream freezers in Australia. EcoLibrium AU 2 (10), 24–27. 
37  Azar A. (2009). Coca-Cola presentation to the members of ‘Refrigerants, Naturally!’
38  Colbourne D. (2009). Op. cit.
39  Colbourne, D. (2008). Safety of Appliances Using Hydrocarbon Refrigerants. Chapter from the GTZ Proklima publication Natural RefrigerantsReferences