# Archivo original: how-companies-still-have-it-wrong-on-plastic-pollution-solutions.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:32 -03 2025

THROWING AWAY 
THE FUTURE:
HOW COMPANIES STILL 
HAVE IT WRONG ON PLASTIC POLLUTION “SOLUTIONS”

There has been a wave of public concern about the 
global plastic pollution crisis, heightened by the 
growing scientific evidence about its ecological and 
social impacts.  As a result, more and more people from 
all around the world are taking action themselves, and turning to solutions  that most large companies have so far failed to implement: rejecting cheap, throwaway 
plastic packaging, and demanding reusable and 
refillable  options for everyday goods.  Small businesses 
are developing many inspiring, innovative (and sometimes basic, common sense) packaging methods and models.  There is a global movement to create a sustainable world with a culture focused on reusables, not disposables
In response to public motivation to resolve the global 
plastic pollution crisis, some of the world’s largest companies that produce massive amounts of wasteful, single-use plastic packaging have started to admit that they need to act. Some have made commitments that seem aspirational, but closer scrutiny shows that they are mostly continuing on the same track by investing in false solutions that fail to move us away from single-use plastic, diverting attention away from better systems, perpetuating the throwaway culture, and confusing people in the process. This is a transformative moment for our society. The world’s largest companies should not remain stuck in the past by promoting false solutions but instead should urgently reprioritize corporate business models, and follow the lead of people all over the world by kicking off a just transition away from a throwaway economy. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1  
INTRODUCTION
SECTION 2  
FALSE PAPER PROMISES
SECTION 3  
FALSE IMPRESSIONS: “BIOPLASTICS” - THE LATEST 
FORM OF “GREENWASHING
SECTION 4  
OUR RECYCLING SYSTEM: DOOMED BY PLASTIC
SECTION 5  
CHEMICAL RECYCLING TECHNOLOGIES - TOXIC TECH DISGUISED AS THE SOLUTION
SECTION 6  
CONCLUSION: WE NEED A REUSE REVOLUTION!  2
6
10
12
18
24

2
SECTION 1
INTRODUCTION

3
Despite the increasing scientific understanding 
of the irreversible damage plastic can cause 
to our environment and communities, plastic production is projected to increase. The fossil fuel industry intends to increase production by an additional 40% over the next decade,
21 and 
plastic could account for 20% of the total global oil consumption.
22 Companies including Shell 
and ExxonMobil have invested a combined $180 billion since 2010 into plastic production, using cheap natural gas from hydraulic fracturing (‘fracking’) in the United States.
23 Petrochemical 
companies are expanding plastic production operations on the Gulf Coast of the United States,
24 where communities have long been 
fighting the toxic effects of oil and gas refining.25 26 
European companies are also hungrily exploiting the natural gas rush, with the Ineos Corporation making the biggest petrochemical investment in the EU in 20 years,
27 28 into plastic production 
infrastructure, including a “virtual pipeline” to flood Europe with cheap fracked gas from the US to make plastic,
29 30 31 a plan which has 
generated an international outcry.  In Asia, it’s also reported that  petrochemical producers including Sinopec, Petronas and Hengli Petrochemical are investing billions of dollars into expanding plastic production.
33
With cheaply available virgin plastic flooding the market, single-use plastic packaging may represent a lifeline for the oil and gas industry. However, solutions focused on improving the ‘end of life’ management of plastic won’t work without turning off the tap. Plastic pollution is a threat to our environment. The equivalent of a truckload of plastic enters the ocean every single minute.
1 Once in the marine 
environment, plastic breaks apart into smaller and smaller pieces. In fact, studies estimate that there are anywhere between five and 50 trillion plastic particles in our oceans today.
2 These plastics are 
often ingested by marine animals, which can then be choked or starved. 
Plastic pollution is not limited to the visible 
pollution in our oceans and on our beaches. The vast majority of all plastic ever produced has been landfilled or released into the environment and remains there in some form.
3 There is emerging 
evidence on the presence of plastic in freshwater,4 
soil,5 and the atmosphere,6 and still more is 
needed on its environmental and health impacts.7  
Plastic carries known and potential impacts to human health, at every point of its life cycle. 
Ninety-nine percent of plastic begins its life as oil 
or gas,
8 with its extraction and refining contributing 
to climate change, air pollution and the potential for accidents.
9 Cumulative impacts from plastic 
production on surrounding communities are not always part of environmental or safety risk assessments, which tend to document the impacts of chemicals in isolation.
10 The climate impacts of 
plastic are grim: current estimates suggest that by 2050, global greenhouse gas emissions related to the lifecycle of plastic could make up as much as 10-13% of the available ‘budget’ of emissions we have left.
11 It has also been estimated that, by the 
end of 2019 alone, globally, plastic production and burning will emit the equivalent of 189 coal-fired power plants.
12
Plastic also needs chemical additives to make it functional and give it desired properties such as stability, flexibility or appearance;
13 these additives 
can include carcinogenic and endocrine-disrupting chemicals such as phthalates.
14 Some plastics can 
themselves leach out hazardous chemicals, such as BPA (bisphenol-A) from polycarbonate
15 16 17 18 
and phthalates from PVC. Though much is known about the dangers these chemicals pose to our reproductive system and other aspects of our health, scientists have highlighted the need for further research on the risks for human health that additives in food packaging may pose.
19 While 
the chemicals may be present in small amounts in each package, the full impacts of these chemicals when combined are generally not considered.
20


4Time to declare Peak Plastic
to other forms of single-use packaging, investing 
in partnerships to improve recycling and waste management, or looking to emerging technologies that enable these companies to continue business as usual rather than reducing demand for plastic. 
To date, no major FMCG has made a commitment 
to reduce the total volume or number of units of single-use packaging it sells, or to invest significantly in reusable and refillable delivery systems, and only a handful of companies have even disclosed their plastic footprint.
40 Companies 
and retailers using single-use plastic packaging need to urgently adopt reduction targets, decrease the number of products they sell packaged in single-use plastic, and significantly invest in new delivery systems based on reusable and refillable packaging constructed of durable materials and designed to achieve multiple uses. Plastic packaging accounts for the largest share of global plastics manufacturing.
34 35 36 It is also the 
largest source of plastic waste in the environment, as packaging is typically designed to be single-use.
37 
Global and regional waste audits have found plastic packaging from large ‘fast moving consumer goods companies’ (FMCGs) such as Nestle, PepsiCo, Procter & Gamble, Coca Cola and Mondelez to be the most frequently identified branded plastic pollution collected worldwide.
38 39 
In response, many FMCGs have adopted various voluntary commitments to make their plastic packaging more recyclable, reusable, compostable, or made of recycled content. While these commitments are an important step forward, most of the plans to meet these goals have focused on false solutions: switching from plastic 


5Not all solutions are equal
Seemingly every day, large FMCG companies 
and retailers as well as smaller start-ups or 
entrepreneurs advertise a new innovation or way 
to reduce plastic, intended to build trust with 
consumers that they are leading the charge to find solutions to our plastic pollution crisis.  Not 
all promoted “solutions” are inherently equal or 
equitable.  
Any solution to the global plastic pollution crisis 
should contribute to a ‘just transition’
41 to a plastic-
free economy, that also needs to be  equitable. Using a ‘people’s solutions lens’
42 to evaluate 
potential solutions can identify solutions that are more likely to benefit the widest array of people and our planet.  
• Who makes the decisions? Does this support 
and drive community self-determination?   Is 
governance adequate so that any decisions made by companies are driven by the public good?  
• Who benefits from the solution?  Does this 
contribute to our collective health and the 
protection of our natural ecosystems, or does this 
allow corporations to continue to externalize the costs of doing business onto communities and our planet? Does this lead towards true systemic 
change? 
• Who or what else will this impact?  Will this 
create unintended consequences for somebody else or another part of our global environment? Is there enough information available to determine 
impacts?
The plastic pollution crisis will only be resolved 
when companies that profit from single-use plastic declare peak plastic, and commit to urgent 
reductions in the amount of single-use disposable 
packaging units they sell.  An obvious first step 
is immediately eliminating unnecessary and 
excessive packaging, such as coffee capsules.  They will also need to adopt a publicly available, 
comprehensive plan to invest in new ways to 
bring products to consumers in reusable and 
refillable packaging that is durable, affordable 
and more responsibly produced.  Many diverse reuse and refill options exist currently, and with 
innovation, even more could be developed. 
The Ellen MacArthur Foundation estimates that 
replacing even 20% of single-use packaging could Warning: bias and inaccuracies in 
Life Cycle Analysis:  Many companies will claim that according to Life Cycle Assessments (LCAs), plastic is the most environmentally friendly option for any type of packaging.  LCAs are decision-making tools that can be used to compare various environmental or social impacts associated with all stages of a product’s life, from raw material extraction through manufacture, distribution, use, and end of life. While these can be illuminating decision-making tools, they often offer a selective view depending on what assumptions are made, and what data is used or available.
44 Some LCAs show 
plastic as the most environmentally-friendly of several options, but these often exclude important parts of the plastics lifecycle such as the extraction of raw materials, production, the release of hazardous chemicals, end of life disposal or marine pollution. For example, a recent Danish study claimed that lightweight LDPE plastic carrier bags had the least environmental impact compared to paper, cotton and other selected materials, but the study’s approach and its assumptions favor single-use practices, effectively removing the benefits of reuse from more durable materials; it also assumes, unrealistically, zero littering and leakage of plastic bags from recycling and waste management systems.
45be worth $10 billion in value,43 with other benefits 
beyond the reduced environmental impacts, including customer convenience and choice. But fundamentally, companies also need to reimagine their business models based on the recognition that we cannot continue to produce disposable packaging that is used for seconds but pollutes our planet for generations.

6
SECTION 2
FALSE PAPER PROMISES

7
Some companies are attempting to address their 
plastics problem by switching their disposable packaging from plastic to paper. Dunkin’ Donuts have announced a switch from plastic foam cups to paper cups,
46 and McDonald’s and Starbucks 
both announced switches to paper straws.47 
Nestle in particular has emphasized a shift to paper-based packaging,
48 proclaiming that its new 
paper-wrapper for its Yes! Candy bar is patent-free because it “want[s] the industry to use paper.”
49 
Nestle has also switched to paper straws for paper Nesquik pouches in Europe,
50 and paper packaging 
for Milo drinks will follow in Asia.51 Companies tout 
these switches as positive moves - and receive praise for them
52 - because paper has long been 
seen as an environmentally sustainable material.  However, in reality, this switch is problematic.
Forests play a unique role, supporting a stunning 
array of biodiversity, removing and storing carbon, providing sustenance and livelihood to indigenous peoples, and performing a range of ecological services that sustain life.
53 The pulp and paper 
industry is responsible for substantial impacts to the environment, including climate change,
54 as 
logging and large-scale industrial tree plantations drive natural forest loss degradation, emitting huge amounts of CO
2.55 In the race to limit global 
warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius, cutting emissions alone is not enough.  We will also have to remove massive amounts of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere; the most effective way to do this is to restore degraded forests and to reforest large parts of those areas lost in the past.
56 This is 
fundamentally incompatible with an increase in logging and industrial tree plantations.  Despite the fact that paper has been recycled for centuries, current paper recycling systems are failing to deliver enough quality recycled fiber in many countries, partly due to contamination in the recycling stream, leading municipalities to incinerate or landfill vast amounts of paper collected for recycling.
57 58 Major FMCG companies 
that have  announced shifts to paper packaging seem unaware of these limitations; none of these have committed to exclusively source post-consumer recycled fiber, and many even ignore the future recyclability of their paper packaging.  For example, McDonald’s announced in 2018 that it would switch its plastic straws to paper in the UK and Ireland, in response to concerns about plastic, but the thickness of the new paper straws and the use of adhesives make them incompatible with current recycling systems.
59 Overall, current paper 
recycling is unable to provide a sustainable route for an increase in paper packaging.
FMCG companies often promote third-party 
certifications, like the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), as proof that their new paper packaging will be sourced responsibly,
60 and some FMCGs 
companies may see increasing their purchasing of disposable paper packaging from certified sources as a responsible way forward. Forest certification can be a useful tool, although even the most stringently FSC-certified fiber does nothing to address the fundamental impact that any logging has on a forest’s ecosystem services such as storing carbon or providing homes for wildlife. 

8
But certified sustainable logging schemes are 
wholly unable to absorb any additional demand, as the current supply of FSC certified fiber is limited, and also fail to ensure enough meaningful sustainability metrics. For example, current demand already outstrips the availability of responsibly sourced fiber in the United States and Canada, and it is uncertain if enough newly certified FSC fiber will come online in order to meet additional demand.
61 This has led some 
companies62 to either rely on less stringent 
elements of the FSC system that cannot provide on-the-ground guarantees,
63 or to rely on entirely 
separate but substantially weaker schemes such as the Sustainable Forestry Initiative or the Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification.
64 It is also important to note that 
sourcing FSC-certified fiber in some regions does not guarantee responsible logging, including in Russia, Congo Basin and Scandinavia where FSC has struggled with massive loss of intact forest landscapes, destruction of high conservation value forest, and insufficient indigenous sovereignty and human rights processes.
65 66 67
As one example, Swedish pulp and paper giant Svenska Cellulosa AB (SCA) is expanding operations in the Great Northern Forest, in part to meet growing demand from packaging manufacturers.
68 SCA’s forestry operations are 
FSC-certified, but indigenous communities have actively opposed SCA’s conversion of old-growth forests to plantations.
69 SCA’s customers make 
cardboard packaging sold to Amazon, IKEA, L’Oréal, Mars, Mondelez, Nestlé,
70 Procter & 
Gamble, and Unilever, much of which will also be single use, and could be replaced with re-usable delivery systems relatively easily.
71
Given the current impacts on already-limited forest resources, much larger areas of forest need to be protected and restored, not transformed into disposable packaging.  There is no way the planet can sustain additional demand from companies attempting to substitute their single-use plastic packaging with paper or cardboard; companies must commit to overall reduction of packaging and shift to alternative delivery systems like reuse and refill. This is a matter of urgency for the climate, and acting now is still possible.

9


10
SECTION 3
FALSE IMPRESSIONS: 
“BIOPLASTICS” - THE LATEST FORM OF “GREENWASHING
In response to growing public concern over conventional single-use plastics, many companies are swapping single-use plastics derived from fossil fuels with bio-based plastics, which are often erroneously promoted as biodegradable or compostable.  Several companies—for example, Coca-Cola,
72 Danone,73 Nestlé,74 PepsiCo,75—are 
using bio-based plastics to replace some portion of conventional fossil-derived plastics in their beverage bottles, and many bags or disposable take-away food service items (cutlery, plates, etc) are increasingly marketed as “biodegradable.”  These terms can be confusing for customers, especially when generic “greenwashing” terms such as ‘eco’, ‘bio’ or ‘green’ are used for marketing advantage.  The word “bioplastics” does not have a standardized definition and is often used to refer to plastic that is either bio-based , biodegradable  
or compostable and can even include fossil fuel 
based plastic. 

11
‘Bio-based plastic’ refers to plastics made not 
from fossil fuel building blocks but from plant 
material, such as corn or sugar cane.76 Bio-based 
plastic only represents about 1% of the plastic available on the market.
77 Though research is 
underway to increase the amount of bio-based material,
78 currently most bio-based plastic is 
still partially composed of fossil-based plastic. For example, the NaturALL bottle used by major beverage companies is currently 30% bio-based plastic, and 70% fossil-based plastic.
79
The majority of bio-based plastic is derived from agricultural crops, which compete with food crops,  threatening food security and driving land use change and agricultural emissions.
80 81 Globally, 
the production of agricultural commodities is the leading cause of deforestation and habitat destruction,
82 and agricultural crops, forestry 
and other land uses are responsible for a quarter of the greenhouse gas emissions globally.
83 A 
growing share of agricultural land is used for non-food crops, mostly farmed on large industrial plantations which displace both natural habitat and small-scale farmers.
84 While some FMCGs like 
Unilever have made commitments to ensure that their bio-based plastic comes from sustainable sources, the commonly-cited Bioplastic Feedstock Alliance is not a third-party certification standard.  While many consumers may believe that all bio-based plastic will naturally decompose if littered or landfilled, this is not necessarily true.  Both conventional fossil-based plastic or bio-based plastic can be engineered to degrade under certain conditions; these are known as either degradable 
or biodegradable plastics.
85 86 However, the heat 
and humidity conditions required are rarely, if ever, met in the natural environment,
87 88 89 and 
when that biodegradable plastic does break apart, it may not fully disappear but instead fragment into smaller pieces, including microplastics, which can be ingested by animals and enter the food web.  
The impression that that these products are more 
‘natural’ because they are from plants is also false: production of bio-based plastic can involve similar chemical additives to conventional fossil-based plastic.
90Compostable plastic:  Another confusing 
marketing term associated with bio-based plastics and biodegradability is the claim that a disposable item is compostable. Compostable plastic is engineered to fully decompose (as opposed to breaking into small fragments) under certain conditions
91 that are met in either industrial 
composting facilities, or, less commonly, in home composting systems.
92 But not all municipalities 
have industrial composting, and many cannot recycle compostable plastic packaging, and thus it is most likely to be landfilled or incinerated, making it little different to conventional single-use plastic.
While some new technologies promise bio-
based packaging made from non-agricultural crops like algae, methane or seaweed,
93 these are 
emerging technologies and processes and will require transparent assessments on a range of impacts. Some bio-based packaging materials that are grown according to agroecological farming principles or make use of local agricultural waste or by-products may be a component of an overall plan to eliminate single-use plastic packaging, provided these materials do not compete with land for food crops or soil fertility needs; for example, in tropical areas, food products may be wrapped in banana leaves. Overall, a highly precautionary approach to industrially-processed bio-based plastic packaging should be taken.


12
SECTION 4
OUR RECYCLING SYSTEM: 
DOOMED BY PLASTIC

13
FMCG companies and the plastics industry have 
long promoted the idea that recycling is the best way to keep plastic out of the landfill,
94 but more 
than 90% of all the plastic ever produced has not been recycled.
95 Plastic is far more likely to end 
up in landfills, incinerators or in the environment than to be recycled. Nevertheless, corporate commitments to confront plastic pollution have overwhelmingly focused on increasing recycled or recyclable content, promoting recyclability or technological recycling solutions.  However, numerous exposés have demonstrated that recycling systems have failed to deliver on the promise to both recover enough material to reduce demand for virgin plastic or to ensure proper disposal,
96 97 98 objectives that are 
unachievable, due to the inherent difficulties posed by the nature of plastics, the mixtures of plastics and the enormous amount produced.
Recycling systems cannot keep up with the 
huge volume of plastic waste generated. Even in Germany, which has one of the highest recycling rates in the world based on collection, more than 60% of all plastic waste is burned, and only 38% recycled.
99 In the EU as a whole, 31% of the plastic 
waste collected in 2016 was reported as recycled100 
- despite the fact that much of this is exported to lower income countries where its ultimate fate is unknown.  This pattern is repeated In the US, where just 9% was recycled in 2015 (the most recent Government data available),
101 while the 
amount actually recycled domestically may be as low as 2% of the total plastic waste, according to one analysis.
102
Plastic packaging made of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) (e.g.soda and water bottles) and high density polyethylene (HDPE)  (eg. milk jugs, laundry detergent containers),
103 are 
commonly recyclable in many municipal systems, but recycling rates for these are still shockingly low: half of the PET sold is never collected for recycling,
104 and only 7% of those bottles collected 
for recycling are turned into new bottles.105 Much 
of the plastic packaging is “downcycled,” which means that instead of making a new plastic package from an old one, the plastic is reprocessed into products of lesser quality or value which are not further recyclable and not possible to recycle. 
Flexible plastic packaging such as wrappers, 
sachets, pouches, shrink-wrap, and savory snack bags now dominate grocery stores - the market for this grew by 19% just in 2017
106 - and this type 
of packaging is often made of multiple materials that make it difficult if not impossible to recycle.
107  
Recycling collection facilities not equipped to handle the complexity of these materials have become overwhelmed. 

14Sachets: a single serving of uncontrollable 
plastic pollution.  A sachet is a particular 
kind of plastic packaging typically used to sell small or single portions of food and personal care products such as  soap, shampoo and deodorant. Southeast Asia accounts for almost 50% of the global sachet market; 855 billion sachets were sold globally in 2018, and at current growth rates, 1.3 trillion will be sold in 2027.
108 109 In North America and Europe, 
this packaging is known as ‘on the go’ (for example, ketchup packets or daily doses of vitamins) or ‘trial size.’ In Southeast Asia, the ‘sachet economy’ was pioneered by Unilever,
110 where products in sachets are 
aggressively marketed by FMCGs to low-income consumers in rural communities  unable to afford larger containers.  Because the package is a combination of plastic and other materials (like foil), it cannot be recycled: waste sachets are therefore overwhelming municipal waste infrastructure systems in South East Asia, imposing an intrusive double standard which exploits global inequity.
Rather than developing accessible 
reusable packaging systems, FMCGs seem intent on continuing to sell products in sachets. Nestle acknowledges the problem but has done little to address its use of sachets directly,
111 and Unilever is using 
downcycling and is now turning to new chemical-based recycling technologies to deal with the unrecyclable sachets (see Section 4).
112 Unilever Philippines 
is reported to sell more than half of its products in plastic sachets.
113 In 2012, 
Unilever developed a Sachet Recovery Program in the Philippines to downcycle sachets into cement pavers, which were then donated to schools and communities.
114 While the company initially collected between 4.5 million and 10 million sachets annually,
115 this is 
a small portion relative to the 27 billion sachets Unilever sold in Southeast Asia in 2016
116 or the estimated 59.7 billion 
sachets used annually in the Philippines alone.
117 Unilever is now promoting its  
use of the CreaSolv process118 which uses 
chemical solvents to dissolve the plastic sachets to make new flexible plastic; a pilot plant in Indonesia processes 3 tonnes of plastic daily.
119  However, Unilever offers 
little information about the potential health impacts of the solvents or the efficiency of the technology.  Instead of focusing on these false solutions, Unilever needs to prioritise the innovation of environmentally responsible reusable and refillable systems for their customers in Southeast Asia. 
What, then, happens to the plastic waste that is collected but not ultimately recycled?  There are no countries where all plastic packaging is effectively recycled domestically, therefore most of this ‘low-value plastic’ is dumped in landfills, burned in incinerators which emit greenhouse gas  emissions and pollutants into the air,
120 or littered into the environment. The vast majority of all of the plastic that has ever been 
produced globally has been released to the environment, with 12% incinerated, and 79% landfilled or released into the natural environment.
121


15Burning Waste:  In the EU the majority 
(41.6%) of plastic waste collected in 2016 was incinerated,
133 and incineration of 
plastic waste in Europe increased by 61% between 2000 and 2016.
134 This rush to 
burn is also happening in China, which has 231 operating incinerators, with another 103 planned (for comparison, Europe has 500 incinerators).
135 According 
to one analysis, the US could be burning 13% of its plastic waste, or six times the plastic waste that it recycles.
136 Waste 
incineration is an inefficient way of generating energy and an irresponsible form of waste management.
137 
Incinerating plastics creates air pollutants, fly ash, bottom ash, and boiler ash/slag; it can harm human health and the planet by emitting respiratory irritants, cancer-causing dioxins/furans, heavy metals including mercury, cadmium and lead, and major greenhouse gases - contributing to the climate crisis.
138 139 It is also an 
environmental justice issue; for example, approximately eighty percent of the waste incinerators in the US are located in low-income communities, communities of color, or both.
140  Facilities are often costly 
to run and require a constant stream of waste, so waste incineration encourages generation of disposable material. Despite the known pollution generated by incineration, Nestle Philippines has announced it is sponsoring recovery of plastic waste to burn in kilns that make cement,
141 a highly polluting practice.142There is no “away” 
that large amounts of plastic waste enter the 
ocean via several large Asian rivers,126 this does not 
mean that Asian countries are more responsible 
for the world’s plastic pollution: much of that 
discarded plastic may have originated in North America or Europe, where plastic generation per 
person is higher than in many Asian countries.
127
In 2018, China banned the importation of foreign 
waste, and plastic waste exports around the world dropped by 50% as plastic waste collected for 
recycling began to stockpile or head for improper 
disposal.
128 Some plastic waste was redirected to 
nearby countries, like Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand,
129 which were already struggling with 
municipal recycling infrastructure clogged by 
non-recyclable waste. Some of those countries 
in turn adopted their own restrictions on plastic 
waste imports130 and have since began to return 
containers of waste to the originating countries.131 132 Within the small percentages of plastic that 
are reported as ‘recycled’ is another  important 
component to this story - the global plastic 
waste trade. Plastic not recycled domestically 
is typically been packed into mixed bales and largely exported to other countries to deal with. 
The United States, for example, exported one 
third of its recyclable plastic waste, and until 2018, 
half of that was destined for China,
122 where low 
environmental standards and cheap labor costs 
made the recycled material attractive to use in the 
manufacturing sector.123 
Field investigations of municipal waste in 
Southeast Asia have detailed unpermitted recycling operations, open burning, complaints 
of health symptoms suggestive of environmental 
pollution, among other problems.
124 Sorting of 
waste is typically done by informal laborers known 
as waste-pickers, who often lack the resources to sort cleanly and safely.
125 While one study reports 

16
It’s abundantlyclear that recycling can only 
ever make a small dent in the rising quantities of plastics being produced and the inevitable plastic waste. Therefore, the efforts made by most FMCGs and retailers to clean up beaches, improve recycling and recyclability, or educate their customers are - at best -  misdirected and at worst, creating a smokescreen of activity to mask the problem. Some have begun increasing package labelling to indicate whether or not it is recyclable; these labels, like How2Recycle in North America, are potentially misleading in that each municipality has different capacity to recycle different types of plastic, so what is recyclable is not necessarily recycled.  Focusing only on end-of-life strategies for plastic waste also ignores the human health and environmental consequences of the entire plastic life cycle.
143 144   
Recycling has a part to play as an important sub-strategy for the transition to a plastic-free economy, but is it not a substitute for the overall reduction in single-use packaging, and certainly not a justification for increased plastic production. In this transition, any continued recycling needs to meet the highest social and environmental standards, and take its rightful place in the waste hierarchy, under ‘avoid’ ‘reduce’ and ‘reuse’.

17


18
SECTION 5
CHEMICAL RECYCLING 
TECHNOLOGIES - TOXIC TECH DISGUISED AS THE SOLUTION

19
Commitments to increase recycled content in 
packaging by at least 37 FMCGs are translating to a demand for up to 5 - 7.5 million metric tons of recycled plastic by 2030, an increase of 200-300%.
145 But these promises crash into a significant 
real-world barrier: the complex plastics and mixed materials used in flexible plastic packaging and labels are not practically recyclable in conventional recycling processes and can’t produce new plastic of the required quality. 
Conventional recycling methods, also known as 
mechanical recycling , essentially chop up plastic 
and re-formulate it without changing the chemical structure. This works well for downcycling plastics into other materials but less well for creating ‘like-new’ plastic due to quality loss, degradation and contamination.
146 The low cost of virgin feedstock 
combined with these limitations means that while that some plastics are technically recyclable, the difficulty recycling them en masse means that no practical market exists, so recycling rates are low.
147 This is the case with polypropylene, the base 
plastic for much of the flexible packaging on the market, like yogurt cups or squeeze bottles.
148
  Thus, the availability of recycled material is much lower than the demand. With FMCGs anxious to label their products as both recycled and recyclable, the plastics industry and lobby is promoting the perception that full recycling will someday be possible, and companies are turning to potentially risky emerging technologies - collectively known as chemical recycling . 

20Chemical Recycling
Chemical recycling is an umbrella term for several 
technologies, most of which are in their infancy. Big brands often describe chemical recycling in 
their promotional materials using terms such as 
“enhanced recycling” or  “advanced recycling” to 
give the false impression that these technologies 
are benign.  Information about the environmental and health impacts of many of these technologies 
is currently limited, but there are serious concerns 
about emissions of hazardous chemicals and their 
intensive use of energy. There are various forms 
of these emerging technologies, which convert plastic waste into basic chemical building blocks 
(polymers or monomers), including:
149
• using chemical solvents to purify waste 
plastics, 
• chemical depolymerisation , in which the 
plastic polymer chains are degraded into their 
original building blocks, such as monomers, and
• thermal depolymerisation and cracking (breaking the chemical bonds, as used in 
petroleum refining) also known as gasification  
and pyrolysis, which can produce hydrocarbons 
such as gas or oil (plastic to fuel) as well as ‘like-
new’ plastic materials.
Chemical solvents and depolymerisation decontaminate the plastic, but the plastic that 
results from the process is still of degraded quality. 
They also require a single-stream of plastic waste 
and therefore face the same collection barriers as 
mechanical recycling. Thermal depolymerisation, 
on the other hand, can process mixed plastic waste 
as well as address the degradation problem, but 
it brings other serious concerns, particularly the 
creation of potentially hazardous byproducts.  
Gasification converts plastic waste into a gas; 
pyrolysis, sometimes called ‘plastic-to-oil’, makes 
plastic waste into tar oil by exposing it to high 
heat; the oil can then be used for fuel, to make 
new plastic, or other chemical applications. While this may technically differ from burning as it is not 
combustion, it is still thermal destruction using 
high heat (and a lot of energy) and can create 
hazardous byproducts.Gasification and pyrolysis are not new technologies 
- they have been used for decades as alternatives to waste incineration, however they have a failed track record due inefficiency, emissions pollution, and environmental impact.
150 151 Despite these failures, 
new development of gasification and pyrolysis for waste plastics reprocessing is currently being inaccurately promoted as a modern way to achieve a ‘circular economy.’ Examples of some companies investing in this risky technology include:
• Mars Incorporated, which claims to be testing capacity to use pyrolysis to meet its commitment to increasing recycled plastic.
152 
• Saudi Arabian Chemical giant SABIC, which has 
even co-opted the ‘circular economy’ language 
by launching “certified circular polymers,” or 
plastic made from pyrolysis (in other words, 
plastic waste made into oil which is made into 
like-new plastic).153 Unilever and Tupperware will 
use this plastic.154 155
• Agilyx, a company manufacturing jet fuel and 
recycled polystyrene from polystyrene waste.156 
Investment in new chemical recycling 
infrastructure is risky in that it will ‘lock in’ demand 
for plastic waste in order to generate more plastic 
as well as non-plastic by-products. One analysis 
estimates products produced by chemical recycling 
to be worth $120 billion, with the production of gas 
and oil from these processes  projected to be 14% 
of that value.157 It is critical for FMCGs to ensure 
that meeting their commitments to increase 
recycled content will reduce the use of virgin 
plastic, not drive new fossil fuel generation. 

21


22Promoting chemical recycling in a
regulatory vacuum
Neither the US nor the EU has coherent regulations or agreed definitions for these technologies as a group, creating further confusion when industry or FMCGs promote new recycling technologies.  The plastics lobby group American Chemistry Council encourages regulators to see ‘plastics-to-fuel’ not as recycling or waste disposal but as manufacturing processes, or even energy production,
158 despite also promoting these 
technologies and companies through the “Chemical Recycling Alliance.”
159 
To promote acceptance of the technology, the plastics industry employs multiple high-profile industry alliances, like the American Chemistry Council’s Chemical Recycling Alliance
160 the Alliance 
to End Plastic Waste,161 and positions plastics-
to-fuel as a technological marvel (one plastics industry spokesperson has even compared plastics-to-fuel technology to “going to Mars”
162). 
PepsiCo and Procter & Gamble have joined the Alliance to End Plastic Waste, a partnership of mostly plastics and petrochemical producers which aims to raise $1.5 billion to improve recycling and waste management infrastructure and develop recycling technologies,
163 including chemical 
recycling, although these are small investments compared to the $180 billion investment into the expansion of plastic production.
164Despite the many concerns mentioned above and the fact that chemical recycling is not yet technically or economically viable,
165 FMCGs are promoting 
these technologies under the guise of “recycling” in their corporate responsibility materials.
166 Many 
petrochemical companies have invested in various chemical recycling start-ups in Europe and North America,
167 which are partly funded by some FMCGs. 
Procter & Gamble, PepsiCo, Nestle, L’Oreal, Coca-Cola, Kuerig and Danone have all invested in chemical recycling technologies or have entered into purchasing agreements for future product,
168 169 170 even though 
many are not yet producing material at significant commercial scale and are still in a laboratory, pilot or construction phase.
171  For example: 
• Procter & Gamble developed a process using chemical solvents to convert polypropylene, which it has licensed to a startup that will sell material to Nestle and L’Oreal.
172 173
• PepsiCo. has touted its intentions to incorporate chemically recycled PET by 2020, despite the fact that PET produced by its supply partner will not be commercially available until mid-2020.
174


23Banking on a false solution with unknown 
environmental and health impacts
Details of these recycling processes are often not disclosed, obscuring information about their costs, efficiency, environmental impacts such as air or water pollution, or risks to workers.  Despite describing them as ‘closed loop’ or referring to the ‘circular economy’ in their promotions,
175 
most processes are highly energy-intensive,176 
require costly infrastructure, and generate waste (such as additives and contaminants). Even with technologies that are more advanced, there is limited evidence that they are environmentally safe or efficient at transitioning to a low-carbon economy,
177 much less away from single-use 
plastics.
Given the limitations of mechanical recycling, 
FMCG commitments towards increased recycled content are dependent on the use of chemical recycling which has not been proven to be safe, efficient, or environmentally responsible, and furthermore is still years away from being a commercial reality.
178 Despite high-profile 
investment and promotion as a solution, chemical recycling is expensive, inefficient and not enough is known about the impacts of these potentially polluting processes. FMCGs and retailers are banking on theoretical solutions in order to claim that their non-reusable and non-recyclable plastics are made from recycled content and are ‘recyclable’.  Meanwhile, focusing on these new technologies could delay innovation into responsible solutions.  And while recycling has a limited but important role to play in the short-term, to solve the plastic pollution crisis, we need to create less single-use plastic in the first place. 


24
SECTION 6
CONCLUSION:
WE NEED A REUSE REVOLUTION! 

25
The plastics crisis we are already in shows that the 
promise of recycling has already failed.  But the 
new chemical recycling technologies promoted by big brands are are no silver bullet either.  We could be waiting years before these become a commercial reality, only to find that they come with a high ecological cost and have already locked us into a never-ending growth of plastics production.  
What of the other solutions offered by big food 
and big plastic?  It’s easy to promote natural alternatives - such as paper and card - and alternatives that sound ‘natural’ - like bioplastics, that come with unanswered questions.  But the volumes and scale of resources that would be needed would put unacceptable pressures on natural resources such as forests and agricultural land, which are already straining from overexploitation.
This is not an adequate response to the plastics 
crisis or the climate crisis.  It’s clear that we cannot afford to wait.  It’s also fortunate that other solutions exist, which can be implemented relatively quickly, that will benefit both people and the planet.
As a priority, we call for the reduction of units 
sold in single-use packaging, and for investment 
in solutions focused on reuse, refill and other systems not dependant on disposables . 
Ultimately companies need to rethink how products are delivered to the consumer. In the transition to avoiding throwaway plastic, replacing virgin plastic with non-toxic, recycled (and recyclable) plastic only has a limited role in addressing plastic overproduction. 
There is no silver bullet, one-size fits all option 
for new reusable/refillable packaging that will be applicable to every company, product or geography.  We propose, however, that FMCGs and retailers urgently prioritize investment into the delivery of reuse and refill options that meet the following criteria: 
• Affordable:  Producers must take responsibility for the cost of the material, the refillable/reusable packaging and its collection, and not create only ‘premium’ reusable containers for well-off consumers. 
• Durable:  Materials should be long-lasting and as strong as possible, to have the least amount of health and environmental impacts. • Non-toxic:  Reusable containers should be free 
of hazardous chemicals, extending not just to chemicals that have been regulated or restricted in certain regions but to all chemicals that have intrinsically hazardous properties.
179
• Convenient:  Consumers should be able to access 
a range of reusable and refillable products to fit various lifestyles, and reuse shouldn’t just be available to customers online, for example.  Reusable packaging should be collectible, and companies should take responsibility for designing collection systems to ensure that reusable containers don’t become disposable. Retailers should allow customers to bring their own reusable containers as well as offer collectible options. 
• Simple:  A transition to an agricultural system designed around ecological principles would include more consumption of food closer to the point of production, meaning that we would need less packaging and transportation. 
• Supports a just transition to a plastic-free economy: values manufacturing and delivery workers, small business owners, and consumers more than profits for upper management


26
What FMCG companies and retailers need to do:
 Prioritize ReductionCompanies must publicly commit to phase out single-use plastics immediately, and achieve absolute reductions in the total number of single-use plastic packaging units (not lightweighting existing products).  Companies should prioritize problematic and unnecessary plastics that are frequently littered or harmful to human health, or frequently not recycled despite recyclability claims. FMCG companies must engage retailers to pilot alternative delivery systems. 
Invest in Innovative Alternative Delivery Systems
Companies have incredible power to collaborate with consumers to re-imagine our supermarkets or shopping experiences to deliver products without sacrificing the planet. Be flexible and creative to meet a variety of consumer needs. There are multiple ways that reuse and refill options can work for consumers; no single option will be the best for everybody. 
Be Transparent
Companies must track and annually disclose their use of plastic, including the number, composition, and weight of items containing single-use plastics. Companies should review the policies taken by their trade associations and either work to ensure those associations act in accordance with their values or sever their relationships.

27


28  
21Taylor, Matthew (2017), ‘180 bn investment in plastic factories feeds 
global packaging binge.’ The Guardian. Dec 26, 2017. https://www.
theguardian.com/environment/2017/dec/26/180bn-investment-in-
plastic-factories-feeds-global-packaging-binge  
22Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2016).  ‘New Plastics Economy’ https://
www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications/the-new-plastics-economy-rethinking-the-future-of-plastics
 page 18 
23Taylor, Matthew (2017), op.cit.
 
24See, for example. Luck, M (2019), Chevron-Phillips to build 8B 
plant on Gulf Coast, Chron, ‘July 10, 2019 https://www.chron.com/
business/energy/article/Chevron-Phillips-to-build-8B-plant-on-Gulf-COast-14082601.php
, Luck, M (2019), Exxon to invest 2B into 
Baytown petrochemicals, Chron, May 2 2019 https://www.chron.
com/business/energy/article/Exxon-to-invest-2B-into-Baytown-petrochemical-13813195.php
, and Environmental Integrity Project 
(2018), 31 New or Expanded Petrochemical Plants Approved in 
Hurricane Zone Along TX and LA Gulf Coast, September 26, 2018
https://www.environmentalintegrity.org/news/31-new-or-
expanded-petrochemical-plants/  
25Hazardous Substance Research Centre, South & Southwest Outreach 
program (2003), Environmental Impact of the Petroleum Industry; 
https://cfpub.epa.gov/ncer_abstracts/index.cfm/fuseaction/display.files/fileID/14522
 
26Gulf Restoration Network, website, undated; http://action.
healthygulf.org/our-work/resisting-dirty-energy/offshore-oil-and-gas
 
27Flanders Investment and Trade, undated; https://www.
flandersinvestmentandtrade.com/invest/en/news/ineos-uk-plans-%E2%80%98mega-investment%E2%80%99-in-antwerp-flanders
28The Brussels Times (2019), 2.7 billion investment on its way to 
Antwerp’s Port, 5 January 2019
https://www.brusselstimes.com/all-news/belgium-all-news/employment/52889/2-7-billion-investment-on-its-way-to-antwerp-s-port/
29Griswold, Eliza. ‘A Pipeline, a Protest, and the Battle for Pennsylvania’s 
Political Soul.’ New Yorker , October 26, 2018 https://www.newyorker.
com/news/dispatch/a-pipeline-a-protest-and-the-battle-for-pennsylvanias-political-soul
 
30Maykuth, Andrew. ‘Sunoco begins first exports of Marcellus Shale 
ethane via Marcus Hook terminal.’  Philadelphia Inquirer, March 9, 2016
31Ineos, website. https://www.ineos.com/news/ineos-group/a-first-
for-britain/  Accessed August 25, 2019.
32Food and Water Watch Europe, August 28, 2019. https://www.
foodandwatereurope.org/pressreleases/broad-international-opposition-to-petrochemical-giant-ineos-expansion-plans/
 
33Foster, Malcolm. ‘G20 to take ocean plastic waste as petrochemical 
producers expand in Asia.’  Retuers.  June 13, 2019. https://www.
reuters.com/article/us-g20-summit-plastics/g20-to-tackle-ocean-plastic-waste-as-petrochemical-producers-expand-in-asia-idUSKCN1TE0QJ
 
34Jambeck et al (2015). ‘Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean.’ 
Science. 3 February 2015. Vol 347, Issue 6223. 
35PlasticsEurope (2018) . https://www.plasticseurope.org/
application/files/6315/4510/9658/Plastics_the_facts_2018_AF_web.pdf
  Accessed August 22, 2019.
36Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2016).  ‘New Plastics Economy’, page 18  
https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications/the-new-plastics-economy-rethinking-the-future-of-plastics
 
37Jambeck et al (2015), op.cit. 
38Break Free from Plastic (2018). ‘The Brand Audit report.’  https://
www.breakfreefromplastic.org/globalbrandauditreport2018/ENDNOTES
1World Economic Forum (2016),  Every minute, one garbage truck of 
plastic is dumped into our oceans. This has to stop, James Pennington, 
27 Oct 2016; https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/10/every-
minute-one-garbage-truck-of-plastic-is-dumped-into-our-oceans/  
2UN News (2017), ‘Turn the tide on plastic’ urges UN, as microplastics in 
the seas now outnumber stars in our galaxy, 23 February 2017;
https://news.un.org/en/story/2017/02/552052-turn-tide-plastic-
urges-un-microplastics-seas-now-outnumber-stars-our-galaxy#.WnTQcqinHIV
 
3Geyer, R, Jambeck J, Law, K,  (2017) ‘Production, use, and fate of all 
plastics ever made.’
https://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/7/e1700782  
4Schmidt et al (2017), Export of Plastic Debris by Rivers into the Sea’ 
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.7b02368  
5Rillig, M. (2012).Microplastic in terrestrial ecosystems and the soil? 
Environ. Sci. Technol. https://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1021/
es302011r  
6Wetherbee, GA, Baldwin AK, Ranville JF (2019),  It is raining plastic, 
USGS; https://pubs.er.usgs.gov/publication/ofr20191048  
7See, for example, draft Scientific Consensus Statement on Nano 
and Micro Plastics, presented at Unwrapped conference, June 12, 
2019, Scotts Valley, California. https://drive.google.com/drive/
folders/1jnKYM5ihrBIxNYaX05FK-yeZWFUSEUqr  
  
8CIEL (2017). Fueling Plastics  issue brief. https://www.ciel.org/
wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Fueling-Plastics-Fossils-Plastics-
Petrochemical-Feedstocks.pdf   Accessed Sep 3, 2019
  
9CIEL (2019) . Plastic & Health: The Hidden Costs of a Plastic Planet 
https://www.ciel.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Plastic-and-Health-The-Hidden-Costs-of-a-Plastic-Planet-February-2019.pdf
  
10CIEL (2019). Op. cit.  Page 63. https://www.ciel.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/02/Plastic-and-Health-The-Hidden-Costs-of-a-Plastic-Planet-February-2019.pdf
  Page 25
  
11Plastic & Climate: The Hidden Costs of  Plastic Planet. https://
www.ciel.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Plastic-and-Climate-FINAL-2019.pdf 
Page 19
  
12CIEL (2019b). op.cit.  Page 80
  
13See for example, British Plastics Federation website (undated). 
‘Plastics Additives.’  https://www.bpf.co.uk/plastipedia/additives/
default.aspx   
  
14US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website (2017).  
https://www.cdc.gov/biomonitoring/Phthalates_FactSheet.html   
  
15State of California Environmental Protection Agency, ‘Proposition 65 
List.’ https://oehha.ca.gov/proposition-65/proposition-65-list  
  
16US National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, website.  
‘Bisphenol A.’ https://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/topics/agents/sya-
bpa/index.cfm    
  
17US National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, website. 
op.cit.  ‘Endocrine Disruptors.’ 
  
18It should be noted that similar additives are added to food packaging 
made of other materials, such as aluminum cans, though migration from packaging into the human body may differ based on the material used. See, for example,  
https://www.foodpackagingforum.org/food-
packaging-health/can-coatings  
  
19See, for example, draft Scientific Consensus Statement on Nano and 
Micro Plastics, presented at Unwrapped conference, June 12, 2019, Scotts Valley, California  
20EU Science Hub, 2016. ‘Assessing potential risks from exposure to 
chemical mixtures - case study review.’ https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/
en/science-update/assessing-potential-risks-exposure-chemical-
mixtures-case-study-review  

2939GAIA (2019), Plastics Exposed:  How Waste Assessments and Brand 
Audits are Helping Philippine Cities Fight Plastic Pollution; https://
www.no-burn.org/wp-content/uploads/Plastics-Exposed-2nd-
Edition-Online-Version.pdf  
40Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2019), op.cit. 
41For more information about principles of just transition, see, for 
example, https://climatejusticealliance.org/just-transition/  
42Adapted from the Grassroots Global Justice Alliance. http://
ggjalliance.org/aggregator/sources/48
43Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2019), ‘Reuse’; https://www.
ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/downloads/Reuse.pdf   
44Friends of the Earth Europe (2018), Justifying plastic pollution: the 
shortcomings of Life Cycle Assessments in food packaging policy; 
http://www.foeeurope.org/sites/default/files/materials_and_waste/2018/justifying_plastic_pollution_the_shortcomings_of_lcas_in_food_packaging_policy.pdf
 
45Ministry of Environment and Food (Denmark) (2018), Life 
Cycle Assessment of grocery carrier bags, Environmental 
Project No. 1985, February 2018; https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/
publications/2018/02/978-87-93614-73-4.pdf , page 13, 43
46Dunkin Donuts (2018). website. https://news.dunkindonuts.com/
news/dunkin-donuts-to-eliminate-foam-cups-worldwide-in-2020   
Accessed September 3, 2019. 
47Starbucks announced that some straws would be replaced by a 
raised lid redesign but that FrappucinoTM drinks would be served with a straw made from a “plastic alternative” (
https://stories.starbucks.
com/stories/2019/say-hello-to-the-lid-that-will-replace-a-billion-
straws-a-year/ ) which has been reported as either paper or bio-based 
plastic ( https://stories.starbucks.com/stories/2018/starbucks-
announces-environmental-milestone/ ).  https://www.nytimes.
com/2018/06/15/business/mcdonalds-plastic-straws-britain.html  
48Nestlé (2019) website. https://www.nestle.com/ask-nestle/
environment/answers/tackling-packaging-waste-plastic-bottles  
49Global Business News (2019), Nestlé wrapper breakthrough hailed 
in fight against plastic, July 2 2019; https://www.business-support-
network.org/Globalbiz/nestle-wrapper-breakthrough-hailed-in-fight-against-plastic/
50Environmental Leader (2019), Nestlé Launches Nesquik in Recyclable 
Paper Pouches, March 7 2019;
https://www.environmentalleader.com/2019/03/nestle-nesquik-recyclable/
 
51Nestlé (2019), Nestlé accelerates action to tackle plastic waste, 
Jan 15 2019; https://www.nestle.com/media/pressreleases/
allpressreleases/nestle-action-tackle-plastic-waste  
52See, for example, Agrawal, N (2018) Well-Known Brands Are Moving 
Towards Paper Packaging. Here’s Why? BizNGO,  October 17, 2018
https://bizongo.com/blog/big-brands-paper-packaging/ , or Myers, 
A (2019), A technical breakthrough in confectionery packaging will 
see Nestlé’s ‘YES!’ snack bar range wrapped in recyclable paper for the first time, Confectionery News, 03-Jul-2019 
https://www.
confectionerynews.com/Article/2019/07/03/Ground-breaking-work-
by-Nestle-research-produces-first-recyclable-paper-packaging-on-snack-bar
 
53IUCN (undated), Raising the profile of primary forests including intact 
forest landscapes, website https://www.iucn.org/theme/forests/our-
work/primary-and-intact-forest-landscapes/raising-profile-primary-forests-including-intact-forest-landscapes
.
54Environmental Paper Network (2019, The state of the global paper 
industry 2018; https://environmentalpaper.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018/04/StateOfTheGlobalPaperIndustry2018_FullReport-Final-1.pdf
 p.3)
55Environmental Paper Network (2019b), A burning issue: Large scale 
industrial tree plantations and climate change, 20 February 2019; 
https://environmentalpaper.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Forest-fires-plantations-EPN-discussion-document-20-Feb-2019.pdf
56Bastin et al (2019). ‘The global tree restoration potential.’ https://
science.sciencemag.org/content/365/6448/76   See also, Greenpeace 
International (2019), Deforestation, meat production driving climate 
crisis, August 8 2019;  https://www.greenpeace.org/international/
press-release/23685/deforestation-meat-production-driving-
climate-crisis/  and  IPCC Land Use report https://www.ipcc.ch/
report/srccl/  57Staub, Colin (2018),  ‘Paper recycling sector reflects on a year in flux.’ 
Resource Recycling, November 6, 2018 https://resource-recycling.com/
recycling/2018/11/06/paper-recycling-sector-reflects-on-a-year-in-
flux/  
58Environmental Paper Network (2019c), op.cit. 
59Picheta, R (2019), McDonald’s new paper straws aren’t recyclable — 
but its axed plastic ones were, CNN Business, August 5, 2019; https://
www.cnn.com/2019/08/05/business/mcdonalds-paper-straws-recyclable-scli-gbr-intl/index.html
 
60Nestlé (2019), Nestlé launches YES! snack bars in recyclable paper 
wrapper, July 2 2019; https://www.nestle.com/media/news/yes-
snack-bars-recyclable-paper-wrapper  
61See, for example, FSC http://ga2014.fsc.org/dollars-and-sense  
62For example, Unilever had stated will give preference to FSC but 
obtain PEFC-certified paper for its packaging where it cannot obtain 
FSC-certified, though its current paper policy notes that it accepts 
both schemes seemingly equally https://www.greenchipstocks.
com/articles/unilever-plans-for-100-sustainable-packaging/78832  
.   https://www.unilever.com/Images/unilever-paper-and-board-
packaging-policy-2018_tcm244-529491_en.pdf
63Greenpeace International press release (2018).  https://www.
greenpeace.org/international/press-release/15589/greenpeace-international-to-not-renew-fsc-membership/
 
64Greenpeace Southeast Asia press release (2015) ‘‘Greenpeace, RAN 
warn of forest certification greenwash.’ https://www.greenpeace.
org/southeastasia/press/591/greenpeace-ran-warn-of-forest-certification-greenwash/
 
65Intact Forest Landscapes website (undated). http://www.
intactforests.org/  
66Greenpeace Global Mapping Hub. 2017. https://maps.greenpeace.
org/project/impact-of-industrial-logging-on-intact-forest-landscape-ifl-in-congo-basin/
67Greenpeace Russia (2017), The major problem of FSC in Russia;   
http://www.forestforum.ru/viewtopic.php?f=28&t=20791
68SCA (2017) investor presentation. http://cloud.magneetto.
com/sca/2017_0531_cmd2017_2/view ; Bioenergy International, 
website (2019). https://bioenergyinternational.com/
biochemicals-materials/sca-investing-sek-7-5-billion-in-kraftliner-capacity-expansion-at-obbola-mill?utm_source=Bioenergy+International+newsletter&utm_campaign=68a135c540-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2019_05_22_07_26_
COPY_01&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_dcf37b26af-
68a135c540-77569249
  
69Greenpeace (2019). Countdown to Extinction , 10 June 2019, page 93; 
https://www.greenpeace.org/international/publication/22247/countdown-extinction-report-deforestation-commodities-soya-palm-oil
  
70Nestlé (2019), Nestlé pulp mill transparency; https://www.nestle.
com/asset-library/documents/creating-shared-value/raw-materials/nestle-pulp-mill-transparency.pdf
 
71Greenpeace (2019), Countdown to Extinction  op.cit.  page 93
72Coca-Cola website (2016). ‘PlantBottle™ Packaging.’ www.coca-
colaafrica.com/stories/sustainability-packaging-plantbottle#
73Barrett, Axel. “Danone Uses Bioplastics Bottle for So Delicious 
Brand.” Bioplastics News, 27 Jun. 2018, http://bioplasticsnews.
com/2018/06/27/danone-wave-bioplastics-plantbased-bottle-packaging
  
74Nestlé Waters. “Danone and Nestlé Waters Launch NaturALL Bottle 
Alliance with California Startup to Develop 100% Bio-Based Bottles.” 2 
Mar 2017 www.nestleusa.com/media/pressreleases/nestle-waters-
launch-alliance-naturall-bio-based-bottles
75Greener Package (2019), PepsiCo joins NaturALL Bottle Alliance; 
https://www.greenerpackage.com/bioplastics/pepsico_joins_naturall_bottle_alliance
 
76European Bioplastics website (undated). https://www.european-
bioplastics.org/faq-items/what-are-the-advantages-of-bioplastic-products/
  Accessed Sep 3 2019
77European Bioplastics (website).  https://www.european-bioplastics.
org/market/    Accessed Sep 3, 2019. 

3078Greener Package (2019), op.cit. 
79Nestlé (2017), Danone and Nestlé Waters Launch NaturALL Bottle 
Alliance with California Startup to Develop 100% Bio-Based Bottles, 2 
March 2017;
https://www.nestleusa.com/media/pressreleases/nestle-waters-
launch-alliance-naturall-bio-based-bottles  
80Institute for Bioplastics and Biocomposites, Biopolymers: Facts and 
Statistics, Edition 4. Hannover, Germany: IfBB, 2017.
81Giljum, Stefan, et al. (2016), Land Under Pressure: Global Impacts of 
the EU Bioeconomy. Brussels: Friends of the Earth Europe, 2016. www.
foeeurope.org/sites/default/files/resource_use/2016/land-under-pressure-report-global-impacts-eu-bioeconomy.pdf
 
82Díaz S et al (2019) ‘Summary for policymakers of the global 
assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the 
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, advance unedited version’ 6 May 2019 
https://
www.ipbes.net/system/tdf/spm_global_unedited_advance.
pdf?file=1&type=node&id=35245  
83IPCC (2014). Climate change 2014: Mitigation of climate change’ 
Cambridge University Press, page 820, figure 11.2;  https://www.ipcc.
ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/ipcc_wg3_ar5_full.pdf   
84Giljum, Stefan, et al. (2016), op.cit.
85Greene, et al. (2018), ‘Biodegradation of Biodegradable and 
Compostable Plastics under Industrial Compost, Marine and Anaerobic 
Digestion’.  http://hendun.org/journals/EEO/PDF/EEO-18-1-104.pdf  
86Degradable plastic breaks apart based on physical and chemical 
impact, while biodegradable plastic specifically degrades based on the action of naturally-occurring microorganisms such as bacteria, fungi and algae. See 
http://www.biobags.co.uk/faq/biodegradable.htm  
87UNEP (2015), ‘ Biodegradable Plastics and Marine Litter: 
Misconceptions, concerns and impacts on impacts on marine environments.’ 
https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/
handle/20.500.11822/7468/-Biodegradable_Plastics_and_Marine_
Litter_Misconceptions,_concerns_and_impacts_on_marine_environments-2015BiodegradablePlasticsAndMarineLitter.pdf.pdf?sequence=3
 
88Laville, S (2019), Biodegradable’ Plastic Bags Survive Three Years in 
Soil and Sea. The Guardian, 29 Apr. 2019; www.theguardian.com/
environment/2019/apr/29/biodegradable-plastic-bags-survive-three-years-in-soil-and-sea
 
89Napper, I.E. & Thompson, R.C. (2019). ‘Environmental Deterioration of 
Biodegradable, Oxo-biodegradable, Compostable, and Conventional 
Plastic Carrier Bags in the Sea, Soil, and Open-Air Over a 3-Year Period.’  Environmental Science & Technology  53(9): 4775-4783 
https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.est.8b06984 .
90Vieira et al (2011) Natural-based plasticizers and biopolymer 
films: A review. European Polymer Journal 47,254–263. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2010.12.011  
91ASTM Standardization News, (1999),  ASTM standards help define 
and grow a biodegradable plastics industry, October 1999; https://
www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/public_comments/
guides-use-environmental-marketing-claims-project-no.p954501-00181%C2%A0/00181-56737.pdf
 
92European Bioplastics website (undated). https://www.european-
bioplastics.org/faq-items/what-are-the-required-circumstances-for-a-compostable-product-to-compost/
  Accessed August 20, 2019 
93European Bioplastics. (2018) ‘Bioplastics Facts and Figures’ https://
docs.european-bioplastics.org/publications/EUBP_Facts_and_figures.pdf
  Accessed Aug 20 2019
94Buranyi, Stephen. ‘The Plastic backlash: what’s behind our sudden 
rage - and will it make a difference.’  The Guardian, November 13, 2018. 
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/nov/13/the-plastic-backlash-whats-behind-our-sudden-rage-and-will-it-make-a-difference
  Accessed August 22, 2019.
95Geyer, R, Jambeck J, Law, K,  (2017), op.cit. 
96Greenpeace Malaysia (2018), ‘Malaysia and the Broken Global 
Recycling System.’ ‘ https://www.greenpeace.org/southeastasia/
publication/549/the-recycling-myth/  
97GAIA, (2019b), Discarded: Communities on the frontlines of the 
global plastic crisis, 22 April 2019; https://wastetradestories.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/04/Discarded-Report-April-22-pages.pdf  98Greenpeace Spain (2019), When Recycling Is Not Enough,  (Spanish 
only); https://es.greenpeace.org/es/wp-content/uploads/
sites/3/2019/03/reciclar_no_es_suficiente.pdf
99Dobush, Grace (2019), The Brutal Reality Of Being The World’s ‘Best’ 
Recycler’,  Huffpost . July 19. 2019; https://www.huffpost.com/entry/
germany-recycling-reality_n_5d30fccbe4b004b6adad52f8  
100Plastics Europe (2018) ‘Plastics the Facts 2018’. https://www.
plasticseurope.org/application/files/6315/4510/9658/Plastics_the_facts_2018_AF_web.pdf
 
101United States Environmental Protection Agency. (undated). ‘Plastics: 
Material-Specific Data.’ https://www.epa.gov/facts-and-figures-
about-materials-waste-and-recycling/plastics-material-specific-data
  Accessed August 25, 2019.
102Dell, Jan. (2019). ‘Six times more plastic waste is burned in US than 
is recycled.’ Analysis was done using both 2015 EPA data and US 
Census Bureau data. https://www.plasticpollutioncoalition.org/
pft/2019/4/29/six-times-more-plastic-waste-is-burned-in-us-than-is-
recycled   
103Closed Loop Partner (2019). ‘Accelerating Circular Supply Chains 
for Plastics.’ http://www.closedlooppartners.com/wp-content/
uploads/2019/04/CLP_Circular_Supply_Chains_for_Plastics.pdf  
104Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2016), ‘New Plastics Economy: 
Rethinking the Future of Plastic’. https://www.newplasticseconomy.
org/about/publications/report-2016  
105Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2016), op.cit. 
106Goldsberry, Clare. ‘Flexible packaging seeing growth in all market 
segments.’ Plastics Today, November 5, 2019.
https://www.plasticstoday.com/packaging/flexible-packaging-seeing-growth-all-market-segments/106685753459758
 
107Friends of the Earth Europe (2018), Unwrapped: how throwaway 
plastic is failing to solve Europe’s food waste problem (and what we 
need to do instead), 10 April 2018, page 9; http://www.foeeurope.org/
unwrapped-throwaway-plastic-food-waste  
108Transparency Market Research, Global Sachet Packaging Market. 
Report held by Greenpeace.
109Posadas, Dennis (2014), Sachets help low-income communities but 
are a waste nightmare, The Guardian. May 22, 2014. https://www.
theguardian.com/sustainable-business/sachet-packaging-low-
income-communities-waste-nightmare  
110Mahajan, Vijay. ‘How Unilever Reaches Rural Consumers in Emerging 
Markets. Harvard Business Review. December 14, 2016. https://hbr.
org/2016/12/how-unilever-reaches-rural-consumers-in-emerging-markets
111In Nestlé’s recent “negative list” of materials it will phase out, 
“non-recyclable paper/plastic combinations” is on the list, but not the 
combination of plastic/foil which characterizes much of the sachets on the market is not. Nestlé (2019). 
https://www.nestle.com/asset-
library/documents/media/press-release/2019-january/nestle-
action-tackle-plastic-waste-negative-list.pdf
112Unilever website. (2018). https://www.unilever.com/news/news-
and-features/Feature-article/2018/our-solution-for-recycling-plastic-sachets-takes-another-step-forward.html
  Accessed August 
25, 2019.
113Manila Bulletin (2018), Unilever PH pushes plastic sachet recycling 
project, January 11, 2018; https://business.mb.com.ph/2018/01/09/
unilever-ph-pushes-plastic-sachet-rcycling-project/
114Unilever (2017), Unilever Strengthens Waste Recovery Efforts, 
5 August 2017; https://www.unilever.com.ph/news/press-
releases/2017/MisisWalastikProgramCynthiaVillar.html
115Various news accounts give various figures for both the first year 
and subsequent years, ranging from 4.5 million to 10 million collected. 
2014 figures have been reported at 7.5 million. Remo AR (2013, Sachet recovery program may help stop floods, September 14, 2013; 
https://
business.inquirer.net/142911/sachet-recovery-program-may-help-
stop-floods#ixzz5zR88mXLB
116Greenpeace (2018), A Crisis of Convenience: the corporations behind 
the plastics pollution pandemic, 23 October 2018, page 10; https://
www.greenpeace.org/international/publication/19007/a-crisis-of-convenience-the-corporations-behind-the-plastics-pollution-pandemic/
  
117GAIA (2019), op.cit. 

31118CreaCycle Gmbh, website (undated).  https://www.creacycle.de/en/
the-process.html  
119Unilever website (2018), Our solution for recycling plastic sachets 
takes another step forward, 08/11/2018; https://www.unilever.com/
news/news-and-features/Feature-article/2018/our-solution-for-
recycling-plastic-sachets-takes-another-step-forward.html
120GAIA, (2019b), op.cit. 
121Geyer, R., Jambeck J., Law, K.  (2017), op.cit.  
122Wheeling, Kate. ‘The EPA Blames Six Asian Nations that the US 
Exports Plastic Waste to For Ocean Pollution.’ Pacific Standard, July 15, 
2019; https://psmag.com/environment/the-epa-blames-six-asian-
nations-that-the-u-s-exports-plastic-waste-to-for-ocean-pollution  
123GAIA, (2019b), op.cit. page 9
124GAIA, (2019), op.cit. 
125GAIA, (2019), op.cit.page 12 
126Schmidt et al (2017), op.cit.
127Jambeck, J. et al (2015), op.cit. 
128Greenpeace East Asia. (2019), Data from the global plastics waste 
trade 2016-2018 and the offshore impact of China’s foreign waste 
import ban, 23 April 2019; http://www.greenpeace.org/eastasia/
Global/eastasia/publications/campaigns/toxics/GPEA%20
Plastic%20waste%20trade%20-%20research%20briefing-v1.pdf
129Greenpeace East Asia. (2019), op.cit. 
130Greenpeace International (2019), New research exposes a crisis in 
the global trade of “recyclable” plastics, 23 April 2019; https://www.
greenpeace.org/international/press-release/21789/new-research-exposes-a-crisis-in-the-global-trade-of-recyclable-plastics/
 
131Cancian, Dan. ‘Malaysia Has Started Returning Tons of Trash to the 
West: ‘We Will Not Be the Dumping Ground of the World.’ Newsweek, 
May 28, 2019. https://www.newsweek.com/plastic-waste-malaysia-
minister-yeo-bee-bin-south-east-asia-trash-1436969  
132Sarmiento, Prime. ‘ASEAN steps up to stop junk imports’ China 
Daily. August 5, 2019. http://global.chinadaily.com.cn/a/201908/05/
WS5d4788d5a310cf3e35563dac.html  
133CIEL (2019),‘Plastic & Health: The Hidden Costs of a Plastic Planet, 
February 2019; https://www.ciel.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/
Plastic-and-Health-The-Hidden-Costs-of-a-Plastic-Planet-February-2019.pdf
 
134Plastics Europe (2018). ‘Plastics: The Facts.’ https://www.
plasticseurope.org/application/files/6315/4510/9658/Plastics_the_facts_2018_AF_web.pdf
 
135CIEL (2019), op.cit. page 44
136Dell, Jan. (2019), Six times more plastic waste is burned in US than is 
recycled, April 30 2019; https://www.plasticpollutioncoalition.org/
pft/2019/4/29/six-times-more-plastic-waste-is-burned-in-us-than-is-recycled
  
137GAIA (2018). ‘Facts about WTE incinerators.’ https://www.no-burn.
org/wp-content/uploads/GAIA-Facts-about-WTE-incinerators-Jan2018-1.pdf
138GAIA (2018), op.cit. 
139GAIA (2018b). ‘Garbage Incineration is Dirty Energy.’  https://www.
pfpi.net/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/GAIA-garbage-incineration-factsheet.pdf
 
140Ana Isabel Baptista AI and Perovich A (2019), US Municipal Solid 
Waste Incinerators: An Industry in Decline, The Tishman Environment 
and Design Center at The New School, May 2019; https://static1.
squarespace.com/static/5d14dab43967cc000179f3d2/t/5d5c4bea0d5
9ad00012d220e/1566329840732/CR_GaiaReportFinal_05.21.pdf  
141Business World (2019), Nestlé Philippines, Republic Cement to 
co-process post-consumer waste . May 17, 2019; https://www.
bworldonline.com/nestle-philippines-republic-cement-to-co-process-post-consumer-waste/
 
142Zero Waste Europe et al (2016). Civil society statement on the 
practice of waste incineration in cement kilns. November 16, 2016. 
https://zerowasteeurope.eu/2016/11/civil-society-statement-on-the-practice-of-waste-incineration-in-cement-kilns/
 143CIEL(2019b), op.cit. https://www.ciel.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/02/Plastic-and-Health-The-Hidden-Costs-of-a-Plastic-Planet-February-2019.pdf
144Hahladakis, J. et al (2019),  An overview of chemical additives present 
in plastics: Migration, release, fate and environmental impact during 
their use, disposal and recycling.’ Journal of Hazardous Materials, 
Volume 344, 15 February 2018.  https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S030438941730763X  
145Closed Loop Partner (2019). ‘Accelerating Circular Supply Chains 
for Plastics.’ http://www.closedlooppartners.com/wp-content/
uploads/2019/04/CLP_Circular_Supply_Chains_for_Plastics.pdf  
146Chemical & Engineering News, 2018, Chemistry may have solutions 
to our plastic trash problem, June 15, 2018,  Volume 96, Issue 25 
https://cen.acs.org/environment/pollution/Chemistry-solutions-
plastic-trash-problem/96/i25   
147Closed Loop Partner (2019) op.cit, or Differences in Recyclability 
and Recycling of Common Consumer Plastic Resins; https://
files.nc.gov/ncdeq/Environmental%20Assistance%20and%20Customer%20Service/Plastic%20Bottles/Other%20Resources/RecyclingCommonConsumerPlasticResins.pdf
 
148Recycling Today (2019), The potential of polypropylene, July 17 2019; 
https://www.recyclingtoday.com/article/the-recycling-potential-of-polypropylene/
 
149Zero Waste Europe (2019), ‘El Dorado of chemical recycling.’ https://
zerowasteeurope.eu/wp-content/uploads/edd/2019/08/2019_08_29_zwe_study_chemical_recycling.pdf
 
150Zero Waste Europe (2019), op.cit.   
151GAIA (2017).  ‘Waste Gasification & Pyrolysis: High Risk, Low Yield 
Processes for Waste Management’ https://www.no-burn.org/report-
reveals-billions-wasted-on-gasification-over-30-years-of-failures/
152Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2019), op.cit 
153SABIC, website, (2019), SABIC PIONEERS FIRST PRODUCTION OF 
CERTIFIED CIRCULAR POLYMERS, 13 February 2019; https://www.
sabic.com/en/news/17390-sabic-pioneers-first-production-of-certified-circular-polymers
 
154Eco Business (2019), Sabic and customers launch certified circular 
polymers from mixed plastic waste https://www.eco-business.com/
press-releases/sabic-and-customers-launch-certified-circular-polymers-from-mixed-plastic-waste/
 
155Plastics News Europe (2016), Tupperware puts Sabic certified 
circular polymers into housewares, May 16 2019; https://www.
plasticsnewseurope.com/news/tupperware-puts-sabic-certified-circular-polymers-housewares
 
156Closed Loop Partner (2019), op.cit..
157Closed Loop Partner (2019), op.cit. page 21
158American Chemistry Council, website (undated). ‘What are 
plastics-to-fuel technologies and how should they be regulated?’ 
https://plastics.americanchemistry.com/Product-Groups-and-Stats/Plastics-to-Fuel/Infographic-What-Are-Plastics-to-Fuel-Technologies-and-How-Should-They-Be-Regulated.pdf
 
159American Chemistry Council, website (undated). ‘The Chemical 
Recycling Alliance.’ https://plastics.americanchemistry.com/
Chemical-Recycling-Alliance.html  
160https://plastics.americanchemistry.com/Chemical-Recycling-
Alliance.html
161Alliance to End Plastic Waste (2019), Plastic Waste and the Circular 
Economy https://endplasticwaste.org/latest/plastic-waste-and-the-
circular-economy/  
162Wagner, Rick (2018), In My Opinion: Launchpad for circularity,  
Resource Recycling. January 25, 2018. https://resource-recycling.
com/recycling/2018/01/25/opinion-launchpad-circularity/  
163https://endplasticwaste.org/latest/alliance-to-end-plastic-waste-
welcomes-12-new-companies-from-across-the-plastics-value-chain/
164Laville, Sandra (2019),  Founders of Plastic Waste Alliance 
Investing Billions in New Plantshttps://www.theguardian.com/
environment/2019/jan/21/founders-of-plastic-waste-alliance-investing-billions-in-new-plants
 
165Chemical & Engineering News, 2018, op.cit. 

32166See, for example, PureCycle website (2019) https://purecycletech.
com/2019/03/purecycle-technologies-partners-with-milliken-
nestle-to-accelerate-revolutionary-plastics-recycling/  and Nestle 
website (2019). https://www.nestle.com/media/pressreleases/
allpressreleases/nestle-action-tackle-plastic-waste  
167Plastics Recycling Update (2018) Recycling startups ink deals with 
virgin plastics makers, May 4, 2018; https://resource-recycling.
com/plastics/2018/05/04/recycling-startups-ink-deals-with-virgin-plastics-makers/
 
168Closed Loop Partner (2019), op.cit. page 16
169Closed Loop Partner (2019), op.cit. 
170Unilever (2018), Unilever to pioneer breakthrough food packaging 
technology together with Ioniqa & Indorama Ventures, April 4 2018;
https://www.unilever.com/news/press-releases/2018/unilever-to-pioneer-breakthrough-food-packaging-technology-together-with-ioniqa-and-indorama-ventures.html
 
171Closed Loop Partner (2019), op.cit..
172PureCycle (2019), PureCycle Technologies Partners with Milliken, 
Nestlé to Accelerate Revolutionary Plastics Recycling, March 13 
2019;  https://purecycletech.com/2019/03/purecycle-technologies-
partners-with-milliken-nestle-to-accelerate-revolutionary-plastics-
recycling/
173PureCycle (2019), PureCycle Technologies signed an agreement with 
L’Oréal for the supply of Ultra-Pure Recycled Polypropylene, July 18 
2019; https://purecycletech.com/2019/07/purecycle-technologies-
signed-agreement-with-loreal-for-the-supply-of-ultra-pure-
recycled-polypropylene/  
174Loop Industries, Inc. Form 10-Q.  July 8, 2019.  Accessed from 
the SEC Edgar database https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/
data/1504678/000165495419008030/lp_10q.htm
175See, for example, Ioniqa website http://www.ioniqa.com/circular-
economy/  
176Based on an initial Greenpeace analysis of available materials 
of companies profiled  in the Closed Loop Partners 2019 report, 
ACCELERATING CIRCULAR SUPPLY CHAINS FOR  PLASTICS; https://
www.closedlooppartners.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/CLP_
Circular_Supply_Chains_for_Plastics.pdf   This is also substantiated by 
Zero Waste Europe (2019), op.cit. 
177Zero Waste Europe (2019), op.cit. 
178Chemical & Engineering News, 2018, op.cit. Ultimately “chemically 
recyclable polymers are the best solution to the problem of plastic 
trash …. Still, intrinsically recyclable plastics are a long way from commercial reality. Besides technical hurdles, there are also economic ones.”Zero Waste Europe (2019), op.cit. “The potential roll-out of such technologies at industrial scale can only be expected from 2025-2030 and this is an important factor when planning the transition to aCircular Economy and notably the decarbonisation agenda.”
179For Greenpeace’s definitions of hazardous chemicals, please see 
glossary for Greenpeace (2018), Crisis of Convenience, op.cit. 
PHOTO CREDITS
Cover © Greenpeace
Merci Ferrer stands and looks at the mountain of trash at a dumpsite in Dumaguete City, 
Philippines.
Page 1 © Bente Stachowske / Greenpeace
Plastic rubbish floats covered by oil in Havana harbour, Cuba.
Page 2 © Fully Syafi / Greenpeace
A plastic bottle of Nestle stacks among imported plastic waste at a dumpsite in Mojokerto, East Java, Indonesia. According to a Greenpeace report, Southeast Asia countries including Thailand, Vietnam, 
Malaysia and Indonesia have accepted more imported plastic waste, since China banned plastic 
waste imports in January 2018.
Page 3 © Nandakumar S. Haridas / Greenpeace
Greenpeace Malaysia has been conducting a field investigation on the broken system of recycling and how it impacts Malaysian society. The findings were shocking: a new ‘dump site’ of plastic waste 
from more than 19 countries -- most of them are developed countries. The investigation found illegal 
practices, and blatant violations causing environmental pollution as well as harming people’s health conditions.
Page 4 © Greenpeace
Global Anti Incineration Alliance Philippines Executive Director Froilan Grate shows a discarded pack of a Nestle product as he stands on a trash-filled shoreline along Manila Bay in Navotas City, 
Philippines.
Page 6 © Ulet Ifansasti / Greenpeace
Young acacia plantation beside peatland forest inside the PT Sumatra Riang Lestari (PT SRL) 
pulpwood concession in Rupat Island, Bengkalis Regency, Riau Province. PT SRL is a supplier to 
APRIL, the pulp & paper division of the RGE Group. On 28 January 2014, APRIL announced its 
intention to continue to use rainforest logs until at least 2020.
Page 8 © Christian Åslund / Greenpeace
Aerial view of SCA’s, tree nursery in Timrå, the boreal region of Sweden. It is the biggest nursery of its kind where SCA among other plants produce the invasive species Lodgepole Pine (Pinus Contorta) 
before being planted out in nature, often replacing natural forests.
Page 10 © Fred Dott / Greenpeace
Page 12 © Kosaku Hamada / Greenpeace
Many tarry residues were found at Chinase beach and dead streaked shearwater was found and oil was attached to its feathers. The dead cause remains unknown, it is under investigation by Ministry 
of Environment.
Page 14 © Vivek M. / Greenpeace
Ananthamma, a local woman, runs a small shop from her home in Vadigere village, an activity 
enabled due to the time saved by running her kitchen on biogas. The community in Bagepalli has 
pioneered the use of renewable energy in its daily life thanks to the biogas Clean Development 
Mechanism (CDM) project started in 2006.
Page 16 © Greenpeace
A trash-filled river is seen in Barangay Bagumbayan North in Navotas City, Philippines.
Page 18 © Greenpeace
In occasion of World Clean Up Day Greenpeace Africa, along with Break Free From Plastic movement, organized cleanup activities and brand audits on 5 continents and inspired people to 
participate. The brand audit results will put the spotlight on big brands and hold them accountable 
for their contribution to the plastic pollution crisis.
Page 21 © Marco Garcia / Greenpeace
Campaigners visit James Campbell National Wildlife Refuge on Oahu Island to document and bear witness to plastic pollution. Greenpeace is tracing plastic found in the ocean, communities, and 
shorelines back to the companies that produce it. The activity is part of Greenpeace visit with the 
Arctic Sunrise ship.
Page 22 © Simran McKenna / Greenpeace
Hurricane Harvey aerials. A refinery storage tank sits surrounded by flood waters in Baytown, Texas more than a week after Hurricane Harvey slammed into the area. The human impacts of Hurricane 
Harvey have been staggering, and the greatest concern is for the people struggling in its aftermath. 
This disaster makes clear once again that coastal Texas and the wider Gulf region are on the frontlines of sea level rise and extreme weather heightened by climate change, as well as the toxic 
impacts from fossil fuel infrastructure.
Page 23 © Nandakumar S. Haridas / Greenpeace
Greenpeace Malaysia has been conducting a field investigation on the broken system of recycling 
and how it impacts Malaysian society. The findings were shocking: a new ‘dump site’ of plastic waste 
from more than 19 countries -- most of them are developed countries. The investigation found illegal 
practices, and blatant violations causing environmental pollution as well as harming people’s health conditions.
Page 24 © Soojung Do / Greenpeace
The market, which aims to be zero-waste, requires the sellers to bring products with no single-use plastic packaging and to encourage the up-cycling of items.
Page 25 © Jung Park / Greenpeace
Seoul office created ‘Plastic Zero Grocery store map’ with volunteers in April and ‘Mangwon market’ is one of the places in the Map. In this traditional market, people can purchase many items with 
their own carrier bags to avoid plastic package. Also, this market runs a campaign called ‘Almaeng’ 
meaning packaging free. The market tries to encourage people to shop without plastic bags in many ways such as rending eco-bags for free and providing discount coupons once customers bring their 
own containers.
Page 26 © Isabelle Rose Povey / Greenpeace
Carrots with no packaging for sale in a supermarket.
Waitrose supermarket Unpacked scheme offers customers a range of unpackaged products with 
the aim of saving thousands of tonnes of unnecessary plastic. Refillable zones have dispensers for 
customers to refill their own containers.
Page 33 © Greenpeace
Merci Ferrer walks on a dumpsite in Dumaguete City, Philippines.
Back cover © Ecoton / Fully Handoko
People collect plastic scraps and paper to take to a local factory, where it is burned as fuel. One small truckload earns 10 USD. Bangkun Village, Pungging District, Mojokerto Regency.

33