# Archivo original: kimberly-clark-investing.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:16 -03 2025

APRIL 2005


1
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................................. 2-3
I INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................................................... 4-5
II  CONSUMER DEMAND FOR “GREEN” AND SOCIALLY RESPONSIBLE PRODUCTS .................................. 6-8
 SIDEBAR: CANCELLED CONTRACTS ............................................................................................................ 7
 SIDEBAR: PUBLISHING: A SHIFTING SECTOR .......................................................................................... 8-9
III SOCIALLY RESPONSIBLE INVESTMENT ................................................................................................. 9-11
 SIDEBAR: SUPPLIER ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT .......................................................................... 11
IV THE FINANCES OF SUCCESS ................................................................................................................ 13-14
V THE BRAND, THE MARKET AND THE CORPORATE CAMPAIGN .......................................................... 14-15
 SIDEBAR: 500 CORPORATIONS ASKED TO PROTECT BOREAL ................................................................. 15
VI KLEENEX, KIMBERLY-CLARK AND FORESTS ........................................................................................ 16-18
VII CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................................................. 19
1

1
Kimberly-Clark Corporation, the world’s largest 
tissue product manufacturer, prides itself on its 
environmental commitments. Yet the company 
famous for its Kleenex brand tissue products is the focal point of continued controversy over its 
purchase of pulp from unsustainably logged ancient 
Boreal forests. This criticism comes at a time when environmental criteria are increasingly playing a 
key role in purchasing and investment decisions. 
Approximately 30 percent of American adults - more 
than 63 million shoppers - take into consideration a 
product’s environmental, health, social justice and sustainability values when purchasing goods and 
services. Ninety percent of Americans would 
consider switching to a competitor’s products or services if they discovered a company was 
behaving illegally or unethically. 
Also gaining prominence is socially responsible 
investment (SRI). SRI expands the traditional 
investment decision-making process by adding social and environmental standards to the mix of 
considerations. Assets in socially screened 
investment portfolios under professional manage-ment topped the US$2 trillion mark for the ﬁ  rst time 
ever in 2001.  Those companies with negative 
environmental standards and/or which are subject to environmental controversy are increasingly being 
dropped from SRI portfolios. 
Many companies now produce corporate social 
responsibility (CSR) reports. Any company that tries to “greenwash” its actions through corporate public 
relations is likely to be called to account as public 
and institutional pressure for better corporate citizenship mounts. Many companies adopt CSR 
policies in order to enhance their reputations and 
brand image, gain market share, improve reputation with investors, cut costs and improve their bottom 
line. Many studies indicate that companies that 
embrace CSR perform just as well as - and some-times better than - non-CSR companies in their 
sector. Similarly, many SRI funds do as well if not 
better than regular investment funds. 
Recent consumer and investor campaigns have 
been very successful at persuading global compa-nies to help preserve ancient and endangered for-
ests by changing their sourcing policies. Companies 
like Home Depot, Boise Cascade, Staples, and Of-ﬁ  ce Depot have all been on the receiving end of international corporate campaigns organized 
by environment and social justice organizations. 
Often very damaging to brands and public proﬁ  le, these campaigns have resulted in lost or cancelled 
contracts, shareholder resolutions and negative 
publicity. 
Kimberly-Clark is listed on the Calvert Social 
Index for socially responsible companies that, among other attributes, are considered to have 
good environmental management. However, the 
company’s continued use of ancient forest ﬁ  ber is a glaring deﬁ  cit that is not addressed in its envi-
ronmental policy. As a result and despite growing 
criticism, Kimberly-Clark continues to source virgin tree ﬁ  ber from Canada’s Boreal forest, buying pulp 
from logging companies that engage in unsustainable 
clearcutting. The Boreal forest is the last large ancient and intact forest left in North America and 
is home to 40 percent of North America’s waterfowl. 
It is also provides the habitat of other animal spe-cies, including lynx, grizzly bear, wolf and woodland 
caribou, a species at risk. Evolving since the last ice 
age 10,000 years ago, the forest supports a rich cul-tural legacy - more than 80 percent of Canada’s First 
Nations communities are based in the Boreal.
Boreal forest pulp is used to make Kimberly-Clark’s 
disposable tissue products, including well-known 
brands such as Kleenex, Viva, Scott and Cottonelle
1. 
Less than 19 percent of the pulp that Kimberly-Clark 
uses in North America comes from recycled sources. 
Notable competitors such as Cascades use much higher proportions of recycled and sustainably 
sourced pulp. 
2

International environmental organizations have 
recently launched public campaigns against 
Kimberly-Clark for its continued role in the 
destruction of ancient Boreal forests. They are demanding an increase in the use of recycled ﬁ  ber 
and an end to the sourcing of ﬁ  ber from ancient and 
endangered forests. 
With the growing demand for “green” products, the 
rise of socially responsible investing, the success of companies that practice genuine corporate social 
responsibility and the negative publicity associated 
with international consumer campaigns, Kimberly-Clark’s continued use of Boreal forest ﬁ  ber runs 
counter to its claims that it is an environmentally 
responsible company. In the current market environment, assuming financial outlooks are 
similar and given the current controversy surround-
ing the source of the ﬁ  ber for its tissue products, Kimberly-Clark does not represent a sound invest-
ment at this time. 
1 Note: Scott and Cottonelle are made by Kimberly-Clark in the USA only. 
In Canada they are made by Scott Paper under license from Kimberly-Clark. Kimberly-Clark’s environmental 
commitments, while strong in some 
areas such as toxics reduction, fall considerably short in the area 
of Boreal forest conservation and recycled content of its disposable 
tissue products. 
Less than 19 percent
of the pulp that Kimberly-Clark 
uses in North America comes from recycled sources.
3
KIMBERLY-CLARK CONTINUES 
TO SOURCE VIRGIN TREE FIBER 
FROM CANADA’S BOREAL FOREST, BUYING PULP FROM LOGGING COMPANIES THAT ENGAGE IN UNSUSTAINABLE CLEARCUTTING. 

Kimberly-Clark Corporation, the world’s largest 
tissue product manufacturer, prides itself on its 
environmental commitments. In March 2002, 
Kimberly-Clark was placed on the Calvert Social Index for socially responsible companies that, 
among other attributes, are considered to have 
strong environmental management. Recently, how-ever a signiﬁ  cant and potentially troublesome gap 
has emerged in Kimberly-Clark’s environmental 
commitments.
To manufacture its tissue products, including the 
popular brand Kleenex, Kimberly-Clark uses virgin 
ﬁ  ber from Canada’s Boreal forest. The Boreal forest, which stretches from the Canada-Alaska border to 
Labrador, is the largest tract of ancient forest left 
in North America. It has evolved since the last Ice Age, more than 10,000 years ago, and represents 
one-quarter of the world’s remaining ancient for-
ests. It is estimated that nearly 30 percent of the virgin fiber that Kimberly-Clark uses each year 
comes from Canada’s ancient Boreal forest. Out of 
growing concern for the health of this forest region, in recent months, international campaigns to pro-
tect the last large and intact areas of Boreal forest 
have been launched by leading conservation organi-zations. The Boreal forest has become a controver-
sial source for pulp used to make paper products.
Just over a year ago, eleven resource companies, conservation groups and First Nations announced 
the establishment of the Boreal Forest Conservation 
Framework.1  The framework is a national initiative 
aimed at protecting at least one-half of the forest and ensuring that leading edge sustainable 
development practices occur throughout the rest of the Boreal region. This initiative is the largest 
conservation vision in Canadian history. 
Since the framework’s creation, a coalition of 
prominent environmental groups, including Green-
peace and the U.S. Natural Resources Defense Council, has launched an international campaign to 
inform consumers about Kimberly-Clark’s continued 
use of ancient Boreal forest ﬁ  ber to make disposable tissue products. The groups are calling on Kimberly-Clark to stop making its tissue products, which include the popular Kleenex facial tissue, from Boreal ﬁ  ber. 
They urge the company to follow the example of 
some of its competitors by increasing the amount of recycled ﬁ  ber in its disposable paper products, as 
well as putting a stop to the purchase of pulp from 
companies logging in endangered forests. 
In 2003, only 19 percent of the total ﬁ  ber Kimberly-
Clark used to manufacture tissue products in North America was from recycled sources.
2 Kimberly-Clark 
makes the Kleenex brand of tissue products in Can-
ada and the U.S., and the Scott, Cottonelle and Viva 
line of products solely in the U.S. These tissue prod-ucts are marketed in several formats—toilet paper, 
napkins, paper towels, and facial tissue.  Kleenex 
facial tissue is made from 100 percent virgin ﬁ  ber because, according to the company, “it provides the 
superior softness consumers expect from a premium 
facial tissue product.” 
In response to growing consumer demand, 
Kimberly-Clark competitors such as Cascades and Seventh Generation are already manufacturing forest 
friendly tissue products for the consumer market 
with a high recycled content. As well, Cascades, the fourth largest manufacturer of tissue products 
in North America has made a commitment to 
purchase sustainably produced and eco-certiﬁ  ed ﬁ  ber for their products. Global companies such as 
Ikea and Home Depot have followed through on 
their recent commitments to protect ancient and endangered forests. The ofﬁ  ce supply giant Staples, 
following a broad-based consumer campaign, is in 
the process of phasing out purchases of paper products from endangered areas of the Canadian 
Boreal region. There is a growing shift in the 
marketplace towards the production of environmentally sensitive forest products. Increasingly, consumers 
are choosing to purchase “green” and socially re-
sponsible products. 
In 2003, only 19 percent of the total 
ﬁ  ber Kimberly-Clark used to manufacture tissue products in North America was from recycled sources.
Accompanying this notable shift in shopping 
patterns is the rise of socially responsible 
investment (SRI). SRI, which takes into account a 
company’s environmental and social performance in addition to traditional ﬁ  nancial considerations, is 
4The Boreal forest 
has become 
a controversial 
source for 
pulp used to make 
paper products.
Recently, howevera signiﬁ  cant and potentially 
troublesome gap has emerged in Kimberly-Clark’s 
environmental commitments.

now a US$2-trillion a year phenomenon in the United 
States. The notion of corporate social responsibility, 
or CSR, is becoming an ever more important issue 
for both investors and consumers. Indeed, recent studies indicate that companies engaging in CSR 
exhibit stronger ﬁ  nancial performances.
At the present time, Kimberly-Clark, although it 
produces an annual “sustainability” report, falls 
considerably short of environmental sustainability benchmarks when it comes to the manufacture of 
tissue paper products. The new consumer campaign 
by environmental organizations targeting Kim-berly-Clark for its use of ancient Boreal forest pulp 
is focusing on the company’s brands in order to 
convince consumers to use their purchasing dollars to support environmentally sustainable products 
rather than those, like Kimberly-Clark’s, which are 
linked to the destruction of ancient forests. In the past, similar consumer campaigns have pressured 
forest products companies like Staples, Boise Cascade 
and Home Depot resulting in the adoption of environmentally sustainable policies regarding the 
world’s ancient and endangered forests. Kimberly-Clark’s continued use 
of ancient Boreal forest ﬁ  ber 
for its disposable tissue 
products is controversial. 
With the growing demand for ‘green’ products, the 
rise of socially responsible investing, the success 
of companies that practice real corporate social 
responsibility and the negative publicity associated with international consumer campaigns, Kimberly-
Clark’s continued use of ancient Boreal forest ﬁ  ber 
for its disposable tissue products is controversial
. 
As such, the investing environment for this company 
could be described as unfavorable.
1  The 11 founding members of the Boreal Leadership Council are Albert a-Paciﬁ  c Forest 
Industries, the Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society, the Deh Cho First Nations, Domtar 
Inc., Ducks Unlimited Canada, ForestEthics, the Innu Nation, Popular Riv er First Nation, 
Suncor Energy Inc., Tembec Inc., and the World Wildlife Fund Canada.
2 Kimberly-Clark, 2003 Sustainability Report.
5
Increasingly, 
consumers are 
choosing to 
purchase “green” 
and socially 
responsible 
products. 


 
Consumer demand for “green” products is 
burgeoning. Approximately 30 percent of American 
adults - more than 63-million shoppers - take a 
product’s environmental, health, social justice and sustainability values into consideration when 
purchasing goods and services, according to the 
Lifestyles of Health and Sustainability Journal (LOHAS). The journal, which follows green economic 
trends, says the US$227-billion a year market for 
sustainable products is projected to reach US$1-trillion annually by 2020.
3
Consumer campaigns once focused largely on boycotting companies perceived to have environ-
mentally and socially harmful policies. A global 
boycott of Nestle Corp. was launched in the 1980s after the company was blamed for contributing to 
the deaths of Third World infants. Consumers argued 
that Nestle, which gave away free samples of infant formula to new mothers in developing countries, 
discouraged breastfeeding while promoting reliance 
on costly formula that poor families often watered down. The Nestle boycott, while famous, was only 
one of a number of far-reaching consumer campaigns 
that sprang up during the 1970s and 1980s to encourage corporations to become more socially 
and environmentally responsible.
Today, consumer campaigns often take a two-
pronged approach: they lobby a company or companies to adopt more environmentally and 
socially conscious policies while, at the same time, 
encouraging shoppers to make purchases only from businesses with sustainable environmental and 
social policies.  
The term “green” consumer was coined to describe 
shoppers who make purchasing decisions based on environmental values—and not just on price 
and convenience. Corporations like George Weston 
Ltd., owner of the leading Canadian grocery chain Loblaws, introduced “green” or environmentally-
friendly products that were quickly embraced by 
conscientious shoppers. Loblaws, which launched its US$87-million green initiative in 1989, saw 
its market share rise by two percent and its stock 
price double in the following two years. As Patrick Carson, vice-president of environmental affairs at 
Loblaws International Merchants Inc. in Toronto, 
explained, “I know we’re getting a lot of shoppers from competitors because we’ve made a move in 
the environmental direction.”
4  Home Depot, too, 
reported a modest increase in sales following the company’s adoption in 1999 of a green “Wood Pur-
chasing Policy” that was lauded by conservation orga-nizations (see Section V for more details).
5  In one 
example, Home Depot pointed to the US$30,000 of 
“green” certiﬁ  ed wood it sold for ramps at the 2004 
X Games, an extreme-sports event in Los Angeles.
Environmental criteria now play a key 
role in purchasing decisions.
In the 1990s, as globalization spread, consumer attention turned to pressuring corporations like 
Nike Inc. and the Gap Inc. to be more accountable 
for conditions under which their products are pro-duced. Fifteen years ago, few corporations wrote 
codes of conduct for their global suppliers or 
produced annual sustainability reports; now, such practices are widespread. Corporate sustainability 
reports have become a prerequisite for doing business 
in an age in which consumers increasingly demand to know where the products they are buying come 
from, if they are environmentally friendly, and who 
made them and under what labor conditions.
Kimberly-Clark’s “2003 Sustainability Report” clearly 
outlines steps the company has taken in some areas to become more environmentally responsible. 
In 2003, for instance, the company achieved an 87 
percent toxics reduction, exceeding its goal of a 50 percent reduction. However, and of great concern to 
Greenpeace, the Natural Resources Defense Council, 
and other environmental organizations, the sustain-ability report does not adequately deal with the 
pressing issue of increasing the recycled content 
of Kimberly-Clark’s tissue products. The report also does not address the controversial issue of sourcing 
pulp from the ancient Boreal forest at a time when 
Boreal conservation is becoming a priority not only for environmental groups but also for First Nations 
and corporations such as Domtar Inc., Suncor Energy 
Inc., and Tembec Inc.Approximately 
30 percent of 
American adults  
take a product’s 
environmental, 
health, social 
justice and 
sustainability 
values into 
consideration 
when purchasing 
goods and services.
90 PERCENT OF AMERICANS 
WOULD CONSIDER SWITCHING TO 
A COMPETITOR’S PRODUCTS OR 
SERVICES IF THEY DISCOVERED A COMPANY WAS BEHAVING ILLEGALLY OR UNETHICALLY. 
6

7Recent polls and studies indicate that a majority 
of North American consumers buy products from 
companies that they consider to have sound 
environmental and social practices. The 2004 Cone Corporate Citizenship Study found that 90 per-
cent of Americans would consider switching to a 
competitor’s products or services if they discovered 
a company was behaving illegally or unethically. Eighty percent said they would consider selling investment in that company’s stock, and 80 percent said they would refuse to invest in that company’s 
stock. Seventy-ﬁ  ve percent said they would boycott 
that company’s products or services.
6 Likewise, 
a POLLARA Report on attitudes towards environ-mentally-responsible paper found that Canadians 
are willing to pay up to 10 percent more for books 
printed on ecologically-sound paper. 
7 Indeed a large 
majority of Canadian book purchasers, both big and small, is also willing to purchase ecologically-
responsible books at an extra cost. “Canadians, 
in all regional and demographic groups, are also highly supportive of the Canadian book publishing industry switching from paper derived from ancient 
forests to more environmentally friendly paper,” 
noted the report.
8  Moreover, a study of 30 large 
corporate buyers of B.C. forest products, conducted by IBM Business Consulting Services, discovered 
clear evidence that environmental criteria now 
play a key role in purchasing decisions, calling it a “greenward shift” in the market for forest products. With all other things being equal, major buyers 
indicated they will choose the “greenest” product: 
“The shift is real, buyers believe it will continue, and we believe it will have a negative impact on forest regions and producers that do not respond to it.”
9   Notably, a case study on corporate social 
responsibility prepared for the Canadian federal 
government states that: “There has…been grow-
ing demand from consumers for wood products from 
sustainably managed forests.”10
It is only a matter of time before buyers of Kimberly-Clark tissue products become fully aware of the origins 
and composition of their preferred brand of facial and 
bath tissue. As consumers learn that these products are made with virgin pulp from ancient forests, they may 
decide to purchase other brands containing both a high 
recycled content and pulp from sustainably-managed forests sanctioned by conservation organizations.The vulnerability of the North American facial tissue market is underscored by the unexpected drop in 
Kleenex sales during the fourth quarter of 2003, a 
decline Kimberly-Clark attributes to a late cold and ﬂ  u season. Kimberly-Clark’s main competitors in the 
North American tissue market, Georgia-Paciﬁ  c and 
Procter & Gamble, have not yet begun to market en-vironmentally-sound facial tissue for at-home use. If 
Kimberly-Clark takes the lead in producing ecologi-
cally-sound facial tissue, it stands to seize market share from competitors. If, on the other hand, Geor-
gia-Paciﬁ  c or Procter & Gamble become the ﬁ  rst 
large tissue product makers to introduce premium brands of recycled tissue products manufactured 
with pulp from certiﬁ  ed “green” forests, Kimberly-
Clark risks losing ecologically conscious customers who will choose to buy from companies perceived 
to have the most advanced environmental policies.
A recent article on consumer campaigns in the San 
Francisco Chronicle describes the momentum consumer 
campaigns are gathering. The article notes that today’s campaigns do not advocate boycotts but, instead, 
have latched onto a promising new tactic - redi-
recting purchasing dollars to companies perceived to have the most advanced environmental and social 
policies: “Anti-corporate campaigns have been 
around for decades, but this ﬁ  ght-the-power genera-tion is going about it with a little more ﬁ  nesse.” 
11 
Increasingly, institutional buyers 
refuse to purchase products 
that harm the environment. 
Consumers are not the only ones wielding newfound clout when it comes to buying environmentally 
friendly products. Governments, businesses, uni-
versities and other institutions are putting their dollars to work to protect the environment and to 
support companies with the best environmental 
track records. As author Joel Makower and envi-ronmental consultant Deborah Fleischer state, “this 
purchasing power is a fundamental lever for change 
because suppliers must listen to their customers. CANCELLED 
CONTRACTS
If Kimberly-Clark continues to 
source virgin ﬁ  ber from ancient and endangered Boreal forests, it runs the risk that institutional buyers will turn to other suppli-ers. Institutional buyers began to cancel contracts with Boise Cascade Corporation during a lengthy campaign spear-headed by the Rainforest Ac-tion Network. The campaign aimed to stop Boise Cascade from making and selling prod-ucts from endangered forests. Washington Mutual, LL Bean, and Levi-Strauss were among the institutional buyers that cancelled Boise contracts. In 2002, following more than a year of student protests and widespread media coverage, the University of Texas at Aus-tin refused to accept an ofﬁ  ce products contract bid from Boise. (The university is the largest in the U.S., with more than 53,000 students.) Student government associations at Kent State, Brown University and Illinois State University also passed resolutions call-ing for bans on the purchase of 
Boise products.
Kimberly-Clark risks losing 
ecologically conscious customers 
who will choose to buy from 
companies perceived to have 
the most advanced 
environmental policies.


PUBLISHING: A 
SHIFTING SECTOR  
Major forest product industries 
are shifting to environmental production in the face of growing public demand for sustainable products. A case in point is the recent and signiﬁ  cant change within the publishing industry. Paper industry reform organi-zation, Markets Initiative, has been working since 2001 with the Canadian book publishing industry to help the sector shift from papers originating from the world’s ancient and endangered forests to ecologi-cally responsible alternatives. Publishers have played a key leadership role in this initiative, pioneering new ground for publishing internationally and triggering signiﬁ  cant shifts 
through their supply chain.
When Markets Initiative ﬁ  rst 
started this work, no publish-ers were consistently printing on recycled paper, no printers stocked ancient forest friendly papers and no ancient forest friendly papers were com-mercially produced.  Today:
• 75% of English language 
literary publishers in Canada have formally committed to eliminate their use of papers containing ancient and endangered forest ﬁ  bre;When billions of dollars -from governments, univer-
sities, and companies - are redirected to sustain-
ably harvested and produced products, the market 
responds and producers change their practices.”12 
Companies and government ofﬁ  cials that do not 
want to be left behind are now soliciting advice 
from former critics.
The Los Angeles Times notes that activists, “once 
relegated to the streets and hallways,” are suddenly ﬁ  nding business and trade ofﬁ  cials receptive to their 
concerns.
13 A case in point is the 1999 Memorandum 
of Understanding that prioritizes pristine rainforest valleys for conservation and adopts lighter touch 
eco-certiﬁ  ed logging in other areas of Clayoquot Sound in British Columbia, Canada. That memorandum 
was signed by Iisaak Forest Resources Ltd. 
- a forestry venture that is 49 percent owned by forestry giant Weyerhaeuser and 51 percent owned 
by the Central Region First Nations of the Nuu-
chah-nulth Tribal Council - and a handful of promi-nent environmental groups, including Green-
peace International. 
3 www.lohasjournal.com, see “About Lohas.” 
4 “Good Behaviours and the Bottom Line,” Canadian Business, May 1991 . Carson pointed 
out that the green program alone was not responsible for all of the comp any’s ﬁ  nancial 
success.
5 “New Leaf: Once Targeted by Protesters: Home Depot Plays Green Role,” Wall Street 
Journal, 6 August 2004. 
6 Cone Inc., “Multi-year Study Finds 21% Increase in Americans Who Sa y Corporate Support 
of Social Issues is Important in Building Trust,” [press release], 8 December 2004, available 
at www.coneinc.com/Pages/pr_30.html.
7 “Canadians’ Attitudes Toward Books Printed On Environmentally Responsible Paper,” a 
POLLARA Report to Markets Initiative, January 2002.
8 Ibid.
9 IBM Business Consulting Services, “A Greenward Shift in the Market fo r Forest Products 
from British Columbia,” commissioned by the Institute for Media, Policy  and Civil Society 
(IMPACS), 2003.
10 Natural Resources Canada, Interdepartmental Working Group on Corporate Social 
Responsibility, “CSR Case Study, Weyerhaeuser: A legacy of acting responsibly, [no date]. 
11 San Francisco Chronicle, “Corporations painted in red and blue,” 15 Fe bruary 2005.
12 Joel Makower and Deborah Fleischer, “Strategies for Accelerating Positive Change: A 
Brieﬁ  ng Guide for Grantmakers,” The Funders Working Group on Sustainable Consumption and Production, Environmental Grantmakers Association, February 2003 .
13 Los Angeles Times, “From the Streets to the Inner Sanctum,” 20 February 2005.When billions of dollars -
from governments, universities, 
and companies - are redirected to 
sustainably harvested and produced 
products, the market responds and 
producers change their practices.
8
www .lohasjournal.com, see “About Lohas.” 
“Good Behaviours and the Bottom Line,” Canadian Business, May 1991 . Carson pointed 
out that the green program alone was not responsible for all of the comp any’s ﬁ nancial 
“New Leaf: Once T argeted by Protesters: Home Depot Plays Green Rol e,” Wall Street 
Cone Inc., “Multi-year Study Finds 21% Increase in Americans Who Sa y Corporate Support 
of Social Issues is Important in Building T rust,” [press release], 8 Decem ber 2004, available 
at www .coneinc.com/Pages/pr_30.html.
 “Canadians’ Attitudes T oward Books Printed On Environmentally Resp onsible Paper,” a 
POLLARA Report to Markets Initiative, January 2002.
IBM Business Consulting Services, “A Greenward Shift in the Market fo r Forest Products 
from British Columbia,” commissioned by the Institute for Media, Policy  and Civil Society 
Natural Resources Canada, Interdepartmental W orking Group on Corp orate Social 
Responsibility , “CSR Case Study , Weyerhaeuser: A legacy of acting respo nsibly, [no date]. 
San Francisco Chronicle, “Corporations painted in red and blue,” 15 Fe bruary 2005.
Joel Makower and Deborah Fleischer , “Strategies for Accelerating Pos itive Change: A 
Brieﬁ  ng Guide for Grantmakers,” The Funders W orking Group on Sustain able Consumption 
and Production, Environmental Grantmakers Association, February 2003 .
Los Angeles T imes, “From the Streets to the Inner Sanctum,” 20 Febru ary 2005.


 
 
Harnessing purchasing power to support socially 
and environmentally responsible companies is one 
way to bring about change. Socially responsible in-
vestment is another. Often known by its acronym, SRI, socially responsible investment expands the 
traditional investment decision-making process by 
adding social and environmental standards to the mix of considerations. SRI -- through shareholder 
advocacy, community-based investment and screen-
ing for environmental and social benchmarks--encourages businesses to engage in responsible 
practices.
The ﬁ  rst socially responsible mutual fund was cre-
ated in the U.S. in 1928. The Pioneer Fund still caters to investors who do not wish to put their money in 
tobacco and alcohol stocks. Yet, even a decade ago, 
SRI was essentially a fringe activity promoted by a relatively small number of investors. Today, social 
investing is a fast-growing phenomenon carried out 
both by individuals and high-powered institutions such as the City of New York and the Connecticut 
and California state pension funds. By 1999, “one 
out of every eight dollars under professional man-agement in the U.S. [was] involved in socially or en-
vironmentally responsible investing, accounting for 
roughly 13% of the total US$16.3-trillion in assets 
under management.”14 
According to the Social Investment Forum’s 2001 Report on Responsible Investing Trends in the Unit-ed States, “assets in socially screened investment 
portfolios under professional management rose by 
more than one-third from 1999 to 2001 to top the 
US$2-trillion mark for the ﬁ  rst time ever.” 
15  
SRI takes a carrot and stick approach to corporate 
policies. If companies fail to meet set environmen-tal and social standards, they are simply not in-
cluded in investment portfolios. In extreme cases, 
investments are withdrawn if screening bench-marks are not met. The Domini Social Index, a SRI 
investment ﬁ  rm that manages more than US$1.8 
billion in assets for individual and institutional in-vestors, removed Nike Inc. from its index in 1997 
and Wal-Mart Stores from its index in 2001 due to 
those companies’ failure to address concerns about international labour standards. Real Assets Invest-
ment Management Inc., Canada’s ﬁ  rst full-service 
investment management ﬁ  rm devoted solely to SRI, announced in September 2004 that it had divested 
of the shares of Gildan Activewear in its portfolios 
due to concerns about working conditions and gar-ment workers rights at overseas factories making 
Gildan clothes. 
Corporations with cutting edge social and envi-
ronmental policies and standards, on the other hand, are rewarded with increased investment and 
positive publicity: “For positive screening, investors 
often use a best-of-sector approach, in which a company’s record is evaluated in relation to that of 
its industry counterparts.”16
The best-of-sector approach has potentially serious long-term implications for Kimberly-Clark. Socially 
responsible investors, making a decision about 
which tissue products company in which to put their money, are likely to choose the company with the 
best environmental track record. Assuming ﬁ  nancial 
outlooks are similar, Kimberly-Clark could lose out to competitors when it comes to best-of-sector so-
cially responsible investing. 
Corporations with cutting edge 
social and environmental policies and standards, on the other hand, 
are rewarded with increased investment and positive publicity.
Environmentally conscious investors will not sup-
port the continued use of virgin ﬁ  ber from Canada’s 
ancient Boreal forest to manufacture Kimberly-
Clark’s disposable tissue products. The additional controversy and media attention that a broad-based 
consumer campaign will inevitably bring is also not 
likely to earn Kimberly-Clark a favorable reputation for environmental practices among socially respon-
sible investors. • All Canadian book print-
ers stock a variety of an-
cient forest friendly papers;
• 12 ancient forest friendly and 9 eco-friendly papers have been developed in the past 3 years speciﬁ  cally in response to Canadian publishers’ requests;
• Millions of Canadian 
books have been printed on ancient forest friendly papers in the past three years, saving more than 150,000 trees and greenhouse gases equivalent to driving more than 19 million kilometers ;
• The Canadian edition of 
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix was printed on ancient forest friendly paper - drawing a personal endorse-ment from JK Rowling, grab-bing international headlines, and triggering increased sales and accolades from Harry Potter fans around the world;
• Two leading publishers engaged in the initiative have been recognized for their innovation with nation-al business awards; and
• Canadian publishers’ successes has inspired a global movement with work now taking place in nine other countries - 81 US and 14 Dutch book publishers 
have similar commitments.
9
By 1999, “one out of every eight 
dollars under professional 
management in the U.S. [was] 
involved in socially or 
environmentally responsible 
investing, accounting for 
roughly 13% of the total 
US$16.3-trillion 
in assets under management.”   

Controversy can also lead to a loss of conﬁ  dence in 
a corporation’s performance, as investors seek other, 
less problematical companies in which to invest. In 
addition, company resources are often diverted to combat the increased controversy, resulting in in-
creased public relations costs and potentially de-
creased proﬁ  tability. 
Assuming ﬁ  nancial outlooks are 
similar, Kimberly-Clark 
could lose out to competitors when it comes to best-of-sector socially responsible investing. 
Many analysts agree that SRI is heading into a period 
of signiﬁ  cant expansion, with “explosive growth in 
U.S. SRI” already taking place, according to Peter 
Kinder, president of the Boston-based investment ﬁ  rm Kinder, Lydenberg, Domini & Co.
17  A recent 
study by the United Kingdom’s Social Investment 
Forum shows that 59 percent of pension funds - 
representing about US$564-billion in assets - say 
they will take SRI policies into account.
In Canada, SRI rose to prominence in the 1970s 
and 1980s when church-based organizations 
successfully tested their strength as shareholders, adopting strong stands on issues such as apartheid and the environment. The Ethical Growth Fund, 
Canada’s ﬁ  rst broad-based socially screened mutual 
fund, came into existence in 1986. By 2000, SRI mutual funds in Canada were worth about US$4.9-
billion.  According to Business Ethics Online, 
“Morningstar now lists 82 separate fund portfolios 
as socially responsible…worth total assets of 
US$24-billion”.
18 Deb Abbey, the founder and 
manager of Real Assets Investment Management 
Inc., says predictions of SRI growth convinced her 
to start the company in 2001. (Real Assets caters to pension funds, high-end investors and foundations with a minimum portfolio of US$400,000.)
19 Notably, 
assets of The Ethical Funds Company, Canada’s 
most comprehensive family of socially responsible 
mutual funds, grew from US$82-million in 1992 to more than US$1.23-billion today. A Vector Research poll found that 72 percent of Canadians and 74 percent of shareholders expect companies to pursue social responsibilities as well as proﬁ  ts. 
More than one-half of respondents said they would 
prefer a pension plan that invested in companies with a proven social responsibility track record, 
even if that meant somewhat lower returns.
20
In another indication that SRI is poised to become 
even more mainstream, the United Nations 
Environment Programme launched its Responsible 
Investment Initiative in mid-2004. The UNEP will work with pension funds and major institutional 
investors to establish a set of globally-recognized 
principles for responsible investing by the fall of 2005. The initiative’s objective, explains Canadian 
Business magazine, is to “get large investors 
thinking about how to integrate environmental, social and governance concerns into financial 
decision-making—a goal that is supported by the 
results of a 14-month study conducted by Deutsche 
Bank, Goldman Sachs, UBS and others.”21
The concept of corporate social responsibility, or CSR, is an essential ingredient of SRI.  Russell 
Sparkes, author of Socially Responsible Investment: 
A Global Revolution, a book written for investment professionals and their clients, writes that corporate 
social responsibility has three core elements: 
• Responsibility to shareholders  (corporate governance); 
• Responsibility to humanity 
 in the form of human rights, and; • Responsibility to the biosphere 
 in terms of good environmental practice.
CSR, according to Sparkes, “simply means that 
companies should carry out their core function of 
making proﬁ  ts by the provision of goods and services but by doing so in a socially responsible way.”
22
The notion of triple bottom line accounting became popular in the mid-1990s when some corporations 
and other institutions began to take into account 
their social and environmental performances as well as ﬁ  nancial considerations. Triple bottom line (TBL) 
accounting, as it gains widespread acceptance, 
is quickly changing the way that corporations do business.  According to PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 
almost one-half of the Fortune 500 corporations 
now issue annual reports detailing their social and environmental conduct. TBL principles are also 
being adopted by organizations that include the 
World Bank and the Asian Development Bank. Socially 
responsible 
investment expands the 
traditional 
investment 
decision-making 
process by 
adding social 
and environmental 
standards 
to the mix of 
considerations.
10
Controversy can also lead to a loss of conﬁ  dence in a corporation’s 
performance, as investors seek other, 
less problematical companies 
in which to invest. 

Most companies now have mission statements 
promoting themselves as good corporate citizens. 
As the Economist explains, “Corporate social 
responsibility is now an industry in its own right, and a ﬂ  ourishing profession as well…There are 
executive education programmes in CSR, business-
school chairs in CSR, CSR professional organizations, CSR websites, CSR newsletters and much, much 
more.”23  According to Sparkes, however, it is no 
longer enough for a company to state that it is a 
good corporate citizen and provide a few examples 
of goodwill towards communities, workers and the environment. Not only is the general public carefully 
watching to ensure that corporate words and 
actions are consistent but individual governments and multiple-country organizations such as 
the European Union are also increasingly concerned 
with corporate responsibility. Any company that tries to “greenwash” its actions through corporate 
public relations will sooner or later be called to 
account as public and institutional pressure for better corporate citizenship mounts, says Sparkes. 
Kimberly-Clark’s environmental commitments, while 
strong in some areas such as toxics reduction, fall considerably short in the area of Boreal forest con-
servation and recycled content of its disposable tis-
sue products. 
Should the company’s premier brand 
name become tainted through as-sociation with destructive logging practices in the Boreal forest and lack of recycled content, Kimberly-Clark risks losing some of the brand cachet it has spent so many years cultivating.
The company’s reputation as a socially responsible 
corporation could be placed in jeopardy--regardless 
of the publication of an annual social responsibility 
report--if Kimberly-Clark does not take immediate steps to address these newsworthy issues. Notably, 
the 2004 spin-off of Neenah Paper and its mills 
does not absolve Kimberly-Clark of responsibility for how and where its products are sourced. Home 
Depot for example, among other initiatives, has 
begun to shift “buying wood from questionable sources to companies that practice sustainable for-
estry.” Home Depot explains that, “implementing 
the [wood purchasing] policy meant making minor changes to our wood supply chain and rewarding 
companies that practice responsible forestry.”
24 A Canadian federal government report on corporate 
social responsibility found that each one of ten CSR companies surveyed said they adopted CSR policies 
in order to enhance their reputations and brand 
image. Seven out of 10 said they were inspired by cost savings and an improved bottom line, and six 
out of 10 reported that they were motivated to adopt 
socially responsible policies because of changing stakeholder reputation. Four of 10 companies 
cited an improved reputation with investors, bond 
agencies and banks as a motivating factor. “The study revealed that the risks of not getting involved 
in CSR are also clear to many companies. These 
risks include…loss of brand reputation.”26
Kimberly-Clark’s Kleenex facial tissue has such 
high brand recognition that consumers often refer 
to competing facial tissue generically as “Kleenex”. 
Should the company’s premier brand name become tainted through association with destructive 
logging practices in the Boreal forest and lack of re-
cycled content, Kimberly-Clark risks losing some of the brand cachet it has spent so many years cultivating.
Already, a consumer campaign to encourage 
shoppers to think twice about tissue products they 
purchase is transforming the “Kleenex” brand name 
into a “Kleercut” message for consumers that associates the manufacture of Kleenex facial 
tissue, toilet paper, and napkins with destructive 
logging practices (see section VI for details). 
14 Paul Asmundson and Stephen R. Foerster, “Socially Responsible Investing: Better for Your 
Soul or Your Bottom Line?” Canadian Investment Review, Winter 2001.
15 Cited in Makower and Fleischer.
16 Asmundson and Foerster.
17 www.socialinvestment.ca. See www.socialinvestment.ca/News&Archives/news-601-
Socially.htm
18 Business Ethics Online, “Surviving the Roller Coaster Ride, Annual SR I Mutual Fund 
Review, Winter 2005,: http://www.business-ethics.com/current_issue/winter_2005_mu-
tual_funds_article.html
19 “Real Assets aims to prove you don’t have to lose money to be socially responsible,” 
Canadian Business, 7 September 2001. 
20 Canadian Democracy & Corporate Accountability Commission, 2002.
21 “Thirst for change: The world’s most inﬂ  uential investors join forces with the United 
Nations Environment Programme to embrace socially responsible investin g,” Canadian 
Business, 30 June 2004.
22 Russell Sparkes, Socially Responsible Investment: A Global Revolutio n (Chichester: John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2002), p. 210. 
23 “The good company,” The Economist, 20 January 2005.
24 Home Depot, “Wood Purchasing Policy,” corporate website.
25 www.bsr.org, see www.bsr.org/CSRResources/IssueBriefDetail.cfm?DocumentID=49622
26 Natural Resources Canada, “Corporate Social Responsibility: Lessons  Learned,” [Summary 
Report, no date], p. 6, available at www.nrcan.gc.ca.SUPPLIER 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
MANAGEMENT
Business for Social Responsi-
bility, “a global organization that helps member companies achieve success in ways that respect ethical values, people, communities and the environ-ment,” points to the increasing importance of supplier environ-mental management (SEM): “A growing number of companies realize that to achieve their en-vironmental goals and satisfy stakeholders’ expectations, they need to look beyond their own facilities and involve their suppliers in environmental ini-tiatives. Leading companies also understand that customers and other stakeholders do not always differentiate between a company and its suppliers, and may hold companies account-able for suppliers’ environmen-
tal and labor practices.” 25
THE RISKS OF NOT GETTING 
INVOLVED IN CSR INCLUDE LOSS OF BRAND REPUTATION.  
11

 
Many studies indicate that 
companies that embrace 
CSR perform just as well as -  
and sometimes better than - 
non-CSR companies in their sector. 
CSR companies are generally considered to be 
well-managed, treat employees fairly, contribute 
positively to communities and have consideration 
for the environment: “Furthermore, proponents argue that screening leads to a reduction in potential 
liabilities (such as those associated with class 
action lawsuits or environmental clean-ups), which could negatively affect the earnings of companies 
included as part of a portfolio.”
27  As stated by the 
Calvert Fund, the U.S.’s largest family of socially responsible mutual funds, today’s social and 
environmental issues tend to become tomorrow’s environmental predicaments: “So, investing in 
companies that are committed to meeting the 
challenges of the future with an expanded view of corporate responsibility is more than just a matter 
of ‘doing the right thing’ - it also makes good 
business sense.”
Two recent “meta-studies” – analyses of dozens of 
studies that encompass years of research – show that companies that are socially and environmentally 
responsible demonstrate superior ﬁ  nancial per-
formance. One meta-analysis, “Corporate Social and Financial Performance”, reviewed 52 studies 
covering a 30-year period. It proved a statistically 
relevant association between corporate social per-formance and ﬁ  nancial performance varying from 
“highly positive to modestly positive.”
28 The re-
searchers suggested that the correlation could be because CSR ﬁ  rms have good management or, con-
versely, because ﬁ  nancially sound companies have more resources at their disposal. A second “meta-
study,” released in November 2004, also concluded 
that businesses “with sound environmental policies and practices, companies are highly likely to see 
improved ﬁ  nancial performance.” The study examined 60 research studies over a six-year period. It found that 85 percent of these 
studies showed “a positive correlation between environmental management and ﬁ  nancial perfor-
mance.”29   That study, commissioned by the United 
Kingdom Environment Agency, was conducted by 
Innovest Strategic Value Advisors, an international 
social research firm that helps make investment decisions for about US$1-billion in funds. 
A May 2003 report on the global paper and forest 
products industry, also by Innovest Strategic 
Value Advisors, showed that stocks Innovest 
classiﬁ  ed as the most environmentally advanced consistently outperformed stocks with below 
average environmental ratings. Stocks of the 
environmentally-advanced companies were ahead by 43 percent (4,300 basis points) over four years 
ending in March 2003.
30 Additionally, the environmentally 
advanced stocks reported superior results in other business performance and market valuation ratios: 
“Companies in the sector with a long term view of successful business strategies are those able to 
capitalize on their environmental investments and 
their capacity to build sound stakeholder relations.”
31
When the Social Investment Forum evaluated the performance of U.S. SRI funds by examining data 
from three U.S. based organizations that analyze 
mutual fund performances—Lipper, Morningstar and Wiesenberger—it found that 12 out of 17 
SRI funds with at least US$100-million in assets 
received top rankings from Lipper or Morningstar. Wisenberger’s three-year performance records 
placed ten of the 17 funds in the top quartile of their 
investment categories.32Two recent 
“meta-studies,” 
analyses of dozens 
of studies that 
encompass years 
of research, 
show that 
companies that 
are socially and 
environmentally 
responsible 
demonstrate 
superior ﬁ  nancial 
performance. 
“WITH SOUND ENVIRONMENTAL POLICIES AND PRACTICES, 
COMPANIES ARE HIGHLY LIKELY TO SEE 
IMPROVED FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE.” 
 Any company that tries to 
“greenwash” its actions through 
corporate public relations will 
sooner or later be called to account 
as public and institutional pressure 
for better corporate citizenship mounts.
12


One negative study of the performance of CSR 
companies, conducted by the Wharton School at 
the University of Pennsylvania, surmised that that 
including SRI factors in investment could cost in-vestors as much as 30 basis points per month--or 
3.6 per annum--in lost performance.
33  Innovest, 
however, points out that the Wharton study did not use “apples to apples” comparisons.
34  In 17 out of 
28 mainstream equity funds, SRI funds were compared to real estate funds. An Innovest study 
for a U.S. pension fund - one that wanted to pursue a SRI strategy with maximum financial 
returns - found that ﬁ  ve of six of the pension fund’s 
portfolios would have performed better than they did by an average of 100 basis points had they been 
modestly titled towards SRI. (The sixth fund would 
have underperformed by .04 percent). Innovest found that “with a robust research platform,” SRI 
can “strengthen portfolio performance across a 
wide variety of investment styles.”35 
Jantzi’s Social Index, launched in January 2000 by 
Michael Jantzi, Canada’s best known social 
investment researcher, increased in value by 6.68 
percent from its inception through the year 2003. It outperformed both the S&P/TSX 60, which 
decreased in value by 1.75 percent over the same 
four- year period, and the S&P/TSA Composite, which decreased in value by 3.62 percent.
36   (Jantzi 
Research Associates Inc. screens JSI stocks by ex-
amining such things as a company’s environmental 
impact, human rights record, and employee relations.)  For 10 years ending October 31, 2003, 
the Domini Social Index delivered annualized 
returns of 11.33 percent compared with 10.44 percent for the S&P 500 during the same 10 years.
37
As the issue of climate change from greenhouse gas emissions becomes pressing, the global investment 
community is becoming concerned about potential 
ﬁ  nancial risk. More and more, investors demand an accounting of such risk exposure from companies 
in which they hold stock, according to the Carbon 
Disclosure Project, the world’s largest corporate responsibility initiative. (The project represents 
95 leading institutional investors and accounts for 
US$10-trillion in assets under management.) The topic of climate change may be of particular 
interest to Kimberly-Clark investors. Canada’s 
Boreal forest--with its layers of soil, moss and peat--forms one of the world’s most significant 
terrestrial storehouses of carbon, playing an 
integral role in slowing climate change. 27 Asmundson and Foerster.
28 Cited in Marjorie Kelly, “Holy Grail Found: Absolute, deﬁ  nitive proof that responsible com-
panies perform better ﬁ  nancially,” Business Ethics, Winter 2004. The study was conducted 
by Marc Orlitzky of the University of Sidney, Australia, and by Frank Schmidt and Sara Rynes from the University of Iowa. It won the Moskowitz Prize of the Social Investment Forum, 
awarded for outstanding research in social investing.
29 Ibid. 
30 Innovest Strategic Value Advisors, “Innovest’s Latest Paper and Forest Products Report 
Finds Environmental Leaders Outperformed by 43% Over 4 Years,” [press release], May 
2003.
31 Ibid.
32 Asmundson and Foerster.
33 Innovest Strategic Value Advisors, “Innovest Releases New Study—Rebuts Wharton’s,” 
[press release], 29 July 2003.
34  Ibid.
35  Ibid.
36 Michael Jantzi Research Associates, “Jantzi Social Index Outperforms S&P/TSX 60 and 
S&P Composite Indices in 2003 and Since Inception,” [press release], 23 J anuary 2004. 
37 www.kld.com/benchmarks/dsi.html.
13More and more, 
investors demand 
an accounting 
of risk exposure 
from companies in 
which they
hold stock.

 
 
 
Recent consumer and investor campaigns have 
persuaded global companies to help preserve 
ancient and endangered forests by changing their 
sourcing policies. Many companies targeted by campaigns have also pledged to increase recycled 
content of their products. An international 
grassroots campaign that included Greenpeace, Rainforest Action Network, and other major 
environmental organizations ﬁ  rst focused on Home 
Depot, the world’s largest lumber retailer. The two-year campaign, from 1997 to 1999, saw the 
company repeatedly picketed by demonstrators. 
Institutional investors also took a stand: Trillium Asset Management was one of several to ﬁ  le a 
proposal on the company’s 1999 proxy statement 
asking Home Depot to issue a report detailing the steps required to end the sale of old growth wood 
entirely.
38 As the Wall Street Journal reported, 
“Home Depot was afraid the protests might lead to 
a consumer backlash and sliding sales.”39
In August 1999, as Home Depot celebrated its 20th 
anniversary, the company made an historic 
announcement. It would phase out all products from 
endangered forests by 2002 and give preference to wood products from sustainably-managed forests. 
Vendors who could not prove that lumber and wood 
products met the new standards would be dropped. 
By 2002, the company’s wood purchases from 
Indonesia, where illegal logging is destroying vast tracts of virgin forest and the habitat of endangered 
wildlife, had plummeted to US$50-million a year 
from US$500-million a year in 2000. The ensu-ing rash of positive publicity about Home Depot’s 
new policy soon brought ﬁ  nancial beneﬁ  ts: the Wall 
Street Journal reported a modest increase in sales from customers supporting the company’s new en-
vironmental standards.40
Publicity about Home Depot’s new policy and growing consumer awareness about ecologically-
sound forest products helped convince other retailers 
to take similar stands. Seven of the remaining top ten lumber retailers said they would match Home 
Depot’s new policy. They included Menards, 84 
Lumber, HomeBase, Lanoga, Wickes Lumber and Lowe’ s, the second largest home improvement retailer 
in the U.S. Notably, Lowe’s stock rose by $US 2.44, 
to $US45 a share, the day it announced its new environment-driven wood procurement policy in 
2000. The five-point policy gives preference to 
independently-certiﬁ  ed wood from areas managed in an environmentally-sustainable manner. Lowe’s 
announcement followed months of communication 
with forest advocacy organizations, although the company insisted it was making the changes because 
of growing consumer demand for environmentally-
friendly wood products. “Lowe’s has set the global standard for responsible wood buying,” announced 
the Rainforest Action Network.
Lowe’s new policy, covered by media such as the 
Wall Street Journal, Associated Press, the Vancouver Sun, the Seattle Post-Intelligencer and 
the Atlanta Journal Constitution, immediately 
ended company purchases of lumber and ﬁ  nished wood products from British Columbia’s Great Bear 
Rainforest region. The policy also banned wooden 
dowels and other products made with Indonesian ramin, a light-colored hardwood, due to worries that 
the wood was from areas where illegal logging has 
led to a sharp decline in the orangutan population. 
Ofﬁ  ce supply chains have also found it beneﬁ  cial 
to adopt policies that increase the recycled content of their products. Staples, the world’s largest ofﬁ  ce 
supply retailer, announced in November 2002 that it 
would phase out paper products made from endan-gered forests. Not only will Staples stop buying pa-
per products manufactured with pulp from endan-
gered forests, but it will also aim for an average 30 percent recycled content in all the paper it sells, 
thereby reducing demand for virgin ﬁ  ber. Staples 
also said it would feature more recycled products in general in its 1,500 stores worldwide, and that it 
would use only post-consumer waste (PCW) paper 
products for internal operations. The company also aims to expand alternative ﬁ  ber paper products as 
well as the number of paper products containing 50 
percent post-consumer waste. Staples made these signiﬁ  cant policy changes following two years of 
intense public pressure from The Paper Campaign, 
a 72-group consortium led by San Francisco-based ForestEthics and the Dogwood Alliance, based in 
Asheville, North Carolina. Paper Campaign members 
staged more than 600 demonstrations at Staples stores across the U.S., and directed tens of thousands Recent consumer 
and investor 
campaigns 
have persuaded 
global companies 
to help preserve 
ancient and 
endangered forests 
by changing their 
sourcing policies.
14
“Home Depot was afraid the protests 
might lead to a consumer backlash 
and sliding sales.”  

of letters and phone calls to the Staples head ofﬁ  ce. 
The new policy has had many positive spin-offs for 
Staples. Among them, ForestEthics and the Dogwood 
Alliance took out an advertisement in USA Today praising Staples for its “landmark commitment to 
protect forests” and calling on Office Max and 
Ofﬁ  ce Depot to “meet or beat” Staples’ policy. The groups said they would spread the word about 
Staples’ commitment to Fortune 500 companies 
and colleges and universities across the United States. Moreover, in the ﬁ  rst year of Staples new 
recycling commitment, the company reported that 
its policy changes saved more than one million trees and nearly 500-million gallons (1-9 billion litres) 
of water. 
After Staples led the way with recycled paper, 
competitors followed suit. In March 2004, Ofﬁ  ce 
Depot, the world’s second largest chain of ofﬁ  ce 
supply stores, made signiﬁ  cant and far-reaching revisions to its environmental policy. Among other 
pledges, Ofﬁ  ce Depot says it will “phase out all 
paper products coming from rare and vulnerable forests, forests containing exceptional biodiversity 
values, forests subject to unsustainable management, 
and forests that have been illegally logged.” Ofﬁ  ce Depot states that the phase-out will mean an end 
to sourcing from three of the world’s remaining 
endangered forest areas, including Canada’s Boreal forests. Socially responsible investor groups that 
tried to inﬂ  uence company policy as shareholders 
- including the Calvert Group, Ltd., Green Century Capital Management and Trillium Asset Manage-
ment - announced that the new initiatives would 
beneﬁ  t both Ofﬁ  ce Depot and its shareholders.
41Another forest products company, Boise Cascade Corporation, was targeted by a three-year campaign 
spearheaded by the Rainforest Action Network. 
In 2002, following publicity about the company’s policy of sourcing from old growth forests, including 
Canada’s Boreal forest, Boise customers began to 
cancel their contracts. They included Washington Mutual, LL Bean, Levi Strauss and the University 
of Notre Dame. That same year, swayed by student 
protests and media reports, the University of Texas at Austin refused to accept an ofﬁ  ce products bid 
from Boise.
In 2003, to thwart further damage to its reputa-
tion and finances, Boise Cascade made a firm commitment to change the way it did business. 
The company document “Boise and the Environ-
ment” was hailed as a breakthrough in private sector commitment to forest protection. Boise 
became one of the largest U.S. companies to begin 
to eliminate completely the use of wood products from endangered forests, and one of the ﬁ  rst forest 
products distributors to extend such a policy to its 
suppliers. It also became one of the ﬁ  rst U.S. for-est products companies to apply the policy to 
both domestic and international operations. Boise’s 
about-face prompted the Rainforest Action Network to take out an ad in the New York Times lauding 
Boise for its new environmental commitment.
38 www.trilliuminvest.com
39 “Once Targeted by Protesters, Home Depot Plays Green Role,” Wall Street Journal, 
6 August 2004.  
40 Ibid.
41 ForestEthics, “Ofﬁ  ce Depot Agrees to Endangered Forest and Recycling Policy
—Environmental Campaign Against the Company Ends,” [press release} , 25 March 2004.
“Staples is committed to being the 
U.S. leader of the ofﬁ  ce supply industry 
in environmentally sound paper 
procurement practices. As we have 
done with energy conservation and 
other environmental issues, 
we will pursue this goal through 
sound business practices that 
will continue to provide to our 
shareholders an adequate return 
at an appropriate level of risk.”   
Staples Environmental Paper 
Procurement Policy.500 CORPORATIONS 
ASKED TO 
PROTECT BOREAL
 In May, 2004, a coalition of 
environmental groups sent a letter to 500 major corpora-tions, including IBM, Kodak, Marriot, Hilton and Safeway, asking them to take steps to minimize the impact of their purchasing policies on the Ca-nadian Boreal forest. The groups - ForestEthics, Greenpeace Canada, the Natural Resources Defense Council and the Rain-forest Action Network - are calling on these corporations to adopt and improve their environ-mental procurement policies in order to support Boreal for-est conservation. 
15


 
Kimberly-Clark, amidst growing controversy, 
continues to source virgin ﬁ  ber from Canada’s 
Boreal forest. In addition to playing a pivotal role 
in thwarting climate change by storing carbon, the Boreal forest houses 40 percent of North America’s 
waterfowl and 30 percent of the continent’s song-
birds. Pine, spruce, ﬁ  r and poplar forests provide habitat for wildlife such as grizzly and black bears, 
threatened woodland caribou, wolves, bald eagles, 
Boreal owls and pine marten. The Boreal forest is also home to more than 80 percent of Canada’s 
indigenous communities and is a source of 
material and spiritual sustenance for the Métis and other First Nations. Large tracts of the forest 
are still the subject of unsettled land claims and 
disputed treaties. 
Kimberly-Clark’s exclusive use of virgin pulp in its 
tissue paper products for many of its consumer brands continues to be controversial. In fact, little 
more than 19 percent of its North American ﬁ  ber 
comes from recycled sources, the majority of which is used in products for the institutional and com-
mercial market. This stands in stark contrast to the 
average 60 percent recycled ﬁ  ber content used by the tissue paper industry in general. Notably, other tissue products companies are quickly moving to-
wards increased recycled content and sustainably 
sourced ﬁ  ber. Montreal-based Cascades meets 96 percent of its pulp requirements with re-
cycled ﬁ  ber and says it will meet the majority of 
the remaining four percent with Forest Steward-ship Council (FSC) eco-certiﬁ  ed pulp by 2007. 
Seventh Generation, based in Vermont, sells its 100 
percent recycled consumer tissue products through-out North America, as does Toronto-based Atlantic 
Packaging. Marcal Paper Mills Inc.’s 100 percent 
recycled facial tissue, made from 30 percent post-consumer waste, is sold in supermarkets 
throughout the northeastern U.S. and in ofﬁ  ce sup-
ply stores nationwide. MARKET SHARE OF TOP WORLD PRODUCERS 
OF TISSUE PRODUCTS 2004
 
Rank Company Market Share
 1 Kimberly-Clark 13.8%
 2 Georgia-Paciﬁ  c 13.4%
 3 Svenska Cellulosa 
 Aktiebolaget (SCA) 7.5%
 4  Procter & Gamble  6.1%
 5 Cascades 2%
Source: RISI, World Tissue Capacity Report 2004
The Neenah pulp mill in Terrace Bay, Ontario, spun-
off from Kimberly-Clark in December 2004, uses 
wood from the 5.7-million acre (2.3-million hectare) 
Kenogami Forest east of Lake Nipigon, part of the Boreal forest. Neenah Paper continues to supply 
Kimberly-Clark with the majority of its Boreal forest 
pulp under a long-term supply contract. Clearcutting is the preferred method of logging the Kenogami’s 
jack pine, spruce, balsam ﬁ  r, cedar, larch and poplar 
trees. The Terrace Bay mill produces approximately 496,000 tons (450,000 metric tonnes) of pulp 
annually, most of which is used by Kimberly-Clark.
In 2000, according to independent 
auditors, more than 35-million 
cubic feet (one million cubic 
metres) of trees were cut and left to rot on the side of logging roads 
in the Kenogami Forest. 42
A second source of Kimberly-Clark pulp is the forests 
of Western Alberta, centered on the Hinton Forest in 
the Rocky Mountain Foothills area. The 2.5-million 
acre (one million hectare) Hinton Forest, contain-ing lodgepole pine, white spruce and balsam ﬁ  r 
trees up to 180 years old, is being clearcut by West 
Fraser Timber of Canada. This forest, along with sur-rounding forests logged by other forestry companies, 
is home to the threatened woodland caribou, a na-
tionally listed species at risk, and logging contin-ues in caribou habitat despite the threat of caribou 
extinction. The West Fraser mill in Hinton 
produces approximately 468,500 tons (425,000 metric tonnes) of pulp per year. Kimberly-Clark is one 
of its major customers.The facial tissue 
market is divided 
into two categories: 
“at home or 
consumer” and 
“away from home 
or commercial 
institutional.”
Tissue bought for 
North American 
homes accounts 
for two-thirds 
of the market.
16
Little more than 19 percent of its 
North American ﬁ  ber comes from 
recycled sources.

In 1996, Kimberly-Clark developed its own Forest 
Management Objectives for Canadian woodlands 
it owns or manages. The objectives are modeled 
on standards set by the American Forest & Paper Association’s Sustainable Forest Initiative (SFI) and 
the Canadian Standards Association’s National 
Sustainable Forest Management Standard. Both initiatives were created by the forestry industry and 
are not considered by conservation groups to be ﬁt
-
ting determinants of environmentally sustainable 
forestry practices. 
Logging continues in caribou habitat 
despite the threat of caribou extinction. 
The Sustainable Forestry Initiative is a certiﬁca -
tion scheme created in 1994 by the American For -
est and Paper Association. As the Sierra 
Legal Defence Fund notes, the SFI “does not 
require on-the-ground practices that protect the environment.”For example, SFI would not require 
halting logging or clearcutting in any part of an area 
of ecological signiﬁcance. Rather, the standard would require demonstrating that there are policies, 
programs, worker education or research in place to 
preserve the ecologically signiﬁcant qualities…
43
The Canadian Standards Association added forestry to its roster in 1993, with funding from the Canadian 
Pulp and Paper Association. A process initiated by a 
group of 22 forest industry associations, called the Canadian Forest Certiﬁcation Coalition, led to the 
1996 adoption by the Standards Council of Canada 
of the “Sustainable Forest Management Standard.” As the Sierra Legal Defence Fund explains, “The 
CSA standard requires that signiﬁcant conservation 
values be addressed but contains no speciﬁc criteria and indicators, leaving their development to industry. 
The standards contain no speciﬁc performance targets; 
rather a company seeking certiﬁcation develops its own performance criteria speciﬁc to a particular 
area that corresponds to the CCFM objectives.”
44  
The difﬁculty Kimberly-Clark faces is that high-proﬁle 
environmental groups, which have put the spotlight on the company for manufacturing Kleenex tissue 
products from virgin Boreal forest pulp, consider only 
one set of standards to be a credible measure of sustainability—the Forest Stewardship Council 
(FSC) management and certiﬁcation system. 
The FSC is an independent international, non-proﬁt 
association composed of representatives from forestry companies, environmental groups, forestry 
professionals, indigenous groups and forest product 
certiﬁcation organizations. The FSC evaluates and 
accredits forest management certiﬁers according to 10 principles that address environmental, social 
and economic issues. Certiﬁers include the nonproﬁt 
organization Smartwood and the for-proﬁt Scientiﬁc Certiﬁcation Systems. The FSC has certiﬁed more 
than 116-million acres (47-million hectares) of 
forestland in 60 countries. Almost 24-million acres (10-million hectares) of FSC certiﬁed forestland are 
in the North America. Among the many prod
-
ucts certiﬁed by the FSC are hardwood ﬂooring and decking sold in home improvement stores, vari
-
ous book and ﬁne papers sold by paper merchants, and pulp available on the international market. 
At about the same time that the Boreal Forest 
Conservation Framework was devised, the FSC 
of Canada endorsed a National Standard for forest management practices in the Boreal forest. 
Jim McCarthy, executive director of FSC Canada, 
explains that: “Third-party certiﬁcation of forest management and forest products to this standard 
provides assurance to consumers that the products 
they purchase do not contribute to the degradation of the world’s forests and, as seen through recent 
public commitments from organizations like 
Domtar, Tembec and Home Depot, it has emerged 
as a globally important marketing tool.”45  
In November 2004, Greenpeace and the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) launched an international campaign to warn consumers about 
Kimberly-Clark’s poor environmental record around 
Canada’s Boreal forest. The groups are calling on Kimberly-Clark to stop destroying Boreal forest to 
make disposable paper products. They point out 
that other global companies, including Ikea, Home Depot and Staples/Business Depot, have 
already made commitments to protect ancient 
and endangered forests. According to Susan Casey-Lefkowitz, a senior attorney with the NRDC: “If 
Kimberly-Clark wants to show real environmental 
leadership, it will dramatically increase the post-consumer recycled content of its products.” The en
-
vironmental groups point out that tissue products 
made from virgin fiber leave an unacceptably high 
“footprint” on the planet. Virtually no tissue prod -
ucts are recovered for recycling - making it even 
more necessary for these products to contain a high 
recycled content.“If Kimberly-Clark 
wants to show real 
environmental 
leadership, 
it will dramatically 
increase the 
post-consumer 
recycled content 
of its products.” 
17

In a bid to pressure Kimberly-Clark to stop 
sourcing pulp from ancient and endangered forests, 
Greenpeace and the NRDC are urging consumers to 
stop buying Kimberly-Clark tissue products and to instead buy products from their competitors that 
are forest friendly.
42 Callaghan and Associates Inc. “An Independent Audit of Forest Manag ement on the 
Kenogami Forest for the Period 1995 to 2000.” November 2000, p. 23. In dependent forest 
audits are required by law in Ontario.  
43 Sierra Legal Defence Fund, “Understanding Canada’s Forest Certiﬁ  cation Schemes: A 
Complete Guide to Filing Appeals and Complaints,” February 2005, p. 9.
44 Ibid, p. 15.
45 Forest Stewardship Council Canada, “FSC Canada’s Boreal Forest Standard Unanimously 
Approved,” [press release], 12 December 2003.
18In November 2004, 
Greenpeace 
and the Natural 
Resources Defense 
Council (NRDC) 
launched an 
international 
campaign to warn 
consumers about 
Kimberly-Clark’s 
poor environmental  
record around Canada’s 
Boreal forest. 


Consumers increasingly demand environmentally-
friendly products. In the absence of important policy 
changes pertaining to the Boreal forest, Kimberly-
Clark’s market share for tissue products could erode as consumer campaigns question the reputation of 
its tissue products (including the Kleenex brand), 
encourage shoppers to become more aware of the origins of disposable paper products and, at the 
same time, present environmentally-friendly alter-
natives to Kimberly-Clark tissue products. 
At the same time, the growing inﬂ  uence of so-
cially responsible investment should be taken into consideration. Investors who adopt a “best of 
sector” approach may opt to put their money in a 
less controversial tissue products company with a greater commitment to recycled content and sus-
tainable forestry. 
These investors may wish to support another tissue 
products company whose ﬁ  ber sources are either 
not from Canada’s ancient Boreal forest or are certiﬁ  ed by the internationally reputable Forest 
Stewardship Council (FSC)—particularly as new 
studies show that companies with strong environmental and social policies and practices 
produce strong ﬁ  nancial returns. There is also the 
possibility that, as the Boreal forest becomes more newsworthy as a result of new conservation 
efforts, socially responsible investors and mutual 
funds will pressure Kimberly-Clark to change Boreal forest sourcing policy through shareholder actions. 
The link between Boreal forest conservation and 
heightened investor concern about global warming also should not be ignored.In the past, consumer 
campaigns around forestry issues have had re-
sounding and remarkable success. 
The campaigns that targeted Home Depot, Staples, 
and Boise Cascade are key examples. Institutional buyers, too, increasingly wish to make bulk pur-
chases from companies they perceive to have the 
soundest environmental and social policies. 
A case in point is the decision by the University of 
Texas at Austin not to accept an ofﬁ  ce products contract bid from Boise Cascade during Rainforest Action Network’s prolonged campaign to persuade 
the company to stop making and selling products 
from endangered forests. If Kimberly-Clark does not change its Boreal forest sourcing policies and 
produce more environmentally friendly tissue 
products, it runs the risk that institutional buyers will take similar measures, contributing to a 
potential loss of market share.
In the current investing and consumer environment, 
assuming ﬁ  nancial outlooks are similar and with 
the current controversy surrounding the source of the ﬁ  ber for its tissue products, Kimberly-Clark does 
not represent a particularly sound investment.
Kimberly-Clark’s market share for 
tissue products could erode as 
consumer campaigns question the reputation of its tissue products.
On the other hand, should Kimberly-Clark choose 
to manufacture tissue products for the “at home” 
market that contain high levels of recycled ﬁ  ber and 
sustainably harvested pulp, it could seize market share from major competitors still using 100 per-
cent virgin ﬁ  ber. The manufacture of tissue products 
made with a high recycled content and FSC eco-certiﬁ  ed ﬁ  ber would give Kimberly-Clark a strong 
competitive edge, as well as garner positive pub-
licity from high-proﬁ  le environmental organizations. As well, this would enable it to protect its brand 
reputation, and avoid being overlooked by socially 
responsible investment funds.
As the issues of global warming and the fate of 
ancient forests become more urgent both for consumers and investors, Kimberly-Clark stands 
to profit from developing tissue products that 
are environmentally sustainable, manufactured with ﬁ  ber whose production leaves the Boreal forest re-
gion and other ancient forests ecologically intact. 
If no steps are taken to address these issues, then Kimberly-Clark could suffer ﬁ  nancially. Investors who 
adopt a “best of 
sector” approach 
may opt to put their 
money in a less 
controversial tissue 
products company 
with a greater 
commitment to 
recycled content 
and sustainable 
forestry. 
19
In the past, consumer campaigns 
around forestry issues have had 
resounding and remarkable success. 

© Greenpeace - Eibner

Greenpeace Canada
250 Dundas St. West, Suite 605
Toronto, Ontario
M5T 2Z5
800-320-7183
www.kleercut.net
www.greenpeace.ca Greenpeace USA
 702 H St. NW, Suite 300
 Washington, D.C
 20001
 800-326-0959
 www.greenpeaceusa.org
Greenpeace is a non-profit organization that uses lobbying, science, public education, peaceful protest, and mar-kets mobilization to bring about increased environmental protection of the Earth’s ecosystems. Founded in Canada in 1971, Greenpeace is now the world’s largest membership-based environmental organization with ofﬁ  ces in 38 countries and more 
than 2.8-million members worldwide.
              
                                            Printed on 100 percent post-consumer recycled and chlorine free paper . 
 Greenpeace USA
 702 H St. NW , 
 Washington, D.C
 20001
 800-326-0959