# Archivo original: kingpins-of-carbon.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:11 -03 2025

Page 1
The Kingpins of Carbon
and Their War on Democracy
©Tim Aubry/Greenpeace

Page 2
Written by: Charlie Cray and Peter Montague
Charlie Cray is a Research 
Specialist for Greenpeace US. 
Research assistance provided by 
Skyler Kopko and Connor Gibson.Peter Montague, Ph.D., is a journalist 
and historian living in New Brunswick, 
N.J., where he is active in the New Jersey 
Environmental Justice Alliance. He is a 
member of the National Writer’s Union 
(UAW Local 1981, AFL-CIO), the NAACP , 
Greenpeace, and Sierra Club, and a fellow 
with the Science and Environmental Health 
Network in Ames, Iowa.published by: Greenpeace US 
September 2014
all photos © GreenpeaceThe Kingpins of Carbon and Their War on Democracy
© Les Stone /Greenpeace

Page 3
The Kingpins of Carbon and Their War on Democracy
Abstract
Global warming is a potentially devastating problem requiring ur -
gent action by governments. However, to date the U.S. government 
has remained largely paralyzed. Now new Greenpeace research has 
shed light on the sources of paralysis, a multi-decade war on democ -
racy by the kingpins of carbon – the coal, oil, and gas industries allied 
with a handful of self-interested libertarian1 billionaires. Their strat -
egy has aimed to (1) shrink, disable and paralyze progressive govern -
ment and (2) manipulate the remaining levers of government power 
by (a) eliminating all restrictions on private money in elections and 
(b) disenfranchising blacks, Latinos, the young, the elderly, and 
1 Although many authors use “conservative” and “libertarian” interchangeably, 
these terms represent distinct political philosophies, which sometimes compete 
for political power, especially within the Republican Party. The acknowledged 
founder of American libertarianism is Ayn Rand, who published the novels The 
Fountainhead (1943) and Atlas Shrugged  (1957). Indeed, the title of the standard 
history of the modern American libertarian movement, Brian Doherty’s 
Radicals for Capitalism , is a phrase first used by Ayn Rand. See Brian Doherty, 
Radicals for Capitalism  (N.Y.: Public Affairs, 2007), pg. 15. Upon her death 
in 1982, Ayn Rand’s “objectivist” (libertarian) philosophy was summarized 
succinctly in her obituary in the New York Times : selfishness is good, altruism 
is evil, and the welfare of society must always be subordinate to individual 
self-interest. (Edwin McDowell, “Ayn Rand: Novelist with a Message,” New York 
Times  Mar. 9, 1982. http://goo.gl/nav7Uw  And see the video Ayn Rand: In her 
Own Words  (2011) in which Rand is interviewed for 74 minutes by Mike Wallace 
and Phil Donahue; available from Amazon on DVD, and on Youtube: http://goo.
gl/XrwWvP ) Principled conservatives generally reject American libertarianism. 
William F . Buckley, Jr., a conventional conservative, described the 1980 
Libertarian Party platform as “Anarcho-Totalitarianism.” (Buckley quoted in 
Jane Mayer, “Covert Operations; the billionaire brothers who are waging a war 
against Obama,” New Yorker  Vol. 86, No. 25 (Aug. 30, 2010), pgs. 44-55. http://
goo.gl/M4MJB1  ) Principled political conservatives seek to preserve what is 
established, including a hierarchical social order, social stability, and tradition. 
Conservatives tend to prefer gradual, not abrupt, change. Libertarians and 
conservatives may agree on certain ideas and programs, such as low taxes, 
limited government regulation of business and private investment, a strong 
national defense, and individual responsibility for financial needs such as 
health insurance and retirement income. Perhaps because global warming will 
require very substantial government intervention to bring it under control, 
or to adapt to the chaos it will bring if it is allowed to run its present course, 
both libertarians and conservatives tend to either (a) deny the reality of global 
warming or (b) deny that humans can do anything about it.

Page 4
the disabled, all of whom are presumed to favor Democrats. Since 
1975, their strategy has rolled back New Deal programs, weakened 
labor unions, and reversed victories of the civil rights movement, 
undermining the strength and cohesion 
of the middle class, further enriching and 
empowering a tiny self-interested elite.
To manage the urgent problem of global 
warming, we will have to understand 
and overcome the libertarian campaign 
against progressive government and their  
war on democracy. The main strategy 
available to the citizenry entails large 
numbers of people agreeing on a simple 
agenda, then taking coordinated action 
together.
In 2012, a new coalition came together 
called the Democracy Initiative (DI), 
which includes environmental, labor, and 
civil rights organizations. DI member 
organizations presently have about 50 
million members. http://www.democ -
racyforus.org . To counter the war on democracy by the kingpins of 
carbon, the Democracy Initiative has adopted a simple agenda: get 
private money out of elections and protect everyone’s right to vote.2
Note to readers: In capitalizing the names of ethnic and racial 
groups, we have followed the Associated Press Stylebook , 46th edition 
(N.Y.: Basic Books, 2011). Thus: African American, Asian American, 
black, Hispanic, Latino, white.
2 We have omitted discussion of the Democracy Initiative’s third agenda item: 
“To address other obstacles to significant reforms, including the abuse of U.S. 
Senate rules that allow a small minority to obstruct deliberation and block 
action on legislation addressing the critical challenges facing our nation.” On 
this agenda item, a partial victory has already been won. See “Fix the Senate 
Now,” a project of the Democracy Initiative. http://fixthesenatenow.org/© Nick Cobbing /Greenpeace

Page 5
Executive Summary
In its 2010 U.S. National Security Strategy , the Pentagon warned, 
“The danger from climate change is real, urgent, and severe.”3 
Scientists agree: “We face risks of abrupt, unpredictable and po -
tentially irreversible changes” with possibly “massively disruptive 
consequences to societies and ecosystems,” the American Association 
for the Advancement of Science stated in 2014.4
According to opinion polls, more than 80 percent of Americans 
want action to reduce the danger from global warming, even if it 
costs them something.5
So why isn’t Congress taking action?
Congress has been unable to act because just a few dozen oil and 
gas moguls – the kingpins of carbon – have used their power and 
influence to jam the gears. These obstructionists have supported a 
full-on assault on campaign finance limits and hard-core attacks on 
voting rights to reinforce their own power, including three recent 
Supreme Court rulings that have radically altered American politics.
• Citizens United v. FEC  (2010) gave corporations the right to spend 
unlimited amounts of money to influence political campaigns from 
the outside. It helped give birth to dozens of giant Super PACs.
• McCutcheon v. FEC  (2014) raised the limit on individual contribu -
tions directly to federal candidates and party committees during 
each two-year election cycle from $123,200 to $3.6 million.
• Shelby County v. Holder  (2013) overturned a key provision of the 50-year-old 
Voting Rights Act requiring states and other jurisdictions with a history of 
racism and discrimination to pre-clear election rule changes with the U.S. 
Department of Justice. The decision is part of a broader attack on the voting 
rights of people of color, the poor and young people – groups that favor 
aggressive action to protect the environment and combat global warming.
3 National Security Strategy (Washington, D.C.: Office of the President of the 
United States, 2010), pgs. 8, 47. http://goo.gl/pBBP ;
4 American Association for the Advancement of Science, Climate Science Panel. 
What We Know  (Washington, DC: 2014). http://goo.gl/lVTysB
5 “Despite costs, most Americans want action on climate change,” Yale 360  Feb. 
12, 2014 ( http://goo.gl/2qYKXt ) describing Anthony Leiserowitz and others, 
Public Support for Climate and Energy Policies in November 2013  (New Haven, 
Conn.: Yale University, 2014). http://goo.gl/6DWxxT

Page 6
These wrongheaded Court decisions have made it much easier for 
corporations and a coterie of secretive billionaires to dump moun -
tains of cash into election campaigns, drowning out the voices and 
the votes of ordinary people.
A Greenpeace review of the largest campaign spenders in the 
2012 election cycle identified 87 top spenders closely tied to the big 
coal, oil and gas companies that are primarily responsible for global 
warming. In addition, 67 big political donors were identified who are 
closely tied to the Koch Brothers, the oil and gas industry billionaires 
from Wichita who are bankrolling the Tea Party and supporting hun -
dreds of nonprofits. [See Appendix A: The Kingpins of Carbon and 
the Koch Brothers’ Club of Plutocrats.]
©Tim Aubry/Greenpeace

Page 7
With the exception of the notorious Koch brothers, few of these 
malefactors of great wealth are widely known because they remain 
anonymous, funneling “dark money” into elections via murky 
nonprofit front groups, exploiting loopholes in campaign laws and 
regulations. They are pursuing a single, simple agenda:
• Prevent Congress from taking action to mitigate global warming;
• Eliminate all remaining restrictions on money in federal and state elections 
for legislators and judges, allowing totally-secret, unrestricted donations;
• Cut taxes to starve and shrink government, to keep it ineffective;
• Eliminate regulations that protect the environment, and, finally,
• Crush labor unions and reverse the victories of the civil rights movement.
These self-interested plutocrats are polluting both our environment 
and our democracy. While their congressional sock puppets claim 
global warming is “scientifically unproven” or a “hoax” and accuse 
EPA of waging a “war on coal,” it is in fact they  who are endangering 
our national security by waging a war on democracy that has para -
lyzed the government’s ability to take significant action.
They have money, but we have people. That is why Greenpeace and 
our allies have joined together to form The Democracy Initiative – an 
alliance of organizations representing 50 million people. http:///
www.democracyforus.org  We are union workers, civil rights cam -
paigners, environmental activists, community leaders, and ordinary 
concerned citizens worried about the future for our families and our 
children. Together – together  – we can overcome. Won’t you join us?

Page 8
Introduction: Warming Up
Global warming is happening now, caused mainly by humans 
burning coal, oil, and natural gas, the so-called “fossil fuels.”6 In the 
United States, the obvious effects include rising sea levels, severe 
drought across the western states, more ferocious storms, the ocean 
growing more acidic, forests dying, and great numbers of species 
going extinct.7 If our leaders had been paying attention, they would 
have seen this coming. Physicists have understood global warming 
since at least 1896: Burning fossil fuel releases carbon dioxide (CO2), 
most of which stays in the atmosphere for many centuries, heating 
the whole planet in the same way a glass roof heats a greenhouse.8 
[See Appendix A: What Global Warming is Doing to Us]
When the Declaration of Independence was adopted, in 1776, the 
Earth’s atmosphere contained about 280 parts per million (ppm) of 
CO2. In 2013, we hit 400 ppm – a 43 percent increase. As a result, 
the whole planet has warmed a bit more than 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit 
(1.5° F .), most of that since 1970.9
6 American Association for the Advancement of Science, Climate Science Panel. 
What We Know  (Washington, DC: 2014). http://goo.gl/lVTysB
7 National Climate Assessment, U.S. Global Research Program. Climate Change 
Impacts in the United States.  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Global Research Program, 
2014. http://goo.gl/h40BD6
8 Spencer Weart. 2008. The Discovery of Global Warming . 2nd edition. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2008. Available online: http://goo.gl/RUSWCF
9 National Climate Assessment, U.S. Global Research Program. 2014. Climate 
Change Impacts in the United States.  http://goo.gl/h40BD6

Page 9
The nations of the world have agreed that much more global warm -
ing would be dangerous. Therefore, since 2009, 120 nations have 
signed the Copenhagen Accord , which defined “dangerous” global 
warming as an increase of 3.6° F . (2º Celsius) above pre-industrial 
levels.10 This requires holding atmospheric CO2 near 450 ppm or 
less.11 As CO2 levels are trending now, we’ll hit 450 ppm in 25 years, 
if not before.12
10 “Dangerous” global warming was defined in the Copenhagen Accord  
(available here: http://goo.gl/YfJ8a7 ): “To achieve the ultimate objective of 
the Convention to stabilize greenhouse gas concentration in the atmosphere 
at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the 
climate system, we shall, recognizing the scientific view that the increase in 
global temperature should be below 2 degrees Celsius [3.6 degrees Fahrenheit], 
on the basis of equity and in the context of sustainable development, enhance 
our long-term cooperative action to combat climate change.” Many qualified 
experts believe a 3.6° F . global average rise and 450 ppm CO2 in the atmosphere 
are far too large to assure safety for planet Earth and its inhabitants, and 
they have strong arguments. See, for example, Kevin Anderson, “Climate 
Change: going beyond dangerous... brutal numbers and tenuous hope or 
cognitive dissonance?” PowerPoint presentation dated July, 2011 (on Vimeo 
at http://goo.gl/9qTJS  ), which is based on Kevin Anderson and Alice Bows, 
“Reframing the climate change challenge in light of post-2000 emission trends.” 
Philosophical  Transactions of the Royal Society A.  Vol. 366 (2008), pgs. 3863-
3882 ( http://goo.gl/0zVGE  ) and on Kevin Anderson and Alice Bows, “Beyond 
‘dangerous’ climate change: emission scenarios for a new world.” Philosophical  
Transactions of the Royal Society A.  Vol. 369 (2011), pgs. 20-44 ( http://goo.
gl/hXFCUX ). See also James Hansen, Storms of My Grandchildren  (N.Y.: 
Bloomsbury USA, 2009). http://goo.gl/lsV76e  ; And: James Hansen and others, 
“Climate sensitivity, sea level and atmospheric carbon dioxide.” Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society A . Vol. 371 (2013): 20120294, pgs. 1-31. http://
goo.gl/m5ziUS  ; and James Hansen and others. “Assessing ‘Dangerous Climate 
Change’: Required Reduction of Carbon Emissions to Protect Young People, 
Future Generations, and Nature.” Plos One  Vol. 8, No. 12 (Dec., 2013), pgs. 1-26. 
http://goo.gl/zaJ17w  In this report we have adopted as a reference standard 
the Copenhagen goal, a 3.6° F . (2° C.) upper limit on average global temperature 
rise.
11 Emily Atkin. “The Three Most Sobering Graphics from the U.N.’s New Climate 
Report.” Climate Progress . April 13, 2014 ( http://goo.gl/sHLMW6 ) discussing 
“Summary for Policymakers” in O. Edenhofer and others, editors, Climate 
Change 2014, Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III 
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
(N.Y. and Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2014). http://goo.gl/
mbGGcr
12 James Hansen,  Storms of My Grandchildren  (N.Y.: Bloomsbury USA: 2009), pg.  

Page 10
The Crux of the Problem
According to authoritative sources, to stay below the 3.6º F . guard 
rail, to avoid dangerous global warming, roughly two-thirds of all 
known fossil fuel reserves must remain in the ground, unburned.13
Plainly put, for humanity to avoid dangerous global warming, the 
fossil corporations must forego most of their future profits, risking 
eventual bankruptcy.
To Prevent “Dangerous” Global Warming, 
Government Must Act
The Pentagon has said repeatedly that global warming threatens 
U.S. national security. For example, the U.S. National Security Strategy  
said in 2010, “The danger from climate change is real, urgent, and 
severe. The change wrought by a warming planet will lead to new 
conflicts over refugees and resources; new suffering from drought 
and famine; catastrophic natural disasters; and the degradation of 
land across the globe.” And: “Climate change and pandemic disease 
threaten the security of regions and the health and safety of the 
American people.”14 That risk alone provides a sound basis for gov -
ernment action, but so far our government has been paralyzed.
160. http://goo.gl/lsV76e
13 IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change], Working Group III 
contribution to the IPCC 5th Assessment Report “Climate Change 2014: Mitigation 
of Climate Change, ” (Geneva, Switzerland, 2014), Chapter 5, pg. 38. http://goo.
gl/rWTbKB ; Malte Meinshausen and others. “Greenhouse-gas emission targets 
for limiting global warming to 2ºC [3.6° F .],” Nature  Vol. 458 (2009), pgs. 1158-
1163 http://goo.gl/8WGQjl ; James Hansen and others, “Climate sensitivity, 
sea level and atmospheric carbon dioxide.” Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society A . Vol. 371 (2013), 20120294 http://goo.gl/m5ziUS ; Will Steffen 
and Lesley Hughes. The Critical Decade 2013: Climate change science, risks and 
response.  Canberra, Australia: Climate Commission Secretariat, 2013. http://
goo.gl/srm0Ie ; Frank McDonald, “Two-thirds of energy sector will have to be 
left undeveloped, Bonn conference told.” Irish Times, June 12, 2013 , quoting 
Fatih Birol, chief economist of the International Energy Agency.  http://goo.gl/
iHTZNB .
14 National Security Strategy (Washington, D.C.: Office of the President of the 
United States, 2010), pgs. 8, 47. http://goo.gl/pBBP ; John M. Broder, “Climate 
Change Seen as Threat to U.S. Security,” New York Times,  Aug. 8, 2009.  http://
goo.gl/GLftPs  ; Coral Davenport, “Climate Change Deemed Growing Security 
Threat by Military Researchers,” New York Times,  May 14, 2014.  http://goo.gl/
emi9Wh

Page 11
President Obama’s latest plan, to curb carbon emissions from U.S. 
coal power plants, is a start but can be negated easily if U.S. fossil 
corporations simply increase their exports, which, Greenpeace 
research shows, they are already doing.15 If U.S. fossil fuel exports 
continue to increase, U.S. emissions might diminish while global 
emissions continued to rise.
Because the Pentagon has acknowledged that global warming 
threatens U.S. national security, Congress and the President could 
justify emergency action to curb both CO2 emissions and fossil fuel 
exports. Furthermore, “A large majority of Americans – 83 percent 
[including 85 percent of Democrats and 55 percent of Republicans] 
– say the U.S. should try to reduce global warming, even if it entails 
economic costs,” according to a 2013 opinion survey by Yale and 
George Mason Universities.16
Why, then, won’t – or can’t  – our government act?
15 Greenpeace USA, Leasing Coal, Fueling Climate Change  (Washington, D.C.: 
Greenpeace USA, July 28, 2014). http://goo.gl/uANB3l ; and see U.S. Energy 
Information Administration, U.S. Exports of Crude Oil and Petroleum Products 
[1988-2014]. http://goo.gl/YO8wAf  ; and: National Mining Association (“U.S. 
Coal Exports” web site). “Exports Benefit Every Region.” http://goo.gl/2zBROh  
Accessed June 23, 2014.
16 “Despite costs, most Americans want action on climate change,” Yale 360  Feb. 
12, 2014 http://goo.gl/2qYKXt  describing Anthony Leiserowitz and others, 
Public Support for Climate and Energy Policies in November 2013  (New Haven, 
Conn.: Yale University, 2014). http://goo.gl/6DWxxT

Page 12
The Strategy of the Kingpins of Carbon
To continue selling carbon fuels, and to stifle the rapid deployment 
of readily-available alternatives (such as super-efficient lights, heat -
ing units, and motors, plus renewable energy sources17), the fossil 
corporations – with help from a vast network of operatives funded 
by a handful of reclusive billionaires – have undertaken two highly-
organized and well-funded campaigns to help them gain, and retain, 
political control in the United States:
1. They are working to get rid of any and all limits on the amount 
of money that can be donated to, or spent by, election campaigns 
for public office at the federal, state and local levels. Furthermore, 
as part of this campaign they are working to get rid of all require -
ments that sources of money be disclosed. Their goal is unlimited 
secret donations to, and expenditures by, election campaigns. In this 
campaign, they are being enabled by a majority of justices on the U.S. 
Supreme Court.
2. Secondly, the kingpins of carbon are conducting a nationwide 
campaign at the federal, state, and local levels to suppress the vote 
among people considered likely to vote Democrat, which includes 
blacks, Latinos, Asians, the young, the elderly, and the disabled. In 
this effort, too, they are being aided by a majority of justices on the 
U.S. Supreme Court.
17 David Goldstein, Invisible Energy. Point Richmond, Calif.: Bay Tree Publishing, 
2009. http://goo.gl/PoBVck ; David Goldstein, “America’s Future: Austerity or 
Invisible Energy?” New York: Switchboard, the Natural Resources Defense Council 
Blog , June 11, 2010. http://goo.gl/vzM7RD ; Benjamin K. Sovacool, The Dirty 
Energy Dilemma . Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2008. http://goo.gl/oLstha ; Amory 
Lovins and others. Reinventing Fire; Bold Business Solutions for the New Energy 
Era. White River Junction, Vermont: Chelsea Green Publishing, 2011. http://
goo.gl/zGwsm ; Peter Montague, Energy Efficiency: Good Jobs, Low Carbon, 
Available Now.  New Brunswick, N.J.: Environmental Research Foundation, 
2013. http://goo.gl/PJEFT ; Sven Teske and others, energy [r]evolution  3rd 
edition (Amsterdam, Holland: Greenpeace International and European 
Renewable Energy Council, May, 2014).  http://goo.gl/e8C2he

Page 13
In Congress, the fossil corporations’ allies are refusing to act, based 
on the false claim that global warming is scientifically unproven or 
is even a hoax perpetrated by the world’s major scientific organiza -
tions. Meanwhile the 3.6º F . “safe” limit on global warming will soon 
disappear in our rear-view mirror.
A Grim Prognosis by the Mainstream of the Mainstream
According to the World Bank, the International Energy Agency, 
and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), we are 
now on track for an average global temperature rise of 7º F . (4º C.), or 
more – perhaps as early as 2060.18
The World Bank said in 2012 that a 7º F . rise would have “dev -
astating” effects that “must be avoided.” In 2014 the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science, the largest scientific 
organization in the world, summarized the perils of global warming 
this way: “We face risks of abrupt, unpredictable and potentially irre -
versible changes” with, possibly, “massively disruptive consequences 
to societies and ecosystems.”19
In other words, the Establishment fully acknowledges that we are 
on a path that risks destruction. Yet our government won’t – or can’t  
– act. Again, the question is, Why?
And so our story begins.
18 World Bank, Turn Down the Heat; Why a 4ºC Warmer World Must be Avoided . 
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 2012. http://goo.gl/JohGMI ; Joe Romm, 
“The $4 Trillion Mistake: Climate Action Delayed is Climate Action Denied.” 
Climate Progress , May 14, 2014. http://goo.gl/eTMidl ; International Energy 
Agency, Energy Technology Perspectives 2014 . Paris: International Energy Agency, 
2014. http://goo.gl/HzI9KS  ; O. Edenhofer and others, editors, Climate Change 
2014, Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (N.Y. and 
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2014), Chapter 5 http://goo.
gl/rWTbKB  See also: Joe Romm, “Faux Pause 3: More Evidence Global Surface 
Temperatures Poised To Rise Rapidly,” ClimateProgress  July 22, 2014. http://
goo.gl/v8byfW
19 World Bank, Turn Down the Heat; Why a 4ºC Warmer World Must be Avoided . 
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 2012. http://goo.gl/JohGMI ; American 
Association for the Advancement of Science, Climate Science Panel. What We 
Know  (Washington, DC: 2014). http://goo.gl/lVTysB

Page 14
Oiling Congress
Everyone knows money talks. And with enough money, you can 
talk your way into a seat in Congress. And once you’re elected, your 
chances of being re-elected are excellent. Getting re-elected is impor -
tant because the longer you stay in Congress, the more influential 
you become (it’s called the “seniority system”20). And the more 
influential you become, the more money comes your way. (It is telling 
that now, for the first time in U.S. history, a majority in Congress are 
millionaires,21 as are 8 out of 9 Supreme Court justices.22 Millionaires 
rule, literally.)
Election campaigns require saturation coverage on TV , which is 
very expensive. In 2012, incumbents seeking re-election to the 
House of Representatives raised an average of $1.6 million each, 
about six times as much as their challengers, who raised an average 
of only $268,000 each. In the Senate, incumbents raised eight times 
as much as their challengers ($11.8 million vs. $1.4 million each). 23 
Not surprisingly, for the past 50 years incumbents have won about 
90 percent of the time.24
Of course after you’ve supported successful candidates, they are in 
a position to do favors for you, making laws and policies that help 
you out. For example, in the U.S., if you are in the fossil fuel business, 
the federal government subsidizes your industry with somewhere 
between $10 and $52 billion of taxpayer money each year (depending 
on what you count as a subsidy).25 That’s free money from taxpayers, 
which can be kicked back into congressional elections to keep the 
free money and other benefits flowing.
20 Kathy Gill, “What is the Seniority System?” About.com. http://goo.gl/Dlpya3  
Accessed July 8, 2014.
21 Carly Cody, “Majority in Congress are Millionaires,” NPR.org, Jan. 13, 2014. 
http://goo.gl/r8rbfr
22 Richard Wolf, “Nearly all Supreme Court justices are millionaires” USA Today  
June 20, 2014. http://goo.gl/lWPGSR
23 “Incumbent Advantage,” OpenSecrets.org http://goo.gl/LmNviV  Accessed 
July 8, 2014
24 “Reelection Rates Over the years,” OpenSecrets.org http://goo.gl/ynOHSL  
Accessed July 8, 2014
25 “Fossil Fuel Subsidies: Overview,” Oil Change International http://goo.gl/
BYdMg  Accessed July 8, 2014

Page 15
A recent report tells us that oil, gas and coal companies “are among 
the biggest political donors, and their investments in Congress are 
paying off. For every $1 the fossil fuel industry spends on campaign 
finance and lobbying, they get $59 back in tax breaks and other 
subsidies – a 5,800 percent rate of return.… At the industry’s urging, 
Congress has blocked critically needed climate and energy policies 
and launched dozens of legislative attacks on existing environmental 
protections….”26 Academic studies have drawn similar conclusions, 
documenting huge payback from investments in political cam -
paigns.27
The corporate capture of Congress is certainly not unique to the 
energy corporations. In 2014, two eminent political scientists 
studied 1,779 policy issues and found that “America’s claims to being 
a democratic society are seriously threatened,” because “economic 
elites and organized groups representing business interests have 
substantial independent impacts on U.S. government policy, while 
average citizens and mass-based interest groups have little or no 
independent influence.”28
The vast majority of Americans have understood this trend for 
a long time. In a 2009 Harris poll, for example, over 80 percent of 
Americans across the partisan spectrum – Republicans, Democrats 
and Independents alike – agreed that big business and PACs have too 
26 Oil Change International and Sierra Club, Polluting Our Democracy and 
Environment: Dirty Fuels Money in Politics  (Washington, D.C.: Oil Change 
International, April 2014). http://goo.gl/EKxy2U
27 Oil Change International and Sierra Club, Polluting Our Democracy and 
Environment: Dirty Fuels Money in Politics  (Washington, D.C.: Oil Change 
International, April 2014). http://goo.gl/EKxy2U  Another study concludes that 
the rate of return for political investors was over 200 times the investment. See 
Raquel Meyer Alexander and others, “Measuring Rates of Return for Lobbying 
Expenditures: An Empirical Case Study of Tax Breaks for Multinational 
Corporations,” Journal of Law and Politics , Vol. 25, No. 401 ( 2009), pgs. 1-36. 
http://goo.gl/MtBWd  Another study concludes that contributions to both 
parties yield gains in corporate share value. See Michael J. Cooper et al., 
“Corporate Political Contributions and Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance , Vol. 
65, No. 2, (April, 2010), pgs. 687-724. Summarized at http://goo.gl/nxopsi
28 Martin Gilens and Benjamin I. Page, “Testing Theories of American Politics: 
Elites, Interest Groups and Average Citizens,” unpublished paper dated April 9, 
2014. http://goo.gl/lkffKb

Page 16
much power and influence.29 (PACs are “political action committees” 
– groups of people pooling their money to elect or defeat candidates, 
influence ballot initiatives or affect legislation. [See box, “PACs and 
Super PACs.”])
Unfortunately, recent U.S. Supreme Court decisions have made the 
situation far worse. 30 Before 2010, election money could merely talk; 
now it can shout, drowning out the voices of ordinary citizens.
Of course there’s nothing wrong with wealth per se. Who hasn’t 
dreamed of gaining sufficient wealth to become independent? But in 
a democratic republic like the U.S., enormous wealth buying political 
power can endanger the general welfare of the people. As esteemed 
journalist Bill Moyers puts it, “Wealth acquired under capitalism 
is in and of itself no enemy to democracy, but wealth armed with 
political power – power to choke off opportunities for others to rise, 
power to subvert public purposes and deny public needs – is a proven 
danger to the ‘general welfare’ proclaimed in the Preamble to the 
Constitution as one of the justifications for America’s existence.”31 
President Theodore Roosevelt in 1907 recognized the “malefactors 
of great wealth” as a threat to our democratic republic. Thirty years 
later, in his “Rendezvous with Destiny” speech, President Franklin 
Roosevelt identified the danger to democracy posed by “economic 
royalists” – those who sought concentrated political power based on 
concentrated wealth. He said, “These economic royalists complain 
that we seek to overthrow the institutions of America. What they 
really complain of is that we seek to take away their power. Our al -
legiance to American institutions requires the overthrow of this kind 
of power.” Many New Deal programs tended to level the economic 
playing field, reducing the power of the economic royalists.
29 Regina A. Corso, “Very Large Majorities of Americans Believe Big Companies, 
PACs, Political Lobbyists and the News Media Have Too Much Power and 
Influence in D.C.,” Harris Interactive, March 12, 2009. http://goo.gl/e6QdBb
30 McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission, April 2, 2014. For the decision 
and related filings see the case file at http://goo.gl/rOm1a7
31 Bill Moyers, “Fighting Back,” in Jeffrey D. Clements, Corporations Are Not 
People  (San Francisco: Berret-Koehler, 2012), pg. xii.

Page 17
PACs and Super PACs
A PAC is a group of people who pool their money to elect or defeat 
candidates, or to influence ballot initiatives, or legislation. If a PAC 
is aiming to affect federal  campaigns, its fundraising is regulated by 
the Federal Election Commission (FEC). PACs influencing state-level 
campaigns are regulated by the individual states. Federal PACs have 
been legal since 1944, and must register with the Federal Election 
Commission as soon as they have raised $1000. Federal PACs must 
report their donors, donations, and expenditures frequently and the 
information is promptly published on an FEC web site. There are 
roughly 5000 PACs registered with the FEC.
Most PACs represent businesses, such as the Microsoft PAC; labor 
unions, such as the Teamsters PAC; or ideological interests, such as 
the National Rifle Association PAC. An organization’s PAC can solicit 
up to $5,000 each from the group’s employees or members and can 
make contributions of up to $10,000 to candidates ($5K each for 
the primary and general elections) and up to $15,000/yr to political 
parties.
Super PACs
A Super PAC, also known as “an independent expenditure-only 
committee,” is one kind of political action committee (PAC) that 
came into existence in 2010 following a federal court decision known 
as SpeechNow.org v. Federal Election Commission .
According to the Federal Election Commission, independent 
expenditures  “represent spending by individuals, groups, politi -
cal committees, corporations or unions expressly advocating the 
election or defeat of clearly identified federal candidates. These 
expenditures may not be made in concert or cooperation with, or at 
the request or suggestion of, a candidate, the candidate’s campaign 
or a political party.” 1
1 http://www.fec.gov/press/press2011/ieoc_alpha.shtml  Accessed July 8, 2014

Page 18
Citizens United , Part 1: Corporations United
Starting back in 1907, Congress banned donations to political cam -
paigns by corporations, for two reasons: (a) The money in a corporate 
treasury belongs to stockholders, who may not agree with its use 
for political purposes; and (b) compared to individuals, corporations 
receive special privileges and advantages from the government (per -
petual life; limited liability for investors; and special tax treatment), 
and those economic  advantages should not be turned into political  
advantages, for fear that corporations will use their vast economic 
power to bribe legislators into granting them even more advantages, 
like more “special tax treatment.”
What does “special tax treatment” mean? Many large corporations 
– especially the largest of them – pay little or no taxes. For example, 
Citizens for Tax Justice (CTJ) reported in 2014 that, during the five-
year period, 2008 through 2012, 26 of the largest American corpora -
tions paid no federal income taxes – zero, none.32 During that period, 
the combined profit of those 26 corporations was $170 billion. Giant 
corporations paying no taxes included General Electric, Boeing, 
and Verizon. Among America’s Fortune 500 corporations, 288 were 
profitable in each of the five years 2008 through 2012. Those 288 
32 Robert S. McIntyre, Matthew Gardner, and Richard Phillips, The Sorry State of 
Corporate Taxes; What Fortune 500 Firms Pay (or Don’t Pay) in the USA and What 
They Pay Abroad – 2008 to 2012  (Washington, D.C.: Citizens for Tax Justice, 
2014). http://goo.gl/PFsNdBPACs and Super PACs continued
Thus Super PACs are allowed to raise and spend unlimited sums of 
money for the sole purpose of advocating for or against identifiable 
candidates. However, unlike traditional PACs, Super PACs may not 
donate money directly  to candidates.
Super PACs are required to disclose their donors to the Federal 
Election Commission, although many Super PACs now channel their 
donations through 501(c) nonprofit groups [See box: “The 501(c) 
Loophole and Dark Money,” Pgs. XX–XX.], which are not required 
to disclose their funders, thus evading the intent of the law and 
providing large donors with anonymity.

Page 19
firms paid an average federal tax of 19.4 percent, considerably less 
than nominal 35 percent top tax rate mandated by law. During the 
five-year period, one-third (93) of the 288 firms paid less than 10 
percent in taxes on their profits. Furthermore, CTJ reported, those 
288 corporations paid higher taxes in foreign countries where they 
did business, than they paid on the U.S.
So, yes, corporations get very special tax treatment under U.S. 
law. Among those getting the very sweetest deal are the fossil fuel 
corporations. A recent report shows that, between 2009 and 2014, 
U.S. oil and gas corporations paid an effective annual tax rate of 11.7 
percent. The report points out that this is “dramatically less” than the 
46.2 percent these same companies paid in taxes to foreign govern -
ments where they operate overseas.33
33 Taxpayers for Common Sense, Effective Tax Rates of Oil and Gas Companies: 
Cashing in on Special Treatment  (Washington, D.C.: Taxpayers for Common 
Sense, July, 2014). http://goo.gl/B7pxYTCitizens United  v. Federal Election Commission
The U.S. Supreme Court’s 5-4 decision in 2010 allowed corpora -
tions and unions to use funds from their general treasuries to pay for 
political advertisements (“independent expenditures”) that expressly 
call for the election or defeat of a candidate, so long as those ads 
are not coordinated with a particular candidate. The court ruling 
solidified the legal concepts that corporate-funded political adver -
tisements are “speech” and that such speech is protected by the First 
Amendment to the Constitution because corporations are just like 
people.1 The ruling capped a 40-year campaign to have corporations 
deemed “persons” under the law with their campaign expenditures 
protected as “speech” under the First Amendment.2
1 Editorial Board, “The Court’s Blow to Democracy,” New York Times  Jan. 22, 
2010 http://goo.gl/NEGwG8
2 Robert L. Kerr, The Corporate Free Speech Movement  (New York: LFB Scholarly 
Publishing, 2008). David D. Kirkpatrick, “Courts Roll Back Limits on Election 
Spending,” New York Times Jan. 9, 2010 http://goo.gl/zdSg7G ; Adam Liptak, 

Page 20
The Corporate Free Speech Movement
But corporate elites want more. For the past 40 years, a small group 
of lawyers has been conducting a campaign to overturn the 1907 ban 
on corporate donations to election campaigns, aiming to establish 
a “right” for corporations to spend unlimited amounts of money in 
elections and to do so in secret.34 [See box: “Challenging Corporate 
Constitutional Rights.”] Their first victory came in 1976 in a Supreme 
Court case called Buckley v. Valeo , when the Court first equated 
money with speech. Two years later, in First National Bank v. Bellotti , 
the Court ruled that corporate spending on political media messages 
34 Robert L. Kerr, The Rights of Corporate Speech; Mobil Oil and the Legal 
Development of the Voice of Big Business  (New York: LFB Scholarly Publishing, 
2005); and Robert L. Kerr, The Corporate Free Speech Movement (New York: 
LFB Scholarly Publishing, 2008). And: David D. Kirkpatrick, “A Quest to End 
Spending Rules for Campaigns,” New York Times  Jan. 25, 2010. http://goo.gl/
WJcW1Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission, continued
The Citizens United  ruling did not eliminate restrictions on cor -
porate donations made directly to candidates. It also did not affect 
other campaign finance regulations, such as limits on individual 
contributions to campaigns, or the ban on expenditures by foreign 
corporations.
Two months after Citizens United,  the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 
District of Columbia Circuit struck down limits on contributions to 
political committees (PACs) that only make independent expendi -
tures. The decision in the case – known as SpeechNow v. FEC  – led the 
FEC to issue guidance allowing political action committees (PACs) 
that only make “independent expenditures” (now known as Super 
PACs), to take unlimited contributions, so long as they disclose the 
source.
Soon after the Citizens United  and SpeechNow  decisions, a flood of 
corporate money began to pour into Super PACs, trade associations 
and nonprofit front groups. [See box: “The 501(c) Loophole and Dark 
Money.”]
“Justices, 5-4, Reject Corporate Spending Limit,” New York Times  January 21, 
2010. http://goo.gl/s8rTSh

Page 21
was “corporate speech,” protected by the First Amendment to the 
Constitution.35 Bellotti  established the “right” of a corporation to 
spend its funds to influence a referendum (in which voters approve 
or reject a proposed law, rather than choose a candidate). After that, 
it was only a matter of time before the ban on corporate spending in 
elections could be overturned. It finally happened in 2010 when the 
court ruled in Citizens United v. FEC  that corporations have a right, 
protected by the First Amendment, to spend without limit on media 
campaigns to influence elections, so long as those expenditures are 
not “coordinated” with a particular candidate.36 [See box, “ Citizens 
United  v. Federal Election Commission. ”]
Jeffrey Toobin, who follows campaign finance for the New Yorker , 
summarized Citizens United  this way: “The gist of the Citizens United 
decision is that it gave rich people more or less free rein to spend as 
much money as they want in support of their favored candidates.”37
35 Robert L. Kerr, The Corporate Free Speech Movement . New York: LFB Scholarly 
Publishing, 2008.
36 Jeffrey Toobin, “Money Unlimited; How Chief Justice Roberts Orchestrated 
the Citizens United Decision,” The New Yorker  May 21, 2012. http://goo.gl/
hQ2DW
37 Jeffrey Toobin, “Republicans United on Climate Change,” The New Yorker  
June 10, 2014. http://goo.gl/gLJPbB  And see Jeffrey Toobin, “Money 
Unlimited; How Chief Justice Roberts Orchestrated the Citizens United 
Decision,” The New Yorker  May 21, 2012. http://goo.gl/hQ2DWChallenging Corporate Constitutional Rights
By manipulating and twisting judicial doctrines, and by many 
other means, corporations have acquired the ability to overturn 
regulations and otherwise directly undermine the public interest in 
numerous ways, creating a fundamental shift in power that threat -
ens the traditions and core principles of American democracy.1
1 For a more detailed review see Ted Nace, Gangs of America: The Rise of Corporate 
Power and the Disabling of Democracy  (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2003); Lee 
Drutman and Charlie Cray, The People’s Business: Controlling Corporations and 
Restoring Democracy  (especially chapter 2: “Challenging the Corporate Claim to 

Page 22
Challenging Corporate Constitutional Rights, continued
In 1931, legal scholar Frederick Wormser summed up the corpo -
rate capture of the federal government as a monstrous and funda -
mental threat to democracy in his book, Frankenstein, Incorporated .
Wormser drew a strong analogy between the day’s giant corpora -
tions and Mary Shelley’s fictional creature: Both escaped their 
creator’s grip, turning into “the terror of ‘all living things’ [that] 
threatened the security and well-being of mankind.”2
“The entire conception of the business corporation must be 
modified in the interest of public service,” Wormser asserted. 
“Corporations must be made to serve social interests, deal honestly 
and fairly, observe the rights of the community… The theory of 
social interest and public trust must supplant the doric simplicity 
of the old laissez faire  doctrine, so far as our corporate giants are 
concerned. There must be a new conception of corporate ‘rights.’ 
Modern and enlightened ideas of social and economic responsibility 
must supplant the individualistic philosophy of the early common 
law and of the business man. … The franchise from the people which 
grants to corporations their invaluable privileges and immunities 
involves the assumption of corollary duties and obligations. The vas -
sal owes a duty of the utmost good faith to its creator, the people. As 
matters of good business and public policy alike, great corporations 
owe, and should heed, and must pay, this debt owing to the commu -
nity from which they have obtained and gained so much.”
Today, corporate colonization of constitutional theory and judicial 
doctrine has extended well beyond where it stood in Wormser’s day, 
especially in the realm of commercial and political speech – two key 
corporate judicial doctrines.
It’s time to make it incontrovertibly clear that the rights enshrined 
in the Constitution are meant for the American people – the ulti -
mate constitutional authority – not for artificial legal entities created 
through incorporation.
Constitutional Rights”); and Jeffrey D. Clements, Corporations Are Not People  
(San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2012).
2 Frederick Wormser, Frankenstein Incorporated  (N.Y.: McGraw-Hill, 1931).

Page 23
Rise of the Super PAC
The effect on U.S. elections was immediate and dramatic. By 2012, 
“independent expenditures” on ads, mailings, and phone calls (also 
known as “outside spending”) in federal elections increased 400 
percent,38 and new kinds of organizations quickly came to dominate 
campaign finance. A PAC dedicated to “independent expenditures” 
– usually TV ads bashing the opposition – is called a Super PAC. 
Between 2010 and August 2012, the number of Super PACs grew 
from 84 to 797, with just 100 donors providing some 60 percent of 
38 Craig Holman, Testimony to the Senate Committee on Rules & 
Administration, April 30, 2014. Holman is Public Citizen’s congressional 
lobbyist for campaign finance and governmental ethics. http://goo.gl/TigeVUChallenging Corporate Constitutional Rights, continued
The People’s Rights Constitutional Amendment (S. J. Res. 18, 
introduced by Senator Jon Tester, D-Mont. and H.J. Res. 21, intro -
duced by Rep. James McGovern, D-Mass.) goes beyond S.J. Res. 19 – 
the Citizens United amendment – by making clear that corporations 
have no constitutional rights that are not expressly granted to them.
Further resources on this issue:
Free Speech for People http://freespeechforpeople.org  (“Get big 
money out of our politics and end the fiction that corporations have 
constitutional rights, as if they were people.”)
Move to Amend in Eureka, California (“End corporate rule. Legalize 
democracy.”) http://www.movetoamend.org
The Community Environmental Legal Defense Fund (CELDF) in 
Mercersburg, Pa. http://www.celdf.org
Public Citizen http://www.citizen.org
The Center for Corporate Policy http://www.corporatepolicy.org
The Constitutional Accountability Center http://www.constitu -
tionalaccountability.org

Page 24
the $394 million raised during that period.39 In the 2012 election, 
Super PACs ended up spending just over $567 million – more than 
half-a- billion  dollars.40 Much of that money was untraceable because 
it flowed from Super PACs through “dark money” nonprofits that 
provide a loophole in campaign finance regulations, allowing donors 
to hide their identities. [“See box: The 501(c) Loophole and Dark 
Money”.]
Outrage over Citizens United  spanned the political spectrum. 
According to a 2010 poll, 77 percent of all voters – including 70 per -
cent of Republicans and 73 percent of independents – view corporate 
election spending as an attempt to bribe politicians rather than free 
speech that should be protected.41
Dale Robertson, founder of TeaParty.org, said, “Corporations are 
not like people. Our founding fathers never wanted them; these 
[are] behemoth organizations that never die, so they can collect an 
insurmountable amount of profit. It puts the people at a tremendous 
disadvantage.”42
In a similar vein, long-time clean-election campaigner, and 
president of Democracy 21, Fred Wertheimer, said, “It has been 
a principle of our democracy, dating back more than a century, 
that corporate wealth should not be used in federal elections. This 
principle is based on the fundamental idea that individuals vote to 
choose federal officeholders and only individuals should provide the 
private financing to elect these officeholders, not corporations or 
other artificial entities.”43
39 James Bennet, “The New Price of American Politics,” The Atlantic , Sept. 19, 
2012. http://goo.gl/crWlO
40 “2012 Outside Spending, by Super PAC,” OpenSecrets.org  http://goo.gl/
zkFqtK
41 Voter Roll Call Survey dated Aug. 9, 2010, cited in Katrina van den Heuvel, 
“Citizens United Aftershocks,” Washington Post  Aug. 25, 2010. http://goo.gl/
YAHLzO
42 “The SCOTUS ‘corporate cash for candidates’ decision: left, right and tea,” 
The Reid Report (blog), Jan. 21, 2010. http://goo.gl/r6n7xc
43 Democracy 21, “The Citizens United Case, Part 4: Key Points Made in Briefs 
Supporting the Ban on Corporate Expenditures in Campaigns,” Aug. 26, 2009. 
http://goo.gl/kwBHCJ

Page 25
Large majorities of U.S. business leaders polled after Citizens United  
agreed that major contributors already had too much influence on 
politicians, that the U.S. campaign finance system is pay-to-play (in 
other words, without money, you’re nobody), and that there should 
be limits on how much money individuals, corporations, and labor 
can give to political candidates.44
In response to Citizens United , the editors of the New York Times  
wrote, “With a single, disastrous 5-to-4 ruling, the Supreme Court 
has thrust politics back to the robber-baron era of the 19th century. 
Disingenuously waving the flag of the First Amendment, the court’s 
conservative majority has paved the way for corporations to use 
their vast treasuries to overwhelm elections and intimidate elected 
officials into doing their bidding.”45
This is an important point: Now that the Supreme Court has 
allowed corporations to spend unlimited amounts of money on elec -
tions, they may not actually have to spend any money to intimidate a 
candidate.46 They could simply announce, “We have unlimited funds 
to spend for you or against  you. It’s your choice.” Few in Congress 
could afford to ignore that kind of threat. In 38 states, judges are 
elected, so in those states even the “non-political branch of govern -
ment” – the judiciary – may be subject to intimidation by big mon -
ey.47
The Citizens United  decision is already undermining democracy 
in another way – by reducing citizens’ faith that voting can make a 
difference. In a national poll taken two years after Citizens United,  25 
percent of Americans said they were less likely to vote now that big 
donors have so much more influence over elected officials than aver -
44 Hart Research Associates, “American Business Leaders on Campaign Finance 
and Reform,” survey conducted for the Committee for Economic Development, 
May/June 2013. http://goo.gl/or4dqY
45 Editorial Board, “The Court’s Blow to Democracy,” New York Times , Jan. 22, 
2010. http://goo.gl/NEGwG8
46 David D. Kirkpatrick, “Lobbyists Get Potent Weapon in Campaign Ruling,” 
New York Times Jan. 22, 2010. http://goo.gl/hr8ZjH
47 American Bar Association, “Fact Sheet on Judicial Selection Methods in the 
States” http://goo.gl/MGtj70  Accessed July 8, 2014

Page 26
age Americans.48 Suppressing voter turnout has been a Republican 
goal for decades. In 1980, legendary Republican strategist Paul 
Weyrich told Ronald Reagan, “I don’t want everybody to vote. Our 
leverage, quite frankly, goes up as the size of the voting population 
goes down.”49
The third – and by far most important – consequence of Citizens 
United  was both unanticipated and potentially revolutionary. Jeffrey 
Toobin, staff writer for the New Yorker,  explains:
[Money gushing into Super PACs] “had the effect of taking money 
and power away from the political parties – which control only mod -
est amounts of money by contemporary standards – and handing 
that power to the people who write the checks. Certain of these 
people, the newly empowered rich, care a great deal about climate 
change – about denying its existence and fighting attempts to limit 
its impact. No one is quite sure who gives how much to the 501(c)(4)s,  
because they are allowed to keep their donors’ names secret. But it’s 
clear that in the forefront of anti-climate-change activism are the 
Koch brothers [Charles and David Koch of Wichita, Kans., heirs to 
a giant energy conglomerate], who have invested huge amounts in 
politics and political candidates since Citizens United. (Jane Mayer 
has written about the brothers’ efforts.50) The Kochs are so promi -
nent that they have become, in effect, gatekeepers for Republican 
politics.51 Climate-change denial is now the price of admission to 
the charmed circle of Republican donors,”52 Toobin writes.  To receive 
campaign funds approved by the billionaire Koch brothers, a politi -
48 Brennan Center for Justice, “Poll: Super PACs Leave Americans Less Likely to 
Vote,” April 24, 2012. http://goo.gl/81dSJp
49 Quoted in Kim Phillips-Fein, Invisible Hands  (N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 2009), pg. 
257.
50 Jane Mayer, “Covert Operations; the billionaire brothers who are waging a 
war against Obama,” New Yorker  Vol. 86, No. 25 (Aug. 30, 2010), pgs. 44-55. 
http://goo.gl/M4MJB1
51 Eric Holmberg and Alexia Fernandez Campbell, “Koch: Climate Pledge 
Strategy continue to grow,” Investigative Reporting Workshop July 1, 2013. 
http://goo.gl/bQyQ6p
52 Jeffrey Toobin, “Republicans United on Climate Change,” The New Yorker  
June 10, 2014. Emphasis added. http://goo.gl/gLJPbB

Page 27
cian actually has to sign a “No climate tax pledge,” promising not to 
spend any money to fight climate change without cutting taxes an 
equivalent amount.53
In other words, the Citizens United  decision has enabled two radical 
libertarian billionaires, whose fortune derives from (and depends 
upon) oil and gas, to blackmail every Republican candidate for office 
into denying the need to take bold action on global warming.
This fact alone goes a long way toward explaining why the U.S. 
government cannot act to resolve the global warming crisis, even as 
the Pentagon is saying the danger to America is “real, urgent, and 
severe.”54
Of course the Koch brothers are not acting alone. They are joined 
by a rogue’s gallery of fossil corporation executives and underlings, 
all working to manipulate the political system in their own ways, 
aiming to stymie efforts by government to solve the urgent problem 
of global warming. As revealed by new Greenpeace research, these 
are the true kingpins of carbon. [See Appendix A: The Kingpins of 
Carbon and the Koch Brothers’ Club of Plutocrats.]
53 Eric Holmberg, “Koch: Climate Pledge Strategy Continues to Grow,” 
InvestigativeReportingWorkshop.org July 1, 2013. http://goo.gl/bQyQ6p  See 
who has signed the pledge here: http://goo.gl/8vRHNA
54 National Security Strategy (Washington, D.C.: Office of the President of the 
United States, 2010), pgs. 8, 47. http://goo.gl/pBBP ; John M. Broder, “Climate 
Change Seen as Threat to U.S. Security.” New York Times  (Aug. 8, 2009).  http://
goo.gl/GLftPs ; Ed King, “Pentagon ‘clear’ climate change is a ‘national security’ 
issue.” RTCC.org, May 28, 2014. http://goo.gl/nIWP45

Page 28
The 501(c) Loophole and Dark Money
In its Citizens United  decision in 2010, the Supreme Court opened 
the flood gates for an ocean of cash to pour into the U.S. election 
system – creating a huge political advantage for billionaires like the 
Koch brothers. Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote the opinion. He said 
corporate cash gushing into elections would not corrupt politicians 
or even influence voters because “Transparency enables the elector -
ate to make informed decisions and give proper weight to different 
speakers and messages.” (By “speakers” he didn’t mean people; he 
meant corporations opening their treasuries. You see, corporate 
money is “speech,” protected by the first amendment, this Court 
believes.)
Unfortunately, immediately after the Citizens United  decision was 
announced, billionaires like the Koch brothers hired some of the 
sharpest lawyers on the planet to devise new strategies for hiding 
Big Money campaign donations from the public’s prying eyes.
So here are some of the ways billionaires and corporate plutocrats 
now hide their identity as they pour money into elections.
First they set up a corporation in Delaware and register it with 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) under section 501(c)(4) of the 
internal revenue code. These are called “social welfare” organiza -
tions – they are supposed be “primarily” engaged in promoting social 
welfare. (These organizations have been around for 100 years, so this 
part isn’t new.)
Importantly, neither the IRS nor the Federal Election Commission 
has ever defined what “primarily” means. So it’s more or less mean -
ingless. The point is that 501(c)(4) organizations are not supposed 
to “primarily” influence elections. But some of them do.1 What’s 
equally important is that 501(c)(4)s are not required to disclose their 
sources of funding.
Another kind of organization that doesn’t have disclose its donors 
is a 501(c)(6) – a trade association, such as the U.S. Chamber of 
Commerce.
1 Kim Barker, “How Nonprofits Spend Millions on Elections and Call it Public 
Welfare,” ProPublica  Aug. 18, 2012. http://goo.gl/FdztJ

Page 29
The 501(c) Loophole and Dark Money, continued
So 501(c)(4) and 501(c)(6) groups are now known as “dark money” 
organizations because they do not have to disclose where their 
money comes from.
Dark money organizations grew very  popular right after the 
Citizens United  decision. In 2006, outside spending by “dark money” 
groups made up 2 percent of “outside spending” on campaign 
ads, mailings and phone calls. By 2010, that “dark money” figure 
had risen to 40 percent. So much for Justice Kennedy’s faith in 
“transparency.”2
But the plot thickens far beyond simple 501(c) groups.
The Koch brothers – ever the innovators – have 12 politically active 
nonprofits, 11 of them (c)(4)s and one of them a (c)(6). (This does 
not include think tanks, foundations or other charities controlled 
by the Kochs, or the hundreds of other groups they fund.) But each 
of these Koch nonprofits in turn owns one or more “limited liability 
corporations” (LLCs) incorporated in Delaware, where the only 
person whose name must be divulged is the person who actually 
creates the LLC – usually a Delaware lawyer who makes a living filing 
incorporation papers. These LLCs are known as “disregarded entities,” 
wholly owned by the nonprofit that sets them up. The Kochs’ 12 non -
profits own 20 LLC “disregarded entities” with names that are just 
string of letters, like STN, POFN, ORRA, ASMI, SLAH, and TOHE. 
The first of these “disregarded entities” sprang into being a month 
after the Citizens United  decision was announced.3
So big donors (perhaps one of the Koch brothers or perhaps one 
of their billionaire friends who attended a Koch Network  secret 
strategy meeting), give money to one of the Kochs’ LLCs. All secret. 
The parent of that LLC, say Freedom Partners, then doles out those 
funds to other 501(c)(4) organizations, which in turn buy TV time  
2 Kim Barker, “How Nonprofits Spend Millions on Elections and Call it Public 
Welfare,” ProPublica  Aug. 18, 2012. http://goo.gl/FdztJ
3 Kim Barker and Theodoric Meyer, “Who Controls the Kochs’ Political 
Network? ASMI, SLAH, and TOHE” ProPublica  Mar. 17, 2014. http://goo.gl/
tD4o6r

Page 30
The 501(c) Loophole and Dark Money, continued  
for attack ads trying to stop some Democrat from getting elected 
in Wisconsin or North Carolina.
If you search the IRS public files for the name of one of the “dis -
regarded entities” you come up empty because the tax filings are 
indexed by the name of the parent 501(c)(4), but there’s no public 
record of which LLC is owned by which 501(c)(4).
Disregarded entities provide a second layer of anonymity for skit -
tish donors who value their extreme anonymity, perhaps because 
they’re jiggering with democracy in a way that would embarrass 
them in front of their children or their friends if the truth were 
known.
The Kochs have innovated secretive campaign giving in another 
way. Nine of their 12 nonprofits have been set up as trusts, which is 
unusual. As ProPublica  describes the situation, “Trusts are subject to 
little outside oversight. They don’t have to file incorporation papers 
of annual reports to the state.” According to ProPublica , each of the 
Koch trusts has a unique twist – the entity with the power to remove 
trustees from the Koch trusts is, itself, an LLC with a name that 
is just a string of letters. Whoever is behind the LLC has complete 
control of the nonprofit, but that person’s identity is not knowable. 
Marcus Owens, who used to run the “exempt organizations” division 
of the IRS, told ProPublica, “It’s someone having control, and it’s that 
someone going to great lengths to avoid being known.”4 One employ -
ee of a nonprofit with ties to the Koch brothers told ProPublica,  “The 
level of degree to which they [the Koch brothers] insist on control is 
truly spectacular.”5
Dark money nonprofits use many tricks to skirt the law that 
requires them to “primarily” serve “public welfare” and not engage in 
much electioneering.
4 Kim Barker and Theodoric Meyer, “Who Controls the Kochs’ Political 
Network? ASMI, SLAH, and TOHE” ProPublica  Mar. 17, 2014. http://goo.gl/
wxA9Av
5 Kim Barker and Theodoric Meyer, “Who Controls the Kochs’ Political 
Network? ASMI, SLAH, and TOHE” ProPublica  Mar. 17, 2014. http://goo.gl/
wxA9Av

Page 31
The 501(c) Loophole and Dark Money, continued
For example, the LLC owned by one 501(c)(4) will receive a large 
donation from an anonymous donor – for example, a major corpora -
tion interested in electing an anti-labor candidate to the Senate. That 
501(c)(4) will then make donations to 5 other LLCs owned by five 
other nonprofits. This is all consistent with IRS rules. Then those 
5 will donate funds to 10 other nonprofits, which will then pay for 
TV ads, phone banks, and targeted mailings, all bashing whoever is 
running against the favored anti-labor candidate. In theory someone 
could investigate all this and track down some wrongdoer near the 
bottom of the food chain.
But here’s another trick: right after the election, several of the 
nonprofits might close up shop and go out of business. “You can go 
into business and violate the law and then go out of business,” says 
Melanie Sloan, executive director of Citizens for Responsibility and 
Ethics in Washington (CREW). “And what’s ever going to happen 
about that? There’s no consequence,” she says.6
“I’m relatively pessimistic right now,” says Karl Sandstrom, a former 
vice-chairman of the Federal Election Commission. “We have agen -
cies that are in some cases silent, in some cases divided, and in some 
cases as slow as they can possibly be.”7
The answer seems clear: We need new laws that completely reverse 
the effects of the Citizens United  and McCutcheon  decisions. See the 
section of this report called “Conclusion and Recommendations.”
6 Kim Barker, “How Nonprofits Spend Millions on Elections and Call it Public 
Welfare,” ProPublica  Aug. 18, 2012. http://goo.gl/FdztJ
7 Kim Barker, “How Nonprofits Spend Millions on Elections and Call it Public 
Welfare,” ProPublica  Aug. 18, 2012. http://goo.gl/FdztJ

Page 32
Citizens United, Part 2: McCutcheon v. FEC
The Supreme Court did not stop with Citizens United . A second 
case, known as McCutcheon v. FEC , in 2014 tore down another key 
campaign finance rule, which had limited the total amount of direct 
donations that individuals could give to candidates. The decision 
left in place a limit on the amounts donors could give to a single  can-
didate, but opened a new loophole by raising the limit on the total 
amount that an individual could give to influence many candidates  
simultaneously.
Overturning decades of precedent, the Court endorsed the argu -
ment made by coal executive Shaun McCutcheon and his co-plaintiffs 
at the Republican National Committee (RNC) that the existing total 
contribution limit of $123,200 – more than twice the annual income 
of the average American household – was an unconstitutional 
restraint on his “political speech,” meaning the money he spends to 
influence the election of politicians.
McCutcheon, who says efforts to address global warming are a 
“waste of money,” claims his lawsuit was about “your right to spend 
your money on as many candidates as you choose,” whether or not 
they directly represent you as a voter.55
As a result of the court’s decision, Mr. McCutcheon and all other 
multi-millionaires are now free to donate $3.6 million to a party’s 
joint fundraising committee, which it can then distribute to any 
candidate(s) it chooses.56
55 Kate Sheppard, “McCutcheon v Federal Election Commission Plaintiff is 
Climate Change Denier,” Huffington Post , October 7, 2013. http://goo.gl/
ySlKnT ; “Supreme Court Returns to Campaign Finance Fight,” CBS News, 
October 9, 2013. http://goo.gl/7n6qf0  Accessed Aug. 20, 2014.
56 The Court’s decision does not do away with limits donors can give to a 
single candidate, party committee or leadership PAC. Most analysts of the 
McCutcheon v. FEC case have explained that the new aggregate limit is $3.6 
million – which includes campaigns and political party committees, but 
excludes leadership PACs, which are another way donors can channel money to 
individual candidates, which, if included, raises the new limit to $5.9 million. 
See Craig Holman, Public Citizen, Testimony to the Senate Committee on Rules 
& Administration, April 30, 2014.  http://goo.gl/TigeVU  For an analysis that 
explains the $3.6 million portion of the new limit, see Darla Cameron, Dan 

Page 33
“We aren’t talking about a large number of individuals” who can 
afford to do so, McCutcheon’s lawyer, Erin Murphy, acknowledged 
during oral arguments in the case. (Incidentally, Murphy is one 
of Chief Justice John Roberts’ former clerks.) That was quite an 
understatement: According to the Center for Responsive Politics just 
591 donors – 0.0000019 percent of the U.S. population – gave can -
didates the maximum ($123,200) allowed in 2012.57 Many of these 
top donors made their fortunes from the fossil fuel industry. [See 
Appendix A: The Kingpins of Carbon and the Koch Brothers’ Club of 
Plutocrats.]
The Roberts Court decided that the right of any supremely wealthy 
individual to support many candidates is more important than 
protecting “the integrity of the marketplace of political ideas,” which 
had been a primary concern of the Court in the previous 100+ years 
of campaign-finance decisions.58
“Where enough money calls the tune, the general public will not 
be heard,” Justice Stephen Breyer wrote in his blistering McCutcheon  
dissent, scolding his colleagues for ignoring precedent and for dem -
onstrating a dim understanding of the real world of politics. “Taken 
together with Citizens United … [the McCutcheon ] decision eviscerates 
our Nation’s campaign finance laws, leaving a remnant incapable of 
dealing with the grave problems of democratic legitimacy that those 
laws were intended to resolve,” Breyer wrote.
Keating and Laura Stanton, “Ruling on limits means campaign contributions 
could soar,” Washington Post  April 2, 2014. http://goo.gl/ijymMl . A New York 
Times  analysis of the decision suggests that “[a] donor could also, in theory, 
give $5,000 per year to every political action committee currently registered 
with the Federal Election Committee. That would total more than $13 million, 
versus the $74,600 allowed under the existing aggregate cap.” See Nicholas 
Confessore, “Power Surge for Donors as Terrain Is Reshaped on Campaign 
Money,” New York Times , April 3, 2014. http://goo.gl/SMJvOa
57 “McCutcheon v. FEC,” Center for Responsive Politics (CRP), “McCutcheon 
v. FEC,” http://goo.gl/2CSsgQ  accessed Aug. 20, 2014. CRP’s number includes 
only those who gave the maximum directly to federal candidates, and not to 
party committees ($74,600).
58 See, for example Massachusetts Citizens for Life (1986), cited in Democracy 
21, “The Citizens United Case, Part 4: Key Points Made in Briefs Supporting the 
Ban on Corporate Expenditures in Campaigns,” Aug. 29, 2009. http://goo.gl/
kwBHCJ

Page 34
“I don’t think $3.5 million is a lot of money,” Justice Antonin Scalia 
said of the new aggregate limit during oral arguments in the case.59 
U.S. Solicitor General Donald Verrilli, representing the FEC, respond -
ed, “I don’t think that’s the right way to look at it, Your Honor. If you 
think that a [political] party’s got to get $1.5 billion together to run a 
congressional campaign, parties and candidates together, and you’ve 
got a maximum of $3.6 million… less than 500 people can fund the 
whole shooting match.”60
“The fact that the Court took this case at all shows where their 
priorities are,” said Adam Lioz, the attorney for Demos who filed 
an amicus brief in the case on behalf of Greenpeace. The Court was 
essentially “agonizing over a specious burden on about a thousand 
millionaires and billionaires (who are already spending heavily on 
politics) rather than focusing on the rights of ordinary Americans,” 
he said.61
As Justice Breyer noted in his dissent, former Republican Senator 
Alan Simpson had testified that cash donations far smaller than $3.6 
million can turn a legislator’s head. “Who, after all, can seriously 
contend that a $100,000 donation does not alter the way one thinks 
about – and quite possibly votes on – an issue?” Simpson asked.62
As with Citizens United , responses to the McCutcheon decision 
reflected dismay across the political spectrum.
59 Ben Jacobs, “McCutcheon v. FEC: Big Money Fights Back at the Supreme 
Court,” Daily Beast , Oct. 9, 2013. http://goo.gl/EjJxWA
60 McCutcheon v. FEC (oral arguments), October 8, 2013. http://goo.gl/BvJzHT
61 Adam Lioz, “McCutcheon Oral Arguments Point Way Backward, and 
Forward,” American Prospect , Oct. 9, 2013. http://goo.gl/rKpCtI  The amicus  
brief can be found at: http://goo.gl/M1Iv9W  Accessed Aug. 20, 2014.
62 Stephen Spaulding, “The 5 Most Absurd Quotes in McCutcheon v FEC 
Decision.” CommonBlog, April 9, 2014. http://goo.gl/jY9zy6

Page 35
To judge by his words and his decisions, Chief Justice Roberts is 
entirely sympathetic to the corporate war on democracy. According 
to Roberts, any campaign contribution that is not a “direct exchange 
of an official act for money” is acceptable. The purchase of regular 
access to elected officials, plus outsized influence over a political 
party’s agenda, plus the effect of discouraging people from voting, 
plus a “gatekeeper” role for billionaires who can now decide who may 
run for office and on what platform – these are not a serious problem 
for democracy, as Chief Justice Roberts sees it.63 In truth, we haven’t 
seen a Chief Justice so hostile to basic democracy since Chief Justice 
Roger Taney ruled in 1857 that any person descended from Africans, 
whether slave or free, is not a citizen of the United States, and 
that “the negro... had no rights which the white man was bound to 
respect.”64
Obviously, for anyone who cherishes one-person-one-vote democ -
racy, huge campaign contributions create at least  the appearance of 
bribery and corruption, thus undermining public confidence in the 
legitimacy of all government, including courts, legislatures, the ex -
ecutive branch, and elections. Libertarians who despise government 
may see this as a good thing. But to normal citizens, the Supreme 
Court’s embrace of one-dollar-one-vote democracy is a dangerous 
precedent that strikes at the heart of America as a self-governing 
republic.
63 Linda Greenhouse, “An Indecent Burial,” New York Times , April 16, 2014. 
http://goo.gl/Rgjt8q
64 Dred Scott v. Sanford (1857) http://goo.gl/IsWBV

Page 36
The Kingpins of Carbon
If money is speech, then Shaun McCutcheon and the other kingpins 
of carbon were already calling the shots long before the McCutcheon  
court case. During the 2012 election cycle, top fossil fuel industry 
executives dumped a mountain of cash – over $ 11.5 million – into 
election campaigns. If they take advantage of the court’s ruling in 
McCutcheon , in 2014 their campaign contributions could legally rise 
27-fold to over $312 million.1
Greenpeace analyzed a list of over 1400 top federal election donors 
in 2012, identifying 87 individuals who are directly connected to the 
dirty-energy industries primarily responsible for global warming.2
Of these 87 top fossil fuel industry donors:
55 are dirty-energy industry executives and board members;
17 are dirty-energy industry lobbyists and business associates;
15 are significant dirty-energy industry investors and financiers.
Eight of these maximum-allowable political spenders are top execu -
tives of one of the biggest all-time global-warming-gas polluters:3
Clarence Cazalot (Marathon Oil) - http://polluterwatch.org/
clarence-cazalot
Stephen Chazen (Occidental Petroleum) - http://polluterwatch.org/
stephen-chazen
Kevin Crutchfield (Alpha Natural Resources) - http://polluterwatch.
org/kevin-crutchfield
1 Stephen Kretzmann (Oil Change International), “Coal Cash, Climate Denial 
Fuel ‘Citizens United 2’,” Huffington Post , Oct. 3, 2013. http://goo.gl/mj3ymb  Oil 
Change International’s estimate is based on a limit of $3.6 million per donor. At 
$5.9 million per donor (i.e., including leadership PACs), the total would rise to 
over $550 million.
2 For a description of the methodology used to identify the individual donors 
who are connected to the fossil fuel industry, see Appendix A.
3 Richard Heede, “Tracing anthropogenic carbon dioxide and methane emissions 
to fossil fuel and cement producers, 1854 -2010,” Climatic Change , Vol. 122 
(January, 2014), pgs. 229-241. http://goo.gl/pRUOK3

Page 37
The Strategy and Strategists behind  
Citizens’ United and McCutcheon
The Citizens United  and McCutcheon  cases were not isolated victo -
ries for corporations and wealthy plutocrats, but resulted from “long-
term ideological warfare,” as former Federal Election Commission 
chairperson Bradley Smith approvingly calls it.65 The two cases 
represent historically-significant victories for a radical right-wing 
movement that began in 1935 when the DuPont family created the 
Liberty League to roll back Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal.66
When FDR took office in early 1933, the nation was on its knees 
and the labor movement was nearly dead. To put spending money 
back into people’s pockets, within months FDR’s Secretary of Labor, 
Frances Perkins, had proposed a far-reaching series of reforms, in -
cluding unemployment compensation, a minimum wage law pegged 
at a livable wage (with the notable omission of domestic servants 
and agricultural workers – mainly blacks and Latinos), overtime 
pay, workers’ compensation for job-related injuries, and an old-age 
65 Eric Lichtblau, “Long Battle by Foes of Campaign Finance Rules Shifts 
Landscape,” New York Times , Oct. 15, 2010. http://goo.gl/MZ7q1B
66 Kim Phillips-Fein, Invisible Hands; The Businessman’s Crusade Against the New 
Deal  (N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 2009).The Kingpins of Carbon, continued
Richard Gilliam (Cumberland Resources) - http://polluterwatch.org/
richard-gilliam
Bennett Hatfield (Patriot Coal) - http://polluterwatch.org/bennett-
hatfield
Robert Murray (Murray Energy) - http://polluterwatch.org/robert-
murray
J. Larry Nichols (Devon Energy) - http://polluterwatch.org/j-larry-
nichols
Rex Tillerson (ExxonMobil) - http://www.polluterwatch.com/rex-
tillerson
[See Appendix A for a full list of names]

Page 38
pension system (“social security”). Along the way, Perkins and FDR 
added the 8-hour work day, workplace safety regulations, and a ban 
on child labor.
Between 1933 and 1938, the National Labor Relations Act and the 
Fair Labor Standards Act gave workers important legal rights for 
the first time in American history, including the right to organize, 
bargain collectively and, if all else failed, to strike – plus majority 
rule for union elections, the employers’ obligation to bargain, and a 
federal board to investigate disputes and issue findings. These provi -
sions set in motion union organizing drives that, by 1935 had tripled 
the size of organized labor, from two million members to six million. 
By 1945, 35 percent of the U.S. labor force was unionized, though 
women, blacks, Latinos and Asian Americans were largely excluded.67
After World War II, laws passed during the New Deal continued 
to improve the lives of most working people. In her book, Invisible 
Hands; The Businessman’s Crusade Against the New Deal , Kim Phillips-
Fein describes it well:
“...[T]he new power of organized labor fundamentally transformed 
the country. The strength of unions in postwar America had a 
profound impact on all people who worked for a living, even those 
who did not belong to a union themselves. When union members 
won higher wages or better benefits, those gains were often adopted 
by non-union companies as well. Unions helped to ensure that the 
productivity gains of the postwar period were more equitably shared 
between owners and workers. Despite occasional recessions (as at 
the beginning and end of the 1950s), real median family incomes 
climbed steadily between 1947 and 1973. Fringe benefits that had 
once been rare expanded greatly; the number of workers covered by 
private pension plans rose from 3.8 million in 1940 to 15.2 million in 
1956. The number of people with hospital insurance climbed from 6 
million in 1939 to 91 million by 1952. Vacations became more 
67 Kirstin Downey, The Woman Behind the New Deal  (N.Y.: Random House, 2009; 
Anchor Books edition, 2010), pgs. 121-122, 197, 200, 219, 228, 337.

Page 39
common, so that by 1960 it was not unusual for workers to have four 
weeks of paid leave a year. ‘The labor movement,’ said Walter Reuther 
of the United Auto Workers, ‘is developing a whole new middle 
class.’”68
It is important to acknowledge that even the New Deal, despite all 
the benefits it offered to working people in general, was often admin -
istered in ways that intentionally excluded blacks, Latinos and Asian-
Americans. This will come as no surprise to anyone familiar with our 
long, shameful history of white supremacy, apartheid, and denial 
of citizenship starting in 1619, when the first black slaves were 
kidnapped and transported to Virginia, and ending as a legal matter 
only in 1964-1968 with the passage of modern civil rights laws.69 
Historian Ira Katznelson and economists Melvin Oliver and Thomas 
Shapiro have shown in detail how the racist administration of New 
Deal programs substantially worsened the disparities of wealth 
between whites and minorities, and that subsequent affirmative ac -
tion programs have been insufficient to overcome the disadvantages 
created during the period 1930-1960 (and of course much earlier as 
well).70 Today, the median wealth of white families is still 20 times 
that of black families. For every dollar owned by a typical white 
family, a typical black family owns a nickel. (Wealth or “net worth” is 
what you own minus what you owe. The median is the midpoint in 
a string of numbers, with half the numbers higher than the median 
and half lower.) In 2009, the net worth of the median white family 
was $113,149 but only $6325 for Latino families and $5677 for black 
families.71 The historical record is crystal clear, so there can be no 
68 Kim Phillips-Fein, Invisible Hands; The Businessmen’s Crusade Against the New 
Deal  (N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 2009), pg. 88.
69 Theodore W. Allen, The Invention of the White Race . Two volumes. (N.Y.: Verso, 
1994). And see Audrey Smedley, Race in North America; Origin and Evolution of a 
Worldview.  Third edition. (N.Y.: Westview Press, 2007).
70 Ira Katznelson, When Affirmative Action was White  (N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 2005). 
And see Melvin L. Oliver and Thomas M. Shapiro, Black Wealth / White Wealth: 
A New Perspective on Racial Inequality  (N.Y.: Routledge, 1997).
71 Thomas Shapiro, Tatjana Meschede and Sam Osoro, The Roots of Widening 
Racial Wealth Gap: Explaining the Black-White Economic Divide  (Waltham, Mass.: 
Brandeis University, Institute for Assets and Social Policy, Feb., 2013). http://
goo.gl/Ednhmi

Page 40
doubt that this disparity was created by, and has been sustained by, 
public policies.72
Most importantly, the New Deal represented a decisive rejection 
of “laissez faire,” the “hands off” political philosophy that insisted 
government must be small and impotent. The public embraced the 
New Deal enthusiastically, re-electing FDR by a landslide in 1936 and 
returning him to office for unprecedented third and fourth terms in 
1940 and 1944. But many in the business community considered the 
New Deal a danger to the established order. The National Association 
of Manufacturers (NAM) and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce (among 
others) could see – correctly – that the New Deal posed a mortal 
threat to their monopoly on wealth and power. After all, any nation’s 
economic pie is only so big. If you control the slicing knife, you 
can carve off humongous portions of the pie for yourself and your 
friends – as corporate leaders had done from 1880 to 1930 – or, with 
government’s help, the pie can be shared more fairly, creating and 
sustaining a middle class.
The Great Depression severely diminished the prestige and 
standing of the business class. Out of greed and stupidity they had 
wrecked the world’s industrial system, so they were in no position 
to effectively oppose the New Deal. After World War II they began to 
regroup, fighting Harry Truman’s Fair Deal and Lyndon Johnson’s 
Great Society, which nevertheless succeeded in creating the Medicare 
and Medicaid national health insurance programs.
By 1970, business people felt ready to reclaim a larger slice of the 
pie for themselves – and that required dismantling the House of 
Labor, shrinking the capacity of government, and finding new ways 
to assert (or reassert) control over the political system.
72 Ta-Nehisi Coates, “The Case for Reparations,” The Atlantic  Vol. 313, No. 
5 (June 1, 2014), pgs. 55-72. http://goo.gl/igkydz ; Ira Katznelson, When 
Affirmative Action was White  (N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 2005). And see Melvin L. 
Oliver and Thomas M. Shapiro, Black Wealth / White Wealth: A New Perspective 
on Racial Inequality  (N.Y.: Routledge, 1997); Randall Robinson, The Debt; What 
America Owes to Blacks  (N.Y.: Dutton, 2000, Plume paperback 2001); Richard 
F . America, Paying the Social Debt; What White America Owes Black America  
(Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 1993).

Page 41
In 1971 the U.S. Chamber of Commerce asked Lewis F . Powell, Jr. 
– a wealthy tobacco lawyer from Virginia – to draft a strategy memo 
for re-taking control of the United States.73 Two months after sub -
mitting his memo, Powell was appointed to the U.S. Supreme Court, 
where he quietly pursued the legal strategy he had just outlined for 
the Chamber.
In his 1971 memo, titled “Attack on American Free Enterprise 
System,” Powell called upon companies to overcome their political 
“impotency” and mount a coordinated effort to control almost every 
facet of public life, including government, the media, academic insti -
tutions, Congress and the judiciary. Influence over the marketplace 
of ideas – especially legal theory and judicial doctrines – was pivotal. 
“The judiciary may be the most important instrument for social, 
economic and political change,” he wrote.
“Strength lies in organization, in careful long-range planning and 
implementation, in consistency of action over an indefinite period 
of years, in the scale of financing available only through joint effort, 
and in the political power available only through united action and 
national organizations,” Powell advised the Chamber.
Over the next 40 years, Powell’s strategy slowly gained form and 
substance, not by conspiracy but because many in the big-business 
community recognized which side their bread was buttered on. In 
retrospect, events of the last 40 years allow us to reconstruct the 
simple three-part agenda that developed to roll back the New Deal 
and reassert corporate dominance – an agenda that has been pursued 
with admirable patience, persistence and discipline:
1. Discourage and prevent workers from joining together to seek 
common goals;
2. Diminish the capacity of national and state governments to curb 
73 Lewis F . Powell, Jr., “Attack on American Free Enterprise System” (1971) 
available as original typescript here: http://goo.gl/0DgLR ; for a discussion of 
the memo and its importance, see Greenpeace USA, “Powell Memo Blueprint: 
Impact on Judicial and Legal Action” (undated) http://goo.gl/MYaOkO  ; John 
C. Jeffries, Jr., Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr.  (N.Y.: Fordham University Press, 
1994, 2001) does his best to paint a gauzy, positive picture of Powell by never 
mentioning the Powell Memo of 1971.

Page 42
harmful business practices and to protect the powerless and the 
downtrodden;
3. Simultaneously develop a global governmental structure (“free 
trade”) to assure the unrestricted flow of investment capital every -
where in the world.
Here’s a brief discussion of each part of this simple-but-effective 
agenda:
(1) Attack the laws and practices that allow workers to 
associate freely together and cooperate.  This started in 1947 
with passage of the Taft-Hartley law, which imposed a dozen new 
restrictions on workers.74 Business Week  described Taft-Hartley as “a 
New Deal for America’s employers.”75 After Ronald Reagan became 
President in 1981 the U.S. became so openly hostile to working 
people and unions that Human Rights Watch published a report 
in summer, 2000, documenting how the U.S. routinely violates the 
three universally-recognized human rights of workers: the right to 
join a union, the right to bargain collectively, and the right, if all else 
fails, to strike.76 More recently, we see efforts across the country, at 
the state level, to prohibit collective bargaining by public employees 
(including teachers, police, and fire fighters), who are now routinely 
blamed for state-budget overruns. Notably, the U.S. Supreme Court, 
led by Chief Justice John Roberts, has joined the attack on public 
employees.77
74 Taft-Hartley “...prevented sympathy strikes (when one group of workers 
strikes on behalf of another), banned secondary boycotts (when a union refuses 
to handle goods made by another, striking union), barred supervisory workers 
or foremen from joining unions, permitted states to pass right-to-work laws 
that prohibited contracts with provisions stating that union membership was 
a mandatory condition of employment, and required all union officers to sign 
affidavits swearing that they were not Communists.” Kim Phillips-Fein, Invisible 
Hands  (N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 2009), pgs. 31-32.
75 Kim Phillips-Fein, Invisible Hands  (N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 2009), pg.32.
76 Lance Compa, Unfair Advantage: Workers’ Freedom of Association in the United 
States Under International Human Rights Standards  (New York: Human Rights 
Watch, August 2000). http://goo.gl/xGGXyH
77 See, for example, Cynthia Estlund and William E. Forbath, “The War on 
Workers,” New York Times  July 2, 2014. http://goo.gl/sxmCnO

Page 43
Public employee unions are the last remaining outpost of union 
strength so, to roll back the New Deal, public-employee unions must 
be weakened until they can be eliminated. This project is making 
good progress toward its goals.
As civil rights laws became effective in the late 1960s, it became 
illegal for governments to discriminate against minorities in hiring, 
so, based on successful completion of competitive civil service exams, 
blacks (and to a lesser extent Latinos and Asians), moved into good, 
unionized civil service jobs. Now, as public-employee unions (and 
government in general) are being attacked by a nationwide organized 
campaign, government jobs are disappearing, in turn shrinking 
an important economic base of the black middle class.78 As more 
minorities are squeezed out of the middle class, they are thrown into 
dog-eat-dog competition for lower-wage work, creating a kind of so -
cial turmoil that ultimately can divide minorities against themselves, 
which in turn benefits low-wage employers and self-interested elites.
As noted, weakening public-employee unions also serves agenda 
item #2, which is...
2. Shrink the capacity of government.  This is fundamental.
As G.K. Chesterton observed in 1908,
“The poor have been rebels but they never have been anarchists; 
they have more interest than anyone else in there being some decent 
government; the poor man really has a stake in the country. The rich 
man hasn’t; he can go away to New Guinea in a yacht. The poor have 
sometimes objected to being governed badly; the rich have always 
objected to being governed at all.”79
The U.S. Constitution tells us that one of the purposes of govern -
ment is to promote the “general welfare.” To do that, since the na -
tion’s founding, government has had four key domestic functions:
78 Corey Dade, “Government Job Cuts Threaten Black Middle Class,” National 
Public Radio May 9, 2012. http://goo.gl/mu4xE
79 G.K. Chesterton, The Man Who Was Thursday: A Nightmare  (London: J.W. 
Arrowsmith, 1908; Seaside, Ore.: Watchmaker Publishing, 2010 reprint of the 
1908 edition), pg. 94.

Page 44
(1) to help individuals and families withstand the ups and downs 
of economic calamities, including job loss, health crises, and severe 
recessions; (2) to advance social mobility by providing excellent 
schooling, higher education, job training, skill building, and mort -
gage assistance; (3) to create, maintain and manage the nation’s 
infrastructure: railroads, highways, bridges, tunnels, airports, librar -
ies, postal service, internet backbone, and more – the underpinnings 
of a sound economy; and (4) to curb market failures and abuses via 
regulation and prevent excessive concentrations of wealth through 
progressive taxation. Those functions define liberal government, and 
they are present in every industrialized society.
Now all those functions of government have come under attack. 
The campaign to discredit and incapacitate government takes many 
forms, chiefly aimed at reducing the ability of government to (a) aid 
those who need it most and (b) to protect the general welfare of the 
people from the predatory behavior of giant corporations and self-
interested elites.
Techniques for attacking the integrity of government include:
(2a) First and foremost, starve government by cutting taxes. As 
influential Republican strategist, radical anti-tax activist, and corpo -
rate lobbyist Grover Norquist said in 2001, “I don’t want to abolish 
government. I simply want to reduce it to the size where I can drag it 
into the bathroom and drown it in the bathtub.”80 Cutting taxes for 
corporations and for corporate elites – and refusing to raise taxes on 
the rich for any reason whatsoever – is the foundational strategy.81
(2b) Privatize public functions (for example, prisons, highways, 
schools, water companies, and, for distant wars, hire soldiers of 
fortune). In general, privatization has several indirect benefits – it 
reduces the number of workers who could join a public-employee 
union; and, second, it puts taxpayer funds into the hands of private 
parties who are legally allowed to kick back some of those funds at 
80 Grover Norquist on National Public Radio May 25, 2001. http://goo.gl/
w6UvR
81 For a concise history of recent tax cuts, see Warren E. Buffett, “A Minimum 
Tax for the Wealthy,” New York Times  Nov. 25, 2012. http://goo.gl/2DdghA

Page 45
election time (which government employees are not legally allowed 
to do). Privatization also gives privatized-government a shield of 
secrecy because private companies are not covered by the federal 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) the way public agencies are. The 
shield of secrecy, in turn, makes graft, corruption, and payola harder 
to discover, investigate, and prosecute, which can benefit many sit -
ting politicians and their patrons.
“After decades of privatization, the U.S. federal government is a 
shadow of its former self,” says Allison Stanger, who has studied the 
subject extensively.82
The libertarian Cato Institute, which was created by the Charles and 
David Koch in 1974, has published plans for further radical privatiza -
tion.83
(2c) Eliminate some regulatory programs and cut the budgets for 
others, to “get government off our back,” as President Ronald Reagan 
liked to say.84 Examples include...
• Big overall cuts: In 2011, the House of Representatives voted to cut 
the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) budget by 27 percent, one 
of the largest cuts ever approved by the House. The Senate balked, but 
eventually agreed to cut EPA’s budget a little less than 16 percent.85
• Small strategic cuts: In 2008, the Republican administration closed EPA’s re -
gional libraries, which EPA employees needed for their work and which the 
public relied upon for basic information.86 EPA libraries held the agency’s 
history of previous actions, programs, regulations, concerns, and communi -
cations, plus a wealth of accumulated regulatory and scientific information.
• Big strategic cuts: Nearly half the American population lives within 10 
miles of one or more toxic waste sites, which Congress in 1980 told EPA 
to identify, investigate and clean up. The 1980 Superfund law provided a 
82 Allison Stanger, One Nation Under Contract  (New Haven, Conn.: Yale 
University Press, 2009).
83 Chris Edwards, Privatization  (Washington, D.C.: Cato Institute, 2009). http://
goo.gl/3hTirf ; and see “Cato Institute,” SourceWatch.org  http://goo.gl/B0x6
84 Ronald Reagan, “A vision for America,” Nov. 3, 1980. http://goo.gl/ykOM5
85 Charles Lewis and others, “The Koch Club – Koch millions spread influence 
through nonprofits, colleges,” Investigative Reporting Workshop July 1, 2013. 
http://goo.gl/R5xtx
86 Christopher Lee, “EPA Closure of Libraries Faulted For Curbing Access to Key 
Data,” Washington Post , March 14, 2008 http://goo.gl/PJTDBV

Page 46
small tax on a large number of polluters to pay for the toxic waste cleanup 
program. But that law expired in 1995 and has never been renewed. The 
$3.8 billion cleanup fund accumulated from the tax ran out in 2003. For 
the past decade the Superfund cleanup program has been teetering on 
life support, effectively freeing industrial poisoners from responsibility 
for their decades of deadly misbehavior.87 That’s what American libertar -
ians mean by “freedom” – corporate freedom from accountability.
(2d) As a special show of cynical force, periodically shut down the 
entire federal government. The complex and successful effort to close 
the federal government in 2013 was made possible by funding from 
the billionaire Koch brothers, Charles and David.88
The possibilities for ruining the effectiveness of liberal government 
are endless, once you set that as your goal. Furthermore, discrediting 
government soon becomes self-fulfilling. As government is rendered 
less efficient and less effective, cutting it or privatizing specific opera -
tions becomes easier. For example, as wait-times grow longer on the 
Medicare Hotline, or the I.R.S. Help Line, even those who benefit 
most from government – including many members of the Tea Party – 
grow petulant and spiteful, demanding an end to the very programs 
that benefit them and their families.89 Meanwhile the libertarian 
operatives who fund the Tea Party are chuckling all the way to the 
bank.
As we have seen in the last 30 years, each of these tactics has 
been pursued aggressively, and the capacity of government has 
clearly been diminished. About 15 years ago, through budget cuts, 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) lost the capacity to fully audit 
complex tax returns (those of the rich).90 More recently, it has lost 
87 Joaquin Saplin and Richard Mullins, “Superfund today – Massive undertaking 
to clean up hazardous waste sites has lost both momentum and funding,” 
Center for Public Integrity April 26, 2007. http://goo.gl/To2fPa
Suzanne Yohannan and Lee Logan, “Sequester Forces EPA To Curtail Superfund 
Actions Beyond New Cleanups,” Inside EPA  May 28, 2013. http://goo.gl/74hfkl
88 Sheryl Gay Stolberg and Mike McIntire, “A Federal Budget Crisis Months in 
the Planning,” New York Times  Oct. 5, 2013. http://goo.gl/Duu4nG
89 Binyamin Appelbaum and Robert Gebeloff, “Even Critics of the Safety Net 
Increasingly Depend on It,” New York Times  Feb. 11, 2012. http://goo.gl/n12YjP
90 David Cay Johnston, “I.R.S More Likely to Audit the Poor and Not the Rich,” 
New York Times  April 16, 2000. http://goo.gl/leI5J1 ; Editorial Board, “The 

Page 47
the capacity to investigate the day-to-day activities of 501(c)(3) and 
(c)(4) nonprofit organizations that claim to promote the “public wel -
fare” when they are actually (and illegally) promoting political candi -
dates.91 As a result, the election process grows ever-more corrupt and 
the federal treasury each year fails to collect hundreds of millions of 
dollars that are legitimately owed – a two-fer that reduces the capac -
ity of government and leaves the rich richer and more powerful.
The Central Role of Racial Politics in 
Dismantling Liberal Government
“American politics today–and the crisis of the middle class–simply 
cannot be understood without recognizing racism’s evolution and the 
power of pernicious demagoguery.” – Ian Haney López, Dog Whistle 
Politics  (2014)
Racism has played a central role – indeed, the central role – in the 
campaign to discredit and dismantle liberal government.92 As Ian 
Haney López explains with superb clarity in his indispensible book, 
Dog Whistle Politics , it was Alabama governor George Wallace who 
discovered the power of “dog whistle politics” to attract and incite a 
political following. “Dog whistle politics” means “coded racial appeals 
that carefully manipulate hostility toward nonwhites.” Modern racial 
pandering “always operates on two levels: inaudible and easily denied 
in one range, yet stimulating strong reactions in another,” just the 
way a dog whistle operates.
After Wallace discovered the power of dog whistle politics, Barry 
Goldwater and Richard Nixon learned the trick (later to be learned 
by Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, George H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton, 
and George W. Bush): pander to racial prejudice without mentioning 
Real Internal Revenue Scandal,” New York Times  July 5, 2014; http://nyti.
ms/1rzhHFU
91 Julie Patel, “Hobbled IRS can’t stem ‘dark money’ flow,” Center for Public 
Integrity July 15, 2014. http://goo.gl/Qg5OyN , and: Jared Bennett and Julie 
Patel, “Decades in the making: The decline of IRS nonprofit regulation,” Center 
for Public Integrity July 15, 2014. http://goo.gl/669fuO
92 Ian Haney López, Dog Whistle Politics; How Coded Racial Appeals Have 
Reinvented Racism & Wrecked the Middle Class  (N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 
2014).

Page 48
race. For example, say “Ours is the party of the working class, not the 
welfare class.” Without even thinking about it, everyone knows what 
a phrase like that implies: You should elect us because government 
has been captured by the undeserving poor and grasping minorities.
By 1963, the leadership of the Republican Party decided it could 
win national elections by becoming the “white man’s party,” using 
the “Southern strategy.”93 The phrase “Southern strategy” is itself a 
euphemism for “white racist strategy” and dog whistle politics be -
came the dominant tactic. It still is. This does not mean that all indi -
vidual Republicans are racists or bigots. It means that the Republican 
leadership made a calculated, strategic decision to capitalize on racial 
anxieties and animosities to advance the party’s electoral agenda.
The Southern strategy worked so well that, over the last 50 years, 
conservatives and American libertarians have continued to rely on 
racial pandering – disguised in “dog whistle” euphemisms, to be sure 
– to “win support from white voters for policies that principally favor 
the extremely wealthy and wreck the middle class.”94
How did this political alchemy occur? During the 1930s and 
‘40s, government assistance programs benefitted whites almost 
exclusively. After black soldiers returned from fighting Hitler’s racist 
Reich in 1945, blacks began to demand fairness. During the height of 
civil rights activism in the 1950s and 1960s, “Attacks on integration 
quickly segued into broadsides against an activist state that funded 
welfare, schooling, job training programs, and so forth. Hostility to -
ward the New Deal surged among whites – once it came to be seen as 
a repudiation of lazy, threatening nonwhites and the big government 
that coddled them.”95 By 1963, Wallace, Goldwater and Nixon were 
able to exploit feelings that New Deal programs were no longer ben -
93 Kevin Phillips, The Emerging Republican Majority  (New Rochelle, N.Y.: 
Arlington House, 1969).
94 Ian Haney López, Dog Whistle Politics; How Coded Racial Appeals Have 
Reinvented Racism & Wrecked the Middle Class  (N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 
2014), pg. 2.
95 Ian Haney López, Dog Whistle Politics; How Coded Racial Appeals Have 
Reinvented Racism & Wrecked the Middle Class  (N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 
2014), pg. 6.

Page 49
efiting whites (which they definitely still were), but were handouts to 
“welfare queens” and “strapping young bucks” buying T-bone steaks 
with food stamps, as Ronald Reagan dog-whistled it to his constitu -
ents in 1980. Once in office, Reagan would use his promise to slash 
welfare as a cover for his other agenda, to cut taxes for the rich.96 The 
technique has worked reliably ever since.
To be sure, the “Southern strategy” wasn’t just about animus 
toward blacks. It was about animus toward blacks, Latinos, Jews, 
and affluent Yankees who had become liberals.97 Later the Southern 
strategy capitalized on animus toward beaded, bearded hippies. 
More recently, it has focused on Muslims as potential terrorists and 
Latinos as “illegal aliens.” Because of our peculiar national history, 
dog whistle racism doesn’t ever go away – it just evolves to strategi -
cally capitalize on the racial and ethnic anxieties of the moment. 
But no matter how it evolves, dog whistle racism reliably provides a 
bludgeon to bash liberal government. Dog whistle racism is always 
the self-interested billionaire’s best friend.
3. Assure the free flow of corporate capital everywhere 
on the planet, otherwise known as “globalization” or “free 
trade.”  This is the third part of the permanent campaign by a small, 
selfish oligarchy to eliminate the New Deal and claim an ever-larger 
slice of the national economic pie for themselves and their heirs. 
So long as corporations can freely, without limit, move their invest -
ments anywhere in the world, they can more easily hide assets (thus 
reducing their taxes, helping to starve government), and they can 
keep U.S. workers in line by threatening to send more jobs overseas. 
Furthermore, so-called “free trade” agreements ensure that the 
resources of any sovereign territory become available to the highest 
bidder, regardless of any restrictions sovereign governments might 
wish to impose. Thus – whatever else they may do – free trade agree -
ments weaken the power of nation-states and strengthen the power 
of transnational corporations and of the superrich who control them. 
96 Ian Haney López, Dog Whistle Politics; How Coded Racial Appeals Have 
Reinvented Racism & Wrecked the Middle Class  (N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 
2014), Chapter 3 (titled “The wrecking begins: Reagan”).
97 James Boyd, “Nixon’s Southern Strategy: ‘It’s all in the Charts,’” New York 
Times  May 17, 1970. http://goo.gl/k5wH6S

Page 50
The term “free trade” is ironic, implying that the global marketplace 
has finally been liberated from intrusive government intervention. 
Nothing could be further from the truth: to achieve “free trade” for 
transnational corporations, i.e., to prevent national governments 
from setting effective labor or environmental standards to protect 
the interests of their citizens, the largest bureaucracy in the history 
of humankind has been erected worldwide – enforced, should push 
come to shove, by military coercion.98
As we’ll see (below), in the last 40 years, the U.S. has witnessed one 
of the largest-ever transfers of wealth from the poor and middle class 
to the superrich – the result of bipartisan public policies. To dignify 
and justify this grand re-slicing of the economic pie to benefit a tiny 
elite, an enormous intellectual infrastructure has been built since 
1970. Rationalizations and defenses for growing inequality include 
– first and foremost – Ayn Rand’s “objectivist” philosophy and its 
offspring American libertarianism, plus “supply-side” economics, the 
Austrian School of economics, the Chicago School, Laffer curves, the 
flat tax, the invisible hand, and the inescapable workings of natural 
law, or of divine will. Other explanations and justifications for the 
growth of barbaric inequalities in recent years include new technolo -
gy, low-wage foreign competition (made unavoidable by “the market” 
tyrannized by “free trade” agreements), new debt-producing financial 
instruments, and various eugenic/racial theories.99 All these reasons, 
and more, have been invoked to justify an increasingly-inequitable 
distribution of the nation’s economic pie, claiming it is natural, right, 
good, inspired by God, and (above all) inevitable.100 
98 David Graeber, Debt: The First 5000 Years  (Brooklyn, N.Y.: Melville House, 
2011; paperback edition 2012), Chapter 12.
99 See, for example, the racial theories of libertarian Charles Murray, whose 
work has been supported by the Koch brothers. http://goo.gl/kpvIK6
100 For details on how it has worked, see Naomi Klein, The Shock Doctrine  (N.Y. 
Henry Holt, 2007); see Jeff Faux, The Servant Economy; Where America’s Elite 
is Sending the Middle Class  (Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley, 2012); Jacob S. Hacker and 
Paul Pierson, Winner-Take-All Politics; How Washington Made the Rich Richer 
and Turned Its Back on the Middle Class  (N.Y.: Simon & Schuster, 2010); James 
K. Galbraith, The Predator State; How Conservatives Abandoned the Free Market 
and Why Liberals Should Too  (N.Y.: Free Press, 2008); Lee Drutman and Charlie 
Cray. The People’s Business  (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2004); Dennis 

Page 51
Marker, Fifteen Steps to Corporate Feudalism; How the Rich Convinced America’s 
Middle Class to Eliminate Themselves  (Santa Fe, N.M.: One Standard Press, 
2012); Gretchen Morgenson and Joshua Rosner, Reckles$ Endangerment  (N.Y.: 
Times Books / Henry Holt, 2011); David Brock, Blinded by the Right  (N.Y.: 
Crown Publishers, 2002); Lee Fang, The Machine  (N.Y.: New Press, 2013); Allen 
Raymond and Ian Spiegelman, How to Rig An Election  (N.Y.: Simon & Schuster, 
2008); Larry Doyle, In Bed With Wall Street  (N.Y.: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014); 
G. William Domhoff, Who Rules America? Challenges to Corporate and Class 
Dominance.  Sixth edition. (N.Y.: McGraw-Hill, 2010); Michael Hirsh, Capital 
Offense; How Washington’s Wise Men Turned America’s Future Over to Wall Street  
(Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley, 2010); Isaac William Martin, Rich People’s Movements; 
Grassroots Campaigns to Untax the One Percent  (N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 
2013); David Brock, The Republican Noise Machine  (N.Y.: Three Rivers Press, 
2004); Michael Lind, Land of Promise; An Economic History of the United States  
(N.Y.: HarperCollins, 2012); Michael Lind, Made in Texas; George W. Bush and 
the Southern Takeover of American Politics  (N.Y.: Basic Books, 2003; paperback 
edition 2004); John Perkins, Confessions of an Economic Hit Man  (San Francisco: 
Berrett-Kohler, 2004); Max Blumenthal, Republican Gomorrah; Inside the 
Movement That Shattered the Party  (N.Y.: Nation Books, 2009); Jeff Faux, The 
Global Class War; How America’s Bipartisan Elite Lost Our Future--And What It 
Will Take to Win It Back  (Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley, 2006); Hervé Kempf, How the 
Rich Are Destroying the Earth  (White River Junction, Vt.: Chelsea Green, 2007); 
Gary Rivlin, Broke, USA; From Pawnshops to Poverty, Inc. – How the Working Poor 
Became Big Business  (N.Y.: HarperCollins, 20010); Hedrick Smith, Who Stole the 
American Dream? (N.Y.: Random House, 2012); Donald L. Barlett and James 
B. Steele, The Betrayal of the American Dream  (N.Y.: PublicAffairs, 2012); David 
Cay Johnston, Perfectly Legal; The Covert Campaign to Rig Our Tax System to 
Benefit the Super Rich and Cheat Everybody Else  (N.Y.: Portfolio, 2003; paperback 
edition 2005); Kevin Phillips, Bad Money; Reckless Finance, Failed Politics, and 
the Global Crisis of American Capitalism  (N.Y.: Viking, 2008); Chuck Collins and 
Felice Yeskel, Economic Apartheid in America; A Primer on Economic Inequality 
and Insecurity  (N.Y.: New Press, 2005); David Cay Johnston, Free Lunch; How 
the Wealthiest Americans Enrich Themselves at Government Expense (and Stick 
You With the Bill)  (N.Y.: Portfolio, 2007); Sidney Blumenthal, The Rise of the 
Counter-Establishment; From Conservative Ideology to Political Power  (N.Y.: Times 
Books, 1986); Nomi Prins, All The Presidents’ Bankers; The Hidden Alliances 
That Drive American Power  (N.Y.: Nation Books, 2014); Greg Palast, The Best 
Democracy Money Can Buy  (N.Y.: Plume, 2004); Mike Lofgren, The Party is Over; 
How Republicans Went Crazy, Democrats Became Useless, and the Middle Class Got 
Shafted  (N.Y.: Viking, 2012); Thomas Byrne Edsall, The Age of Austerity  (N.Y.: 
Doubleday, 2011; Anchor paperback edition, 2012); Robert Scheer, The Great 
American Stickup  (N.Y.: Nation Books, 2010); Joseph E. Stiglitz, The Price of 
Inequality; How Today’s Divided Society Endangers Our Future  (N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 
2012, paperback edition 2013); Paul Krugman, End This Depression Now!  
(N.Y.: Norton, 2012; paperback edition 2013); Sheldon S. Wolin, Democracy 

Page 52
As former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher used to repeat 
as she was privatizing one government function after another, “There 
is no alternative.”101
Since 1935, and accelerating after 1980, tens of thousands of 
books, magazines, movies, videos, plays, novels, romances, short sto -
ries, science-fiction utopias, sermons, catechisms, curricula, coloring 
books, cartoons, advertisements, essays, treatises, textbooks, theses, 
dissertations, articles, reports, monographs, studies, screeds, broad -
sides, leaflets, pamphlets, PowerPoints, manifestos, declarations, 
diatribes, position papers, handouts, talking points, backgrounders, 
brochures, editorials, op-eds, press releases, and news stories have 
poured forth year after year, decade after decade, from a vast net -
work of scribes, stenographers, publicists and propagandists bonded 
to think tanks, policy shops, institutes, agencies, commissions, foun -
dations, captive academic departments, publishing houses, movie 
studios, TV networks, K-street plumbers, PR flaks, fixers and dirty 
tricksters, hate radio, Fox News bimbos and their ventriloquists, 
fake grass-roots groups, corporate shills of every stripe, instant 
experts for hire, front groups for rent, plastic politicians, and clueless 
journalists – all to convince those falling out of the middle class (and 
those without hope of ever rising into it) – that their fate had been 
sealed by the inescapable natural laws of economics, or by God’s 
mysterious ways, or more likely by gays, Arabs, Muslims, Jews, athe -
ists, abortionists, union bosses, limousine liberals, immigrants, and 
swarthy welfare queens. In short, blame anyone besides the bipar -
tisan Democrat and Republican policy makers and their billionaire 
minders who have actually pulled off the heist.
Incorporated  (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2008).
101 Claire Berlinski, “There Is No Alternative”: Why Margaret Thatcher Matters  
(N.Y.: Basic Books, 2008).

Page 53
It must be obvious to everyone that the campaign to roll back the 
New Deal, to weaken labor unions, and to transfer vast wealth from 
the poor and middle class to the superrich has enjoyed stunning suc -
cess. In 2014 the New Deal is essentially dead and its few remaining 
parts, like social security, are under constant attack by the radical 
libertarian right who want to privatize it and place it in the hands 
of Wall Street. As a result, the middle class is shrinking as typical 
families grow poorer year after year:
** Real (inflation-adjusted) wages for 80 percent of American 
workers have stagnated for almost four decades. During the 38-year 
period, 1973 to 2011, average wages rose less than 4 percent, from 
$18.74 per hour to $19.47 per hour.102 Meanwhile, in 2009, each 
of the 400 wealthiest Americans took home an average “wage” of 
$97,000 per hour (assuming they got paid during lunch hour).103
** In 1973, the richest 1 percent of Americans took home 10 
percent of total national income. By 2007, the richest 1 percent of 
Americans took home 24 percent of total national income. (In 2008 
it fell back to 21 percent before starting to rise again.) 104
Perhaps even more important than income is the trend in wealth. 
Wealth (or “net worth”) is what a family owns minus what it owes. 
Wealth allows families to make progress – for example, to move to a 
better, safer neighborhood, invest in a business, save for retirement, 
or help children attend college or gain skills. As families lose wealth, 
they lose stability and opportunity. They also lose their capacity to 
contribute to the economy, thus shrinking the total pie that’s avail -
able.105
102 Gar Alperovitz, What Then Must We Do?  (White River Junction, Vt.: Chelsea 
Green, 2013), pg. 4.
103 Warren E. Buffett, “A Minimum Tax for the Wealthy,” New York Times  Nov. 
25, 2012. http://goo.gl/2DdghA
104 Timothy Noah, The Great Divergence  (N.Y.: Bloomsbury, 2012), pg. 4.
105 Joseph E. Stiglitz, The Price of Inequality; How Today’s Divided Society 
Endangers Our Future  (N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 2012, paperback edition 2013). 
And: Standard & Poor’s Financial Services, How Increasing Income Inequality Is 
Dampening U.S. Economic Growth, And Possible Ways To Change The Tide  (N.Y.: 
McGraw Hill Financial, Aug. 5, 2014). http://goo.gl/ixfia7

Page 54
Measured in constant (inflation-adjusted) dollars, between 2003 
and 2013 the net worth of the average family in the U.S. dropped  by 
36 percent.106 Specifically, in round numbers, the net worth of the av -
erage (median) U.S. family dropped  from $88,000 in 2003 to $56,000 
in 2013. (The median is the midpoint in a string of numbers, with 
half the numbers higher than the median and half lower.)
During the same period, 2003 to 2013, the combined net worth 
of the Forbes 400 – the 400 richest people in America – more than 
doubled, from $955 billion to $2 trillion.107 The richest 1 percent of 
households now own 40 percent of all the wealth in the nation, and 
the pie-slices are growing more lopsided each passing year.108
People are feeling  pinched because they are. There’s only so much 
to go around and, for the past 40 years, the people at the top of the 
heap have been grabbing almost all of it for themselves. According 
to American libertarian philosophy, that’s what they’re supposed  to 
do. As we’ll see, there is no more striking example of rich, libertarian 
elites than the Koch brothers.
The Kochs’ War on Democracy: Who Are These People Anyway?
The Koch Brothers of Wichita, Kansas – Charles (born in 1935) and 
David (born in 1940) – first became household names in 2010 when 
the New Yorker  profiled them at length.109 But by 2010 the Kochs had 
been politically active for over 40 years, relentlessly pursuing a politi -
cal goal that is nothing short of breathtaking: the Kochs decided long 
ago to re-make the United States political system, roll back the New 
Deal, destroy progressivism, and create a libertarian utopia (at least 
for white people).
106 Fabian T. Pfeffer, Sheldon Danziger, and Robert F . Schoeni, Wealth Levels, 
Wealth Inequality, and the Great Recession; Research Summary  (N.Y.: Russell Sage 
Foundation, June, 2014). http://goo.gl/v5HEXE
107 Forbes 400 for 2003: http://goo.gl/IQKLT9  and for 2013: http://goo.gl/
qR1LmE
108 Joseph Stiglitz, “Of the 1 percent, by the 1 percent, for the 1 percent.” 
Vanity Fair  (May, 2011). http://goo.gl/Vs1GA
109 Jane Mayer, “Covert Operations; the billionaire brothers who are waging 
a war against Obama,” New Yorker  Vol. 86, No. 25 (Aug. 30, 2010), pgs. 44-55. 
http://goo.gl/M4MJB1

Page 55
The Koch strategy for re-making the United States has changed 
over the decades. In 1980, David Koch ran for Vice-President on 
the Libertarian Party ticket. Of course they were trounced. That 
convinced the brothers that running for office wasn’t the path to 
power. Now they have a much simpler plan: they just want to (a) buy 
Congress and (b) disenfranchise liberal voters. And they may have 
what it takes.
According to Forbes  magazine, in early 2014 the Koch brothers each 
had a net worth of $40 billion.110 Compare that to the total cost of 
all federal elections in 2012, which was $6.3 billion. That $6.3 billion 
included all expenses for both Presidential candidates, plus both 
sides of all contests for 435 seats in the House of Representatives, 
plus two candidacies each for 33 U.S. Senate races.111 It sounds 
absurd, but either of the Koch brothers could personally – and rather 
painlessly – pay for the whole shebang. And although it may sound  
absurd, the Kochs and some of their libertarian allies are working 
aggressively to make such a thing possible, simply by eliminating all 
restrictions on campaign donations and expenditures by individuals 
and by corporations.
The Koch brothers’ commitment to using their money to influence 
political outcomes is unprecedented. Only they know exactly how 
much they have put out, but public tax records reveal that, between 
1998 and 2008 the Kochs spent at least  $256 million dollars on poli -
tics.112 Now that’s  commitment.
It is one of the real internal dangers facing a modern democratic 
republic: one or two narcissistic billionaires may try to grease the 
entire political system and thus purchase nearly-unlimited behind-
the-scenes power. With the royalists of the Supreme Court in their 
110 “The Forbes 400; The Richest people in America,” Forbes.com; http://goo.gl/
kRcXa  ; accessed July 24, 2014
111 Russ Choma, “Election 2012: The Big Picture Shows Record Cost of Winning 
a Seat in Congress.” OpenSecrets.org, June 19, 2013. http://goo.gl/NpxX4b  
Accessed Aug. 20, 2014.
112 Jane Mayer, “Covert Operations: The billionaire brothers who are waging 
a war against Obama,” New Yorker  Vol. 86, No. 25 (Aug. 30, 1010), pgs. 44-55. 
http://goo.gl/M4MJB1

Page 56
corner, and much of the electorate convinced that voting no longer 
matters – plus (as we’ll see below) another large number of voters 
disenfranchised by a nationwide campaign to suppress voting by 
blacks, Latinos, college youth, old people, Democrats, and the dis -
abled – such an effort might conceivably succeed.
Of course the Koch brothers wouldn’t have to spend their personal 
fortunes to support the campaigns of every candidate for federal 
office. Their corporation (of which they own 84 percent of the 
stock) could do it for them. Given recent Supreme Court decisions, 
the brothers could use funds from the treasury of Koch Industries 
(a gigantic oil and chemicals conglomerate), which reportedly has 
revenues of about $115 billion each year and a pre-tax profit margin 
of 10 percent.113 If it paid the full statutory corporate income tax of 
35 percent, Koch Industries would still net $7.4 billion each year. In 
sum, the Koch brothers have limitless amounts of cash with which 
to influence elections and try to eradicate the egalitarian culture of 
America.
To pay for the entire federal election cycle by themselves, the 
Kochs would just have to wait until the Supreme Court found (or 
invented114) opportunities to strike down every remaining limit on 
campaign donations and expenditures. Then the brothers and their 
friends could purchase influence, wholesale, throughout the U.S. 
political system and it would be perfectly legal.
113 Charles Lewis and others, “Koch millions spread influence through 
nonprofits, colleges,” Investigative Reporting Workshop July 1, 2013. http://
goo.gl/R5xtx
114 Jeffrey Toobin, “Money Unlimited; How Chief Justice John Roberts 
orchestrated the Citizens United Decision,” New Yorker  Vol. 88, No. 14 (May 21, 
2012), pgs. 36-47. http://goo.gl/hQ2DW

Page 57
It all started with father Fred
Fred Koch, father of the Koch brothers, was a hard-ass Texas oil 
man. David has described his father: “He was like John Wayne. Just 
like John Wayne.” One family friend said Fred’s interest “was not in 
the kids,” and another said Fred “was the type of father who taught 
his children to swim by throwing them into a pool and walking 
away.”115 According to family biographer Daniel Schulman, when his 
sons got into arguments, Fred encouraged them to put on the gloves 
and duke it out.116 Charles, in turn, “took sadistic pleasure in provok -
ing fights” between his younger twin brothers David and Bill (as 
recounted by Bill himself).117 A member of the extended Koch family 
describes David and Charles this way: “Everything goes back to their 
childhood. Everything goes back to the love they didn’t get.”118
The Koch brothers have been imitating, idolizing and trying to live 
up to their dad since at least 1967 when he died of a heart attack. For 
example, after his death they renamed his oil company (which they 
inherited) Koch Industries, to honor him.119 And they have run it on 
libertarian principles, ignoring public health – in 2013 it ranked 13th 
in the nation’s largest dischargers of toxic air pollution.120 The broth -
ers have also hewed to the political line father Fred had drummed 
into their dear little ears: racist-sounding paranoia about the dangers 
of government action for the general welfare.121
115 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita  (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing, 2014), pg. 
15.
116 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita  (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing, 2014), pg. 
25.
117 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita  (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing, 2014), pg. 
24.
118 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita  (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing, 2014), pg. 
26.
119 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita  (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing, 2014), pg. 
77.
120 “Toxic 100 Air Polluters,” Political Economy Research Institute  (University 
of Massachusetts, Amherst), Aug. 2013. http://goo.gl/rNYA60  Accessed Aug. 
24, 2014. For details of Koch Industries’ air pollution, see “Koch Industries,” 
Political Economy Research Institute  (University of Massachusetts, Amherst), 
http://goo.gl/v6nLY6 . Accessed Aug. 24, 2014.
121 Fred C. Koch, A Business Man Looks at Communism  (Seattle, Wash.: Amazon.

Page 58
Fred Koch was a one of the original founders of the John Birch 
Society, in 1958. Three years later, he was joined by son Charles, 
who founded a Bircher book store in Wichita, specializing in anti-
communist and racist tracts.122 The Birchers made themselves 
instantly famous by asserting that both Republican and Democratic 
parties had been infiltrated by communists, and that President 
Dwight Eisenhower himself was a “dedicated, conscious agent 
of the Communist conspiracy,” guilty of “treason.”123 Fred Koch 
agreed: Because Eisenhower allowed the flag of Panama to fly over 
the Panama Canal, he must be surrendering to the communist con -
spiracy, Fred concluded.124
Fred (and, later, son Charles) opposed the civil rights movement of 
the 1960s because he was certain that black people were part of the 
communist conspiracy to destroy America: “The colored man looms 
large in the Communist plot to take over America,” he wrote. The 
mechanism? Government assistance. In his book, A Business Man 
Looks at Communism,  Fred explained that government assistance pro -
grams would entice blacks and Puerto Ricans to move to large cities, 
where their vote would produce communist electoral victories in im -
portant states like New York, Pennsylvania, Michigan and Illinois.125 
Then, when the communist party “is ready to take over these cities it 
will use the colored people by getting a vicious race war started,” Fred 
wrote.126
com [Kindle edition], 1961, 2014).
122 “Charles G. Koch,” SourceWatch. http://goo.gl/sqC1NH  accessed Aug. 
20, 2014; and see Lisa Graves, “The Radical Past of Charles Koch – A Former 
Die-Hard John Birch Society Member,” Alternet July 8, 2014. http://goo.gl/
MKG11M .
123 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing, 2014), 
pg. 52, and Lee Fang, The Machine  (N.Y.: New Press, 2013), pg. 98.
124 Lee Fang, The Machine  (N.Y.: New Press, 2013), pg. 95.
125 Fred C. Koch, A Business Man Looks at Communism  (Seattle, Wash.: Amazon.
com [Kindle edition], 1961, 2014).
126 Fred C. Koch, A Business Man Looks at Communism  (Seattle, Wash.: Amazon.
com [Kindle edition], 1961, 2014).

Page 59
Today the Koch brothers are continuing their father’s ideological 
battle against the rights of working people and against govern -
ment aid for the downtrodden, which, like Fred, they see as a grand 
conspiracy to destroy America. They have declared war on President 
Obama because he has a “socialist vision for this country,” and 
because he’s “making massive efforts to socialize this country.”127 
And of course, as we’ll see, the brothers are now supporting a new 
racially-tinged political movement, not very different from the John 
Birch Society – the Tea Party.128
According to the Koch family biographer, “Fred reserved special 
scorn for labor unions.”129 In his 1961 book, A Business Man Looks 
at Communism , Fred said labor  unions had been infiltrated “very far 
indeed” by communists. Labor unions “have the worker do as little as 
possible for the money he receives,” Fred wrote. “This practice alone 
can destroy our country.”130
The Koch Brothers’ Theory of Government: 
American Libertarianism
The Koch brothers are hard-line libertarians – but what is libertari -
anism? In some parts of the world there are libertarian socialists.131 
That is not what the Kochs have in mind. The founder of the 
American libertarian movement was Ayn Rand, the Russian émigré 
who wrote the novels The Fountainhead  (1943) and Atlas Shrugged  
127 Jane Mayer, “Covert Operations; the billionaire brothers who are waging 
a war against Obama,” New Yorker  Vol. 86, No. 25 (Aug. 30, 2010), pgs. 44-55. 
http://goo.gl/M4MJB1
128 David Welch, “Where Have You Gone, Bill Buckley?” New York Times 
Dec. 3, 2010, writes, “The modern day Birchers are the Tea Party.” http://
goo.gl/rh0TB4  Welch is former research director for the Republican National 
Committee.
129 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita  (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing, 2014), 
pg. 47, and Fred C. Koch, A Business Man Looks at Communism  (Seattle, Wash.: 
Amazon.com [Kindle edition], 1961, 2014).
130 Fred C. Koch, A Business Man Looks at Communism  (Seattle, Wash.: Amazon.
com [Kindle edition], 1961, 2014).
131 Alex Prichard and others (editors), Libertarian Socialism: Politics in Black and 
Red (N.Y.: St. Martins Press, 2012).

Page 60
(1957).132 Upon her death in 1982, Ayn Rand’s “objectivist” (libertar -
ian) philosophy was summarized succinctly in her obituary in the 
New York Times : selfishness is good, altruism is evil, and the welfare 
of society must always be subordinate to individual self-interest.133 
Gordon Gekko, the hero of Oliver Stone’s 1987 movie, Wall Street , 
said it best: “Greed is good.” Government can only get in the way.134 
That’s the heart and soul of American libertarianism. You can think 
of it as Adam Smith’s invisible hand curled into a fist with brass 
knuckles.
Because government can only get in the way, the goal of the Koch 
brothers is to tear government “out at the root,” as Charles put it 
in 1978.135 After the strict ideological training they received from 
their father, they fell under the sway of a libertarian huckster named 
Robert Lefevre, a failed Hollywood actor who became a professional 
anti-communist and anti-union lecturer. Lefevre’s teachings “played 
an important role in shaping [Charles’s] political views,” writes the 
family biographer.136 Lefevre detested government so much that 
he refused even to vote, so as not to legitimize it. Lefevre founded 
and operated the all-white Freedom School (later named Rampart 
College) in the mountains of Colorado, which the Koch brothers at -
tended, funded, and later helped direct. No blacks allowed.137
132 The title of the standard history of “the modern American libertarian 
movement,” Brian Doherty’s Radicals for Capitalism , is a phrase first used by 
Ayn Rand. See Brian Doherty, Radicals for Capitalism  (N.Y.: Public Affairs, 2007), 
pg. 15.
133 Edwin McDowell, “Ayn Rand: Novelist with a Message,” New York Times  
Mar. 9, 1982. http://goo.gl/nav7Uw  And see the video Ayn Rand: In her Own 
Words  (2011) in which Rand is interviewed for 74 minutes by Mike Wallace and 
Phil Donahue; available from Amazon on DVD, and on Youtube: http://goo.gl/
XrwWvP
134 As President Ronald Reagan told us in his first inaugural address (1981), “In 
this crisis, government is not the solution to our problem; government is the 
problem.”
135 Brian Doherty, Radicals for Capitalism  (N.Y.: Public Affairs, 2007), pg. 445.
136 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita  (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing, 2014), pg. 
92.
137 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita  (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing, 2014), pg. 
95-96.

Page 61
Like the DuPonts before them, the Koch brothers aim to roll back 
the New Deal, which they regard as a tyrannical threat to freedom.138 
When David Koch ran for Vice-President in 1980, he advocated 
privatizing social security, eliminating minimum wage laws, do -
ing away with all personal and corporate income taxes, abolishing 
gun controls, and legalizing prostitution, among other libertarian 
goals. Government has only one legitimate function: protect indi -
vidual rights. (William F . Buckley, Jr., a conventional conservative, 
described the Lefevre/Koch plan as “Anarcho-Totalitarianism.”139) 
Since that time, the Kochs have supported efforts to privatize public 
schools, end the welfare state, generally shrink government small 
enough to drown in a bathtub, eliminate the regulation of industrial 
poisons and global warming gases, and outlaw civil rights laws and 
affirmative action programs intended to give a hand up to anyone 
trying to overcome centuries of oppression – mainly women and 
people of color.140 In short, the Kochs support the standard libertar -
ian agenda. Never mind that no nation in the world – not one – has 
ever organized itself on such principles. Historian Michael Lind chal -
lenges libertarians to answer one simple question: “If your approach 
is so great, why hasn’t any country anywhere in the world ever tried 
it?”141
138 Lee Fang, The Machine  (N.Y.: New Press, 2013), pg. 108; and see Jane Mayer, 
“Covert Operations; the billionaire brothers who are waging a war against 
Obama,” New Yorker  Vol. 86, No. 25 (Aug. 30, 2010), pgs. 44-55. http://goo.gl/
M4MJB1
139 Buckley quoted in Jane Mayer, “Covert Operations; the billionaire brothers 
who are waging a war against Obama,” New Yorker  Vol. 86, No. 25 (Aug. 30, 
2010), pgs. 44-55. http://goo.gl/M4MJB1
140 On the organized campaign to roll back civil rights laws and end affirmative 
action programs, and the Kochs’ role in it, see Lee Cokorinos, The Assault on 
Diversity; An Organized Challenge to Racial and Gender Justice  (Lanham, Md.: 
Rowman & Littlefield, 2003).
141 Michael Lind, “The question libertarians just can’t answer,” Salon.com June 
4, 2013. http://goo.gl/YuitC

Page 62
Despite their impossible dream, the Kochs – particularly Charles – 
hold themselves, and their mission to save America, in very high re -
gard. Charles has compared himself to Martin Luther, who radically 
altered history by starting the Protestant Reformation in 1517.142 A 
senior official at the Cato Institute (a Libertarian think tank founded 
by the Kochs in 1974) says Charles “thinks he’s a genius. He’s the 
emperor and he’s convinced he’s wearing clothes.”143
David Koch has been described as “a bit of a lunk,”144 but brother 
Charles may be a bit of a narcissist.145 And perhaps a bit of a bully. 
At Koch Industries, “You either drink the Kool-Aid or you keep your 
mouth shut and walk the line,” says Randy Rathbun, a Wichita lawyer 
and former U.S. attorney in Kansas who has many friends who work 
for the company. “I have never seen a place where people are afraid 
like this where they work,” says Rathbun, noting that some of his 
friends who work for Koch jokingly refer to it as the “evil empire.” He 
adds, “There’s a culture of fear out there.”146
142 Lee Fang, The Machine  (N.Y.: New Press), p. 120.
143 Quoted in Jane Mayer, “Covert Operations; the billionaire brothers who are 
waging a war against Obama,” New Yorker  Vol. 86, No. 25 (Aug. 30, 2010), pgs. 
44-55. http://goo.gl/M4MJB1
144 Jane Mayer, “Covert Operations; the billionaire brothers who are waging 
a war against Obama,” New Yorker  Vol. 86, No. 25 (Aug. 30, 2010), pgs. 44-55. 
http://goo.gl/M4MJB1
145 To read more about narcissism, consult: Simon Baron-Cohen, The Science 
of Evil  (N.Y.: Basic Books, 2011); Robert D. Hare, Without Conscience  (N.Y.: 
Guilford Press, 1993; paperback edition 1999); Paul Babiak and Robert D. Hare, 
Snakes in Suits  (N.Y.: Harper-Collins, 2006); Ronald Schouten and James Silver, 
Almost a Psychopath  (Center City, Minn.: Hazelden, 2012); and Kevin Dutton, 
The Wisdom of Psychopaths  (N.Y.: Scientific American / Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux, 2012).
146 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita  (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing, 2014), pg. 
253.

Page 63
The Plan
After David’s failed Vice-Presidential campaign in 1980, the Koch 
brothers shifted strategy. One “longtime Koch lieutenant” explains 
their overall strategy this way:
“Politicians, ultimately, are just actors playing out a script. The 
idea is, one gets better and quicker results aiming not at the actors 
but at the scriptwriters, to help supply the themes and words for 
the scripts–to try to influence the areas where policy ideas percolate 
from: academia and think tanks.”147
As early as 1974, Charles Koch began urging libertarian thinkers 
and business leaders to invest in a collective enterprise of conserva -
tive movement-building that would focus on long-term strategies to 
advance the ideological fight, rather than short-term political and 
electoral objectives. “The development of a well-financed cadre of 
sound proponents of the free enterprise philosophy is the most criti -
cal need facing us at the moment,” Koch asserted, quoting the Powell 
memo of 1971.148
Without mentioning Powell, Koch cited the same four spheres 
where business should focus the fight: education, the media, “legal 
challenges” and political action.149
In the 40 years since Charles Koch delivered his rallying cry, the 
Kochs and their close allies have built a broad and deep network of 
libertarian and conservative foundations, national and state think 
tanks, state-level media watchdogs, political operatives, phony 
“grass-roots” groups, legislative clearinghouses, and academic and 
legal programs that are so stunning in their reach that they make 
Lewis Powell’s blueprint for action look like a simple napkin draw -
ing.150
147 Brian Doherty, Radicals for Capitalism  (N.Y.: Public Affairs, 2007), pg. 410.
148 Nicholas Confessore, “Quixotic ‘80 Campaign Gave Birth to Kochs’ Powerful 
Network,” New York Times , May 17, 2014. http://goo.gl/5vd1sH
149 Charles Koch speech to Libertarian Party, Dallas, April 27, 1974. https://
www.documentcloud.org/documents/1302373-1974-charles-koch-ihs-speech-
anti-capitalism-and.html
150 Charles Lewis et al., “Koch millions spread influence through nonprofits, 
colleges,” Investigative Reporting Workshop (American University School of 

Page 64
Although other libertarian foundations had a strong interest in 
social and cultural issues, the Kochs’ focus was almost exclusively on 
minimizing the role of government in the economy and in the regula -
tion of businesses like their own, shrinking government’s capacity 
to hold such businesses accountable – thus increasing the wealth of 
wealthy people like themselves.
Every group in the Koch pantheon is committed to the Koch 
agenda, which is: oppose any action to curb global warming or other 
environmental pollution; weaken worker rights; sharply reduce social 
welfare programs and the regulation of business; and cut taxes for 
the wealthy.151
In the early 1980s, the Koch brothers devised a plan for re-making 
America into their libertarian utopia.152 Their plan, called “Structure 
for Social Change,” has three stages:
Stage 1  requires the production of ideas, starting as abstract 
concepts and theories. For this, Charles spent “millions of dollars on 
hundreds of universities around the country” – nearly $31 million 
dollars between 2007 and 2011 alone “to endow professorships, un -
derwrite free-market economics programs, and sponsor conferences 
and lecture-series for libertarian thinkers.”153
In Stage 2 , these abstract ideas and concepts must to be turned 
into something usable in the real world, something people can 
understand. Privatize social security. Cast doubt on the science of 
Communication), July 1, 2013. http://goo.gl/R5xtx  ; Jane Mayer, “Covert 
Operations; the billionaire brothers who are waging a war against Obama,” New 
Yorker  Vol. 86, No. 25 (Aug. 30, 2010), pgs. 44-55. http://goo.gl/M4MJB1 ; And 
see Kochcash.org (International Forum on Globalization); and: Tony Carrk, The 
Koch Brothers: What You Need to Know About the Financiers of the Radical Right  
(Washington, D.C.: Center for American Progress Action Fund, April 2011). 
http://goo.gl/jy2OED ; and: Greenpeace, “Koch Brothers: Still Funding Climate 
Denial” http://goo.gl/U9o2t  ; and Brave New Films, “Koch Brothers Exposed: 
2014 Edition.” At http://www.bravenewfilms.org/koch2014
151 Lee Fang, The Machine  (N.Y.: New Press, 2013), pg. 92.
152 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita  (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing, 2014), 
pgs. 263-270.
153 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita  (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing, 2014), 
pgs. 263-270.

Page 65
global warming.154 End government funding for research on solar 
energy. Eliminate the income tax. Simple, practical ideas to shrink 
government, make workers less secure, and help oil barons make and 
keep more windfall profits. The work of Stage 2  falls to think tanks 
and policy institutions.
The Kochs already understood Stage 2  – they had created the Cato 
Institute in 1974, and were funding and controlling the Mercatus 
Institute at George Mason University, plus dozens of other little aca -
demic centers of libertarian dogma. Mercatus is famous for having 
selected 14 of the 23 regulatory programs targeted for elimination 
by George W. Bush as soon as he became President. (It was Mercatus 
founder Richard H. Fink who initially devised the Koch’s three-part 
plan for the libertarian re-make of America. Fink has been Charles’s 
“ideological consigliere” for decades.155)
Stage 3  of the Koch/Fink master plan called for a mobilization of 
citizens – hundreds of thousands of them, if possible – preferably 
ones who are mad as hell and not going to take it anymore. As David 
Koch put it, “What was needed was a sales force that participated in 
political campaigns or town hall meetings, in rallies, to communicate 
to the public at large much of the information that these think tanks 
were creating.”156
This third stage was slow getting started – it’s not easy to convince 
middle-class Americans that a libertarian agenda, which is likely to 
make them poorer and less secure, is worth fighting for. But with 
persistence, cynical cunning and “dog whistle” appeals to racial ani -
mus, many white people can be recruited.157
154 Greenpeace, Koch Industries Secretly Funding the Climate Denial Machine  
(Washington, D.C.: Greenpeace, March, 2010). http://goo.gl/9nV3  And 
see Connor Gibson, “Koch Brothers Exposed: Fueling Climate Denial and 
Privatizing Democracy” (Greenpeace web page last updated June 20, 2012) at 
http://goo.gl/tVtmfG .
155 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita  (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing, 2014), pg. 
263
156 Charles Koch quoted in Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita  (N.Y.: Grand 
Central Publishing, 2014), pg. 266.
157 Ian Haney López, Dog Whistle Politics: How Coded Racial Appeals Have 
Reinvented Racism and Wrecked the Middle Class  (N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 

Page 66
In America, because of its peculiar history, race has proven again 
and again to be politically useful: If you suggest to white people that 
they are somehow being threatened or taken advantage of by black 
or brown people, then they may join your cause, even if it means 
they’ll have to live with self-inflicted wounds forever after. This is 
why political analysts call race a “wedge issue” – because time after 
time it has been used to divide white people against their natural 
allies and against their self-interests, leaving them poorer and politi -
cally weaker, while the narcissistic nabobs grow wealthier and more 
powerful year after year.158
As we’ll see (below), after 30 years of coaxing, training, and fund -
ing, the Kochs’ libertarian sales force finally blossomed onto the 
scene in 2009, calling itself the Tea Party. Stage 3  of the Koch/Fink 
plan had finally materialized.
The Kochtopus Begins to Wriggle and Grasp
In the late 1970s, the Kochs were financing relatively few projects 
– the Cato Institute, the Libertarian Party, Students for a Libertarian 
Society, Inquiry magazine, and Libertarian Review. At that time, a 
disgruntled libertarian named Sam Konkin, who thought the Kochs 
lacked sufficient ideological purity, labeled their operation “the 
Kochtopus” and the name stuck.159
2014).
158 For many reports of this strategy succeeding, see, for example, Allen C. 
Guelzo, Fateful Lightning; A New History of the Civil War and Reconstruction  
(N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 2012), pgs. 38-52. Or see Joan Walsh, What’s 
the Matter with White People; Why We Long for a Golden Age That Never Was  
(Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley, 2012). Or see Michael Goldfield, The Color of Politics: 
Race and the Mainsprings of American Politics  (N.Y.: New Press, 1997) or Thomas 
Byrne Edsall and Mary D. Edsall, Chain Reaction  (N.Y.: Norton, 1991), or Kevin 
Phillips, The Emerging Republican Majority  (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington 
House, 1969); or Joe R. Feagin, White Party, White Government; Race, Class, and 
U.S. Politics  (N.Y.: Routledge, 2012); or – best of all – see the indispensible Ian 
Haney López, Dog Whistle Politics: How Coded Racial Appeals Have Reinvented 
Racism and Wrecked the Middle Class  (N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 2014).
159 Brian Doherty, Radicals for Capitalism  (N.Y.: Public Affairs, 2007), pg. 410.

Page 67
Since then the Kochtopus has grown into something worthy of 
the name – a sprawling tangle of hundreds of think tanks, endowed 
academic positions and departments, internships, policy shops, leg -
islative bill mills, media outlets, training institutes, and disciplined 
foot-soldiers for the policy wars, all funded by Koch Industries, Koch 
Family Foundations, or the Koch brothers as individual donors, and 
their friends.
“This extensive, cross-sector Koch club or network appears to be 
unprecedented in size, scope and funding,” says investigative journal -
ist Charles Lewis. “The sheer dimension of it is what sets them apart. 
They have a pattern of lawbreaking, political manipulation, and 
obfuscation. I’ve been in Washington since Watergate,” says Lewis, 
“But I’ve never seen anything like it.”160
“It’s almost like an investor investing in a whole variety of com -
panies,” David Koch himself once said, explaining the strategy: “He 
achieves diversity and balance and he hedges his bets.”161
“What distinguishes the Koch foundations from others… is this 
commitment to a longer-term payoff,” the Hudson Institute’s Leslie 
Lendowsky observes.162
160Charles Lewis and others, “The Koch Club – Koch millions spread influence 
through nonprofits, colleges,” Investigative Reporting Workshop July 1, 
2013. http://goo.gl/R5xtx  And Charles Lewis quoted in Jane Mayer, “Covert 
Operations; the billionaire brothers who are waging a war against Obama,” New 
Yorker  Vol. 86, No. 25 (Aug. 30, 2010), pgs. 44-55. http://goo.gl/M4MJB1
161 W. John Moore, “Wichita Pipeline,” National Journal  May 16, 1992. http://
goo.gl/4CEUMR
162 W. John Moore, “Wichita Pipeline,” National Journal  May 16, 1992. http://
goo.gl/4CEUMR

Page 68
Influencing Elections Directly
Increasingly in recent years, the Kochtopus has focused its financial 
resources to influence elections directly. The Kochs’ network of Super 
PACs and dark-money nonprofit organizations raised over $400 
million in the 2012 election cycle. And as the Washington Post  report 
in early 2014, these groups have continued “expand(ing) into a far-
reaching operation of unrivaled complexity, built around a maze of 
groups that cloaks its donors.”163
Furthermore, as the Supreme Court knocks down one campaign-
finance limit after another, the Kochtopus responds rapidly with 
ever-greater contributions and expenditures. “If the Koch brothers’ 
political operation seemed ambitious in 2010 or 2012, wait for 
what’s in store for 2014 and beyond,” Politico  reporter Ken Vogel 
predicted in January 2014.164
Here is a brief description of a few of the major tentacles of the 
Kochtopus:165
163 Matea Gold, “Koch-backed political coalition, designed to shield donors, 
raised $400 million in 2012,” Washington Post, January 5, 2014. http://goo.gl/
fuhCTc
164 Kenneth P . Vogel, “Koch World 2014,” Politico  Jan. 24, 2014. http://goo.
gl/5NTey3
165 For our current understanding of the Kochtopus, we are indebted to 
SourceWatch  at http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php/Koch  and Koch Cash  at 
http://www.kochcash.org  and Real Koch Facts  at http://www.RealKochFacts.
com  and Polluter Watch  at http://www.polluterwatch.com  and The Center for 
Public Integrity  at http://www.publicintegrity.org  and ProPublica  at http://
www.propublica.org/  and The Investigative Reporting Workshop  at http://
investigativereportingworkshop.org/ , and DeSmogBlog http://desmogblog.
com , and ThinkProgress at http:/www.thinkprogress.org  and the Energy & 
Policy Institute http://www.energyandpolicy.org  . For additional information 
about the Kochtopus, see Greenpeace, “Koch Industries Still Fueling Climate 
Denial,” http://goo.gl/U9o2t ; and Jane Mayer, “Covert Operations; the 
billionaire brothers who are waging a war against Obama,” New Yorker  Vol. 86, 
No. 25 (Aug. 30, 2010), pgs. 44-55. http://goo.gl/M4MJB1 ; Brad Friedman, 
“Audio: Christie lets loose at Secret Koch Brothers Confab,” Mother Jones , 
Sept. 7, 2011. http://goo.gl/aFmvlL ; and Gavin Aronsen, “Exclusive: The Koch 
Brothers’ Million-Dollar Donor Club,” Mother Jones , Sept. 6, 2011 http://goo.
gl/k0dV8 ; and Brave New Films, “Koch Brothers Exposed” (2014) http://goo.gl/
EX0EO2 .

Page 69
I. ALEC , the American Legislative Exchange Council , was 
founded in 1973, the brainchild of theocrat and Republican strate -
gist, Paul Weyrich. ALEC  works directly with corporations and state 
representatives who, together, write business-friendly laws without 
public disclosure. ALEC  has an enviable track record of success: 
it produces about 1000 new bills each year, approximately 200 of 
which become law in one state or another.166 As Greenpeace research 
has shown, ALEC promotes whatever it’s paid to promote: privatize 
social security, eliminate the minimum wage, repeal carbon emis -
sion standards, kill net neutrality, abolish collective bargaining for 
public employees (teachers, police, and fire fighters), and transfer 
government functions, such as prisons, into the hands of private 
corporations.167 In sum, ALEC  aims to roll back the New Deal, shrink 
government, and prevent effective action to manage global warming 
– the Koch brothers’ agenda.
An ALEC priority: Blocking the Sun
After the Kochs and their Republican allies managed to take over 
Congress in 2010, undermining the possibility of serious construc -
tive federal legislation on energy, the attacks on global warming and 
energy policies shifted to the states,167 where ALEC  serves as a key 
Koch ally.
One of ALEC’s  top priorities has been to undermine the regulation 
of global-warming gases (CO2 and methane), and to eliminate state 
clean-energy standards that have helped incentivize the growth of 
energy efficiency and renewable energy sources such as wind and 
solar. In 2013 alone, ALEC  supported over 70 bills to slow the de -
ployment of renewable energy.168
166 Lee Fang, The Machine  (N.Y.: New Press, 2013), pg. 212.
167 Energy & Policy Institute, Attacks on Renewable Energy Standards and Net 
Metering Policies By Fossil Fuel Interests & Front Groups 2013-2014  (Washington, 
D.C.: May, 2014). http://goo.gl/ifjyVG
168 Herman K. Trabish, “ALEC Coordinates New Attacks on Renewables 
Mandates and Net Metering,” Green Tech Media , Feb. 24, 2014. http://goo.gl/
mlsgM1  Accessed Aug. 20, 214.

Page 70
But it hasn’t been easy. In 2013, ALEC’s  attacks on state renewable 
portfolio standards (RPS) failed in 15 states, including Republican-
controlled ones like North Carolina and the Kochs’ own home, 
Kansas, mainly because wind and solar are providing significant 
economic benefits.169
Of course the setbacks didn’t stop the Kochs, ALEC  and their allies 
from taking their offensive to Ohio and other states.170 In Arizona, 
former top Koch political operator Sean Noble used funding from 
local utility Arizona Public Service Co. to run attack ads against 
solar.171 In 2014 they managed to get the Oklahoma state legislature 
to become the first to pass a bill allowing the state utility commis -
sion to charge customers for “net metering” – the right to sell excess 
electricity generated by wind and solar back onto the grid. The goal: 
to make solar more expensive.
“At long last, the Koch brothers and their conservative allies in 
state government have found a new tax they can support,” editors 
at the New York Times  wrote. “Naturally it’s a tax on something the 
country needs: solar energy panels.”172
The 2014 ALEC catalog of model legislation includes a wide variety 
of dirty-energy bills that not only attack renewable energy standards, 
but perform other favors for their dirty-energy corporate members, 
including bills designed to reduce fracking chemical disclosure re -
quirements, weaken energy efficiency policies, and relax air pollution 
standards.
169 Brendan Fischer, “Big Defeat for ALEC’s Effort to Repeal Renewable Energy 
Standards for North Carolina,” PR Watch, April 24, 2013. http://goo.gl/5lSSEo . 
The 2013 North Carolina Clean Energy Industry Census ,
 published in January 2014 by the North Carolina Sustainable Energy 
Association, estimated that the state clean energy sector brought the state $3.6 
billion in revenues, sustaining over 18,000 jobs. http://goo.gl/OCc5Tt
170 Connor Gibson, “Ohio Clean Energy Still in Koch & ALEC Crosshairs,” 
DeSmogBlog.com , Oct. 30, 2013. http://goo.gl/4zuJNZ
171 Andy Kroll, “Power Company Comes Clean: We Bankrolled Arizona’s Anti-
Solar Blitz,” Mother Jones, Oct. 21, 2013. http://goo.gl/eYqtLV  For up-to-date 
information about the attacks on renewable and clean energy policies see the 
Energy and Policy Institute, http://www.energyandpolicy.org/
172 Editorial Board, “The Koch Attack on Solar Energy,” New York Times , April 
26, 2014. http://goo.gl/Xk3a1y

Page 71
While coal industry executives and their political allies continue 
accusing the Obama administration of waging an unfair “war on 
coal,” they are quietly working with ALEC  and other groups to try 
to sabotage the EPA’s long-awaited proposed new coal power plant 
emissions standards.
Coal giant Peabody Energy, a top corporate funder of ALEC -
sponsored junkets,173 and the American Coalition for Clean Coal 
Electricity, a coal industry front group, co-sponsored ALEC’s  
December 2013 conference in Washington, DC where lobbyists and 
legislators were urged to engage in “guerrilla warfare” to block EPA’s 
coal plant emissions regulation.174 Kelly Mader, Peabody’s top lobby -
ist, sits on ALEC’s  corporate board,175 and another Peabody lobbyist, 
Wendy Lowe. received ALEC’s  “State Chair of the Year” award in 
2012.176
ALEC  organized a phone call for state legislators to help encour -
age them to lobby their state attorney general to sue EPA over the 
proposed regulations.177
ALEC  has written boilerplate legislation to obstruct EPA’s proposed 
CO2 regulations and continues to attack state laws and incentives 
that would give states flexibility in complying with EPA’s proposal, 
including clean energy standards and cap-and-trade programs.
ALEC  joined with Americans for Prosperity (AFP) , another of 
the Kochs’ key political operations (see IX, below) in attacking New 
173 Lisa Graves, Buying Influence: How The American Legislative Exchange Council 
Used Corporate-Funded “Scholarships” to Send Lawmakers on Trips with Corporate 
Lobbyists  (Madison, Wisc.: Center for Media and Democracy, D.B.A. Press, 
and Common Cause, July 2013). And: Nick Surgey, “Peabody Energy Lobbyist 
Schools Legislators on Getting More ALEC Travel Perks,” PR Watch , March 5, 
2014. http://goo.gl/b5U2wq
174 Aliya Haq, “Polluters begin their so-called ‘guerrilla warfare’ strategy against 
climate action,” NRDC Switchboard  Feb. 4, 2014. http://goo.gl/Vb44Hz
175 Nick Surgey, “Revealed: ALEC’s 2014 Attacks on the Environment,” PR 
Watch  April 23, 2014. http://goo.gl/D8i6SQ
176 Nick Surgey, “Peabody Energy Lobbyist Schools Legislators on Getting More 
ALEC Travel Perks,” PR Watch , March 5, 2014. http://goo.gl/b5U2wq
177 Connor Gibson, “ALEC doesn’t care about #freemarkets – explaining ALEC’s 
shill bills,” Greenpeace blog, May 2, 2014. http://goo.gl/ZflhwR

Page 72
England’s Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI), an interstate 
global-warming reduction pact.178 AFP  claimed credit for convincing 
New Jersey Governor Chris Christie to remove New Jersey from 
RGGI, urging him to fight proposed off-shore wind projects as well 
– which he did.179 That same year Christie (who is clearly planning a 
presidential run in 2016) tried to hide his guest speaker appearance 
at the secretive Koch Network  high-donor retreat by keeping it off 
of his publicly available calendar.180 But Christie’s appearance at the 
event highlights the Kochs’ “gatekeeper” role within the Republican 
Party, noted earlier.
“Private” sector ALEC  members from Koch Industries, Peabody 
and other companies and their front groups regularly join state 
legislators at ALEC  task force meetings where they develop legisla -
tive priorities and draft bills and resolutions.181 ALEC’s  Energy, 
Environment and Agriculture task force is stuffed with representa -
tives from Shell, Americans for Prosperity , Duke Energy and other 
big polluters and their front groups. ALEC’s  corporate membership 
also includes an A-list of other dirty-energy companies, including 
ExxonMobil, Duke Energy, Shell, Chevron and BP .182
The Kochs’ connection to ALEC  goes back to the 1990s, when Koch 
Industries chaired ALEC’s  corporate board and loaned ALEC  nearly 
half a million dollars.183 The brothers’ support has continued to this 
day; Koch-controlled foundations have given ALEC at least $600,000 
in the past decade. The Kochs and other right-wing foundations, in -
178 Connor Gibson, “Video: Koch used NJ Gov. Chris Christie to Undermine 
Climate Policy,” Greenpeace blog, May 13, 2014. http://goo.gl/P61wnQ
179 Keith Harrington, “Koch brothers declare war on offshore wind,” Grist , July 
16, 2011. http://goo.gl/qfltLh
180 Brad Friedman, “Audio: Christie lets loose at Secret Koch Brothers Confab,” 
Mother Jones , Sept. 7, 2011. http://goo.gl/aFmvlL
181 Connor Gibson, “What’s on ALEC’s Polluter Agenda Tomorrow?” 
Greenpeace blog May 10, 2012. http://goo.gl/02Hqy9
182 For information about ALEC see http://www.alecexposed.org  ; for a list 
of corporations supporting ALEC as of September 2013, see http://www.
sourcewatch.org/index.php/ALEC_Corporations
183 Lisa Graves, “A CMD Special Report on ALEC’s funding and spending,” PR 
Watch , July 13, 2011. http://goo.gl/re3Hy

Page 73
cluding the Searle Freedom Trust, have also amplified ALEC’s  effects 
by supporting the State Policy Network (SPN) , the web of state-
based think tanks created by ALEC  and its allies to provide talking 
points and media-friendly analysis for its policy proposals. (More on 
SPN  below.)184
According to the Center for Media and Democracy, almost 98 per -
cent of ALEC’s  funding between 2009 and 2011 – over $21 million 
– came from corporations, conservative foundations, trade associa -
tions and other outside sources. Just 2 percent came from ALEC’s 
legislative members.185
Another group joining AFP’s  attack on wind is the American 
Energy Alliance (AEA) , an oil industry front group headed by 
Thomas Pyle, a former Koch Industries lobbyist.186 AEA  describes 
itself as the “grassroots arm” of the Institute for Energy Research 
(IER),  which has leveled a persistent attack on renewable energy and 
global-warming science. IER is a “partner institution” of the Charles 
Koch Institute.187 AEA’s  CEO Robert Bradley is a former Koch lob -
byist and the former Director of Public Relations Policy at Enron, 
the notorious collection of scam artists masquerading as an energy 
conglomerate.188 Bradley joined ALEC’s  2011 Energy, Environment 
and Agriculture task force meeting, along with James Taylor of the 
Heartland Institute , a vocal global warming science denier.189 
While AEA  claims it has “no interest in supporting the agenda of 
184 Steve Horn, “Stink Tanks: Historical Records Reveal That State Policy 
Network Was Created by ALEC,” DeSmogBlog.com, Dec. 9, 2013. http://goo.gl/
elUZQH
185 Lisa Graves, “A CMD Special Report on ALEC’s funding and spending,” PR 
Watch , July 13, 2011. http://goo.gl/re3Hy
186 Brendan DeMelle, “Institute for Energy Research Admits It Was Behind 
Anti-Wind Study,” DeSmogBlog , Mar. 22, 2010. http://goo.gl/wNH5Zm
187 See “Partner Organizations,” Charles Koch Institute. http://goo.gl/RvqNdj  
Accessed Aug. 20, 2014.
188 Josh Harkinson, “The Dirty Dozen of Climate Change Denial: No. 12: 
Institute for Energy Research (A.K.A. American Energy Alliance),” Mother Jones  
Dec. 4, 2009. http://goo.gl/A3r4Su
189 ALEC Task Force Materials dated March 31, 2011, posted by Common Cause 
at http://goo.gl/ghRmRd  Accessed Aug. 20, 2014.

Page 74
any particular political party,” it received $1.5 million in 2011 from 
Freedom Partners  (described below), the Koch brothers’ main 
political-money conduit,190 and many of its staff members are former 
Republican congressional staff.191
The Institute for Energy Research  and the American Energy 
Alliance  sponsored a “wind welfare” summit in Washington, DC 
in December 2013, where Bradley and others announced that they 
would run ads and fly in advocates to attack the federal wind energy 
Production Tax Credit (PTC). Even though Congress has provided 
enormous long-enduring subsidies to the nuclear and fossil-fuel in -
dustries, uncertainties surrounding the PTC’s renewal have put wind 
developers at a disadvantage by making it difficult to plan ahead and 
attract investors.192 Congress allowed the PTC for wind projects to 
expire at the end of 2013.193
II. The State Policy Network (SPN).  The State Policy Network , 
founded in 1992, maintains a web of state-based think tanks, mod -
eled on the ultra-rightwing Heritage Foundation  in D.C., which 
was started in 1973 by arch-conservative theocrat Paul Weyrich. 
Ideas and propaganda generated by Heritage  in D.C. can now filter 
down to the state level by way of SPN . Located in all 50 states, SPN  
has 58 affiliates, all of which are “rigidly Republican but maintain a 
veneer of independence.”194 Most state legislators serve part-time 
and have neither capacity nor inclination to study issues and policies 
deeply. SPN  can do that for them.
SPN  executive director Tracie Sharp admits its agenda is “driven 
by donor intent.”195 An example reported by the Guardian  is a 
190 Center for Responsive Politics, “Freedom Partners Chamber of Commerce,” 
at http://goo.gl/2Uufdx
191 Brendan DeMelle, “Institute for Energy Research Admits It Was Behind 
Anti-Wind Study,” DeSmogBlog , Mar. 22, 2010. http://goo.gl/wNH5Zm
192 Elliott Negin, “The Koch Brothers Are Still Trying to Break Wind,” 
Huffington Post, Dec. 9, 2013. http://goo.gl/yxYY69
193 American Wind Energy Association, “Federal Production Tax Credit for wind 
energy,” web site. http://goo.gl/x9LHk2  Accessed Aug. 15, 2014.
194 Lee Fang, The Machine , pg. 201.
195 Rebekah Wilce and others, EXPOSED: The State Policy Network  (Madison, 

Page 75
proposal by the Beacon Hill Institute (BHI) , an SPN  associ -
ate member based at Suffolk University in Massachusetts. BHI  
requested $38,825 from Searle Freedom Trust to publish research 
that would help weaken RGGI, the interstate global warming control 
pact, mentioned above. After BHI’s  proposal was leaked, Suffolk 
University distanced itself from the BHI , saying the proposal had 
not met the university’s research protocols. BHI  has also published 
a report claiming that renewable energy standards are bad for state 
economies. The report was distributed through other SPN  member 
groups in association with ALEC -related state legislative attacks on 
renewable standards.196
III. Freedom Partners  is a 501(c)(6) business association, and 
thus does not have to identify its donors to anyone. Politico  describes 
the group as “the Koch brothers’ secret bank.”197 It is also a hub 
for strategic communication between the grandees of the Koch 
Network  and the ground troops of the Kochtopus . A document 
discovered after the Koch Network’s  winter 2014 meeting revealed 
extensive one-on-one confabs between donors and “representatives 
of the political, corporate, and philanthropic wings of Kochworld.” 
Raising $256 million during the 2012 election cycle, Freedom 
Partners  served as a “de facto bank” in the $400 million Koch net -
work by “feeding money to groups downstream.” 198
Although Freedom Partners won’t name its 200 “members,” each 
of whom has donated over $100,000, it’s highly likely that most 
have been invited to attend the Koch Network’s  secret retreats 
where money is solicited and strategies are hatched.199 Despite its 
Wisc.: Center for Media and Democracy, November, 2013). http://goo.gl/
s1Rg83  And see Rebekah Wilce, “Guardian Documents Expose State Policy 
Network Groups’ Intent to Lobby,” PR Watch  Dec. 5, 2013. http://goo.gl/ss9Sem
196 Suzanne Goldenberg, “Free-market research group’s climate proposal 
denounced by host university,” The Guardian  Dec. 5, 2013. http://goo.gl/
WIoUk5
197 Mike Allen and Jim Vandehei, “Exclusive: the Koch brothers’ secret bank,” 
Politico  Sept. 11, 2013. http://goo.gl/sdyXBy
198 All data and quotations from “Freedom Partners,” SourceWatch . http://goo.
gl/hZ8XjF  Accessed July 28, 2014.
199 Nicholas Confessore, “Tax Filings Hint at Extent of Koch Brothers’ Reach,” 

Page 76
important and well-known role in the Kochs’ political operations, 
in its 2012 tax return, Freedom Partners  told the IRS it does not 
engage in politics, claiming its grants are “subject to express prohibi -
tions or protections against the use of grant funds for electioneering 
purposes.”200 [See Appendix A: The Kingpins of Carbon and the Koch 
Brothers’ Club of Plutocrats.]
IV . American Encore  is a not-for-profit group (formerly known 
as the Center to Protect Patient Rights ) organized as a 501(c)(4), 
which therefore isn’t required to divulge its donors. Between 2009 
and 2012 it passed more than $182 million in secret donations to 
advocacy groups, including Americans for Prosperity (AFP) . The 
Washington Post  describes American Encore  as a “major cash turn -
stile for groups on the right during the past two election cycles,” be -
cause it received large amounts of money from Freedom Partners  
and TC4 Trust  as part of the $400 million Koch political network.
V . DonorsTrust (DT)  is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit started in 1999 “to 
ensure the intent of donors who are dedicated to the ideals of limited 
government, personal responsibility, and free enterprise.” Its partner 
organization is Donors Capital Fund (DCF) . Both are spin-offs of 
the Philanthropy Roundtable , which is a coordinating body for 
conservative foundations.
DT and DCF  are both “donor-advised funds,” which means they 
maintain separate accounts for individual donors, who then recom -
mend disbursements from the accounts to favored not-for-profits. 
The funds are then distributed in the name of DT or DCF , which 
hides the identity of the original donor, thus creating a “murky 
money maze.” DT and DCF  are advertised as a vehicle for corpora -
tions and ultra-wealthy individuals to remain anonymous when 
“funding sensitive or controversial issues.” If donors forget to give 
DonorsTrust  a statement of intent, then DT is free to distribute the 
funds as it pleases.
New York Times  Sept. 12, 2013. http://goo.gl/jNLmyj
200 Kim Barker and Theodoric Meyer, “The Dark Money Man: How Sean Noble 
Moved the Kochs’ Cash into Politics and Made Millions,” ProPublica  Feb. 14, 
2014. http://goo.gl/MHlfGK

Page 77
DonorsTrust  played a key role in coordinating support for the 
three Supreme Court cases highlighted in this report, Citizens United , 
McCutcheon , and Shelby County . [See box: “Who Orchestrated the 
Shelby County  Attack on Voting Rights?”] This provides additional 
evidence of a deliberate elite attack on democracy, led by the Kochs 
and other wealthy libertarians and fossil fuel barons who attend 
Koch Network  strategy retreats and sluice their money through 
DonorsTrust .
VI. TC4 Trust  is a 501(c)(4) nonprofit Koch-affiliated organization 
that the Center for Responsive Politics called a “shadow money mail -
box,” one of several groups – like Freedom Partners  and American 
Encore  – “that do virtually nothing but pass grants through to other 
politically active 501(c)(4) organizations, many of which have been 
big spenders on election ads benefiting the GOP .”
In its first two years of operation, TC4 Trust  distributed nearly 
80 percent of its $46.3 million in revenues to other groups including 
many that also received donations from American Encore . TC4 
Trust has been dormant since 2012.201
VII. The Koch Network (aka the Koch Club)
Since 2003, the Koch brothers have hosted semi-annual meetings 
for wealthy libertarian and conservative donors, sometimes referred 
to as the Koch Network  or the Koch Club .202 Although these gath -
erings of the super-elite are super-private, leaked documents and 
recordings have revealed that they include “titans of industry – from 
health insurance companies, oil executives, Wall Street investors, and 
real estate tycoons – working together with conservative journalists 
and Republican operatives,” as well as prominent public officials, 
including members of Congress, state governors, and even Supreme 
Court Justices Clarence Thomas and Antonin Scalia. These are re -
laxed meetings where everyone can align their ideas, their language, 
and their strategies.
201 “TC4 Trust,” SourceWatch , accessed Aug. 19, 2014. http://goo.gl/ijvhY1
202 Charles Lewis and others, “The Koch Club – Koch millions spread influence 
through nonprofits, colleges,” Investigative Reporting Workshop  July 1, 2013. 
http://goo.gl/R5xtx

Page 78
Using news reports and leaked lists of attendees at the Kochs’ 
secret strategy retreats, Greenpeace identified 68 individuals con -
nected to the Koch Network who spent at least $123,200 in 2012 – 
the aggregate direct contribution limit that the McCutcheon  decision 
raised to $3.6 million.203 [See Appendix A: The Kingpins of Carbon 
and the Koch Brothers’ Club of Plutocrats.] Many, like the Kochs 
themselves, are kingpins of carbon and funders of climate denial 
propaganda.
VIII. The Franklin Center, the Kochs, and the Media
The Kochs’ ambition continues to grow. In 2013, the brothers tried 
to purchase 10 major newspapers owned by the Tribune Company, 
including the Chicago Tribune , the Los Angeles Times  and the Baltimore 
Sun.204 Even without direct control of media outlets, the Kochs, 
ExxonMobil and their network of global-warming-denial think tanks 
have had enormous success in spreading disinformation about global 
warming.205
According to Media Matters, the Kochs have donated millions 
of dollars to the Franklin Center , “whose websites and affiliates 
provide free statehouse reporting to local newspapers and other 
media across the country.” The groups are “staffed by veterans of 
203 The list of individuals included in the Koch Brothers and Koch Industries 
network is compiled from: (1) a list of individuals  who attended the Kochs’ 
January 2014 Palm Springs donor retreat, originally published by Mother 
Jones , including individuals named by Charles Koch in a speech ; (2) a list of 
individuals who attended  a June 2010 Koch Industries-sponsored retreat held 
in Aspen, Colorado, and c) reports  submitted by Koch Industries lobbyists 
under the Lobbying Disclosure Act.
204 Connor Gibson, “Koch Bros Tribune Co? Climate Change Denial in Koch-
Friendly Media.” Greenpeace blog, April 24, 2013. http://goo.gl/M64zPu
205 For an extensive analysis of the fossil fuel industry’s role in the media’s 
failed coverage of climate change see Elliott Negin, “Unreliable Sources: 
How the News Media Help the Kochs and ExxonMobil Spread Climate 
Disinformation,” Six-Part series published on Huffington Post  by the Union of 
Concerned Scientists, 2013. http://goo.gl/X7EcpA  See also Naomi Oreskes and 
Erik M. Conway, Merchants of Doubt  (N.Y.: Bloomsbury Press, 2010); James 
Hoggan and Richard Littlemore, Climate Cover-Up; The Crusade to Deny Global 
Warming  (Vancouver, B.C.: Greystone Books, 2009); and Haydn Washington 
and John Cook, Climate Change Denial  (London: Earthscan, 2011).

Page 79
groups affiliated with the Koch brothers” and take advantage of the 
void created by a decade of state newsroom layoffs, providing a third 
leg of support for corporate-crafted legislation sponsored by ALEC  
and promoted by state think tanks affiliated with the State Policy 
Network .206
IX. Americans for Prosperity (AFP)  is a libertarian membership 
organization founded by the Koch brothers, now claiming to have 
1.2 million individual members, organized into local chapters. AFP ’s 
budget comes from the Kochs, plus other unknown sources, rising 
from $7 million in 2007 to over $100 million in 2012. According to 
the Center for Public Integrity, Americans for Prosperity  “spent 
a staggering $122 million (in 2012) as it unsuccessfully attempted 
to defeat President Barack Obama and congressional Democrats.” In 
the 2012 election cycle, AFP  served as the hub of the Kochs’ $400 
million political network. It receives funds from Koch-linked dark 
money groups like Freedom Partners , American Encore , and 
DonorsTrust .207
X. The Tea Party. The Koch-funded  Americans for Prosperity  
(AFP) has been the main engine behind the Tea Party.208 In her 2010 
New Yorker  profile of the Koch brothers, Jane Mayer quotes Bruce 
Bartlett, an economist whose work has been supported by the Kochs:
 “The problem with the whole libertarian movement is that it’s been 
all chiefs and no Indians. There haven’t been any actual people, like 
voters, who give a crap about it. So the problem for the Kochs has 
been trying to create a movement.” With the emergence of the Tea 
Party, he said, “everyone suddenly sees that for the first time there 
are Indians out there–people who can provide real ideological power.” 
The Kochs, he said, are “trying to shape and control and channel the 
populist uprising into their own policies.”209
206 Joe Strupp, “How a Right-Wing Group is Infiltrating State News Coverage,” 
Media Matters for America , July 11, 2012. http://goo.gl/l35mq
207 All data and quotations in this paragraph are from “Americans for 
Prosperity,” SourceWatch  http://goo.gl/WQxna  Accessed July 28, 2014.
208 See Taki Oldham’s documentary film, “The Billionaire’s Tea Party” (54 
minutes; released Feb. 5, 2011). http://goo.gl/RQNRND
209 Jane Mayer, “Covert Operations: The billionaire brothers who are waging 

Page 80
When asked about the Tea Party, David Koch feigns surprise 
that anyone would connect it with him or his brother. The truth is, 
they’ve been joined at the hip since Feb. 19, 2009, the day when 
CNBC’s Rick Santelli first “launched into an on-air tirade” denounc -
ing Obama and screaming into the camera, “We’re thinking of having 
a Chicago Tea Party!”210 Within hours, the Kochs’ AFP  had registered 
the domain name taxpayerteaparty.com and the Tea Party sprang to 
life. Not surprisingly, from the beginning, the Tea Party has exhib -
ited a strong tinge of white supremacy.
In a way, the Tea Party is little more than a revival of Fred Koch’s 
John Birch Society, but with a more distinctly-libertarian, anti-
government agenda. However, the Tea Party has other Koch-funded 
roots as well. Many Tea Party operatives began their political careers 
working for the tobacco industry’s astroturf211 campaign to create 
“smokers’ rights” groups. Starting as early as 1986, Citizens for 
a Sound Economy (CSE) , funded both by the Kochs and by the 
tobacco industry, was advancing the tobacco industry’s libertarian 
agenda, aiming to shrink government by cutting tobacco taxes and 
eliminating local tobacco-control measures. In 1992, CSE  “flirted 
with the idea of creating a Tea Party protest, funded by the tobacco 
industry.” By 2001, the North Carolina affiliate of CSE  had actually 
organized a “Tar Heel Tea Party” opposing state taxes.212 In 2003, 
CSE  broke apart and morphed into Americans for Prosperity  and 
FreedomWorks . For its part, the Tea Party has continued to sup -
port the tobacco industry’s political agenda, opposing tobacco taxes 
and smoke-free laws.213
a war against Obama,” New Yorker  Vol. 86, No. 25 (Aug. 30, 1010), pgs. 44-55. 
http://goo.gl/M4MJB1
210 Daniel Schulman, Sons of Wichita (N.Y.: Grand Central Publishing), pg. 271.
211 Astroturf is defined as a movement that appears to be grass-roots but 
is either funded, created, or conceived by a corporation or industry trade 
association, political interest group, or public relations firm. From SourceWatch 
http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php/Astroturf
212 Lee Fang, The Machine  (N.Y.: New Press, 2013), pg. 24.
213 Amanda Fallin, Rachel Grana, and Stanton A. Glantz, “’To quarterback 
behind the scenes, third-party efforts’: the tobacco industry and the Tea Party,” 
Tobacco Control  Vol. 23, No. 4 (2014), pgs. 322-331. http://goo.gl/1LpNM4

Page 81
Since 2009, the mainstream media have presented the Tea Party 
as a rag-tag working-class rebellion, a “populist uprising.” However, 
in reality, active supporters of the Tea Party are more affluent and 
better-educated than average Americans.214 Rather than a working-
class rebellion, the Tea Party is a movement of elites serving elite 
purposes.215 And its leadership is predominantly Southern, not 
broadly national. In the House of Representatives, Tea Party lead -
ers are overwhelmingly Southern – from Texas, Florida, Louisiana, 
Georgia, South Carolina, Tennessee and Missouri (plus Orange 
County, California, which was settled in the 1930s by refugees from 
the Oklahoma dust bowl).
As William Galston pointed out in the Wall Street Journal in 2013, 
“Only 26 percent of tea-party supporters regard themselves as work -
ing class, versus 34 percent of the general population; 50 percent 
identify as middle class (versus 40 percent nationally); and 15 
percent consider themselves upper-middle class (versus 10 percent 
nationally). Twenty-three percent are college graduates, and an addi -
tional 14 percent have postgraduate training, versus 15 percent and 
10 percent, respectively, for the overall population. Conversely, only 
29 percent of tea-party supporters have just a high-school education 
or less, versus 47 percent for all adults.”216
Historian Michael Lind has shown that the Tea Party is driven by 
Southern whites who recognize that they will soon be a minority 
in America (or already are, as in Texas) and who will likely lose 
their dominant status in their own communities. They tend to be 
“local notables,” men more likely to operate low-wage construction 
businesses or car dealerships than national or transnational corpora -
tions. They are “second-tier people on a national level but first-tier 
people in their states and counties and cities.”217
214 Kate Zernike and Megan Thee-Brenan, “Poll Finds Tea Party Backers 
Wealthier and More Educated” New York Times  April 14, 2010.  http://goo.gl/
XMhQuw
215 Michael Lind, “Tea Party is an anti-populist elite tool. And it has 
progressives fooled,” Salon.com  Oct. 22, 2013. http://goo.gl/rLfSV3
216 William Galston, “The Tea Party and the GOP Crackup,” Wall Street Journal  
Oct. 15, 2013. http://goo.gl/CShg7S
217 Ian Haney López, Dog Whistle Politics: How Coded Racial Appeals Have 

Page 82
No doubt, capitalizing on America’s history of white supremacy 
and bigotry is still a central strategy for many within the Republican 
Party.218 The Tea Party fits right in.
During a D.C. rally against Obamacare at the Capitol in 2010, Tea 
Party demonstrators shouted “Nigger!” at Congressman John Lewis 
and two of his colleagues, and spat on one of them. As the New York 
Times  reported, “The No. 3 Democrat in the House, Representative 
James E. Clyburn of South Carolina, said, ‘I heard people saying 
things today that I have not heard since March 15, 1960, when I was 
marching to try to get off the back of the bus.’”219
Tea Party racism has been so blatant and so persistent that, a week 
before the spitting incident at the Capitol, the national convention 
of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People] had passed a resolution calling “on the tea party and all 
people of good will to repudiate the racist element and activities 
within the tea party.”220
Without denying Tea Party racism, historian Michael Lind argues 
that the Party’s main thrust for small government is less about race 
and more about keeping labor poorly-paid and powerless. By scaling 
back social security, Medicare and Medicaid, the lives of workers can 
be made more precarious, increasing the likelihood that they will 
remain docile and obedient. From the viewpoint of local notables in 
the South, the aim is to out-compete other states (or even, ideally, 
other countries) for external investment by winning a race to the 
Reinvented Racism and Wrecked the Middle Class  (N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 
2014). And: Michael Lind, “Tea Party radicalism is misunderstood: Meet the 
‘Newest Right,’” Salon.com  Oct. 6, 2013. http://goo.gl/WZqJYq
218 Kevin Phillips, The Emerging Republican Majority  (New Rochelle, N.Y.: 
Arlington House, 1969). Michael Goldfield, The Color of Politics: Race and the 
Mainsprings of American Politics  (N.Y.: New Press, 1997); Thomas Byrne Edsall 
and Mary D. Edsall, Chain Reaction  (N.Y.: Norton, 1991); and Ian Haney López, 
Dog Whistle Politics: How Coded Racial Appeals Have Reinvented Racism and 
Wrecked the Middle Class  (N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 2014).
219 Robert Pear, “Slurs and Spitting Directed at Lawmakers,” New York Times  
Mar. 20, 2010. http://goo.gl/lFb9ts
220 Heather Hollingsworth, “NAACP Condemns Tea Party Racism In 
Resolution,” Huffington Post , July 13, 2010. http://goo.gl/abtqoo

Page 83
bottom with low wages, minimal government welfare (thus keeping 
workers desperate), and lax environmental regulation.221 It’s the 
Kochs’ libertarian agenda dressed up in a tri-corner hat.
It may be dawning on the Kochs that their libertarian agenda isn’t 
necessarily going to sell well among Latinos. The Kochs are now 
backing the LIBRE Initiative , which is dedicated to Hispanic voter 
outreach in states like Colorado, New Mexico and Texas.222 However, 
the Kochs’ appeal to Latinos may be limited by the dismal record of 
Koch Industries subsidiaries pumping deadly pollution into Latino 
communities plagued by high rates of cancer, birth defects, asthma 
and other lung diseases.223 The Kochs’s appeal to Latinos may be fur -
ther limited by their support of voter intimidation efforts in Latino 
communities.224
XI. The Kochs on Campus: 221 Gifts to 
Colleges and Universities, 2007–2011
Dictating Curriculum
Many public universities in the U.S. are now in such dire financial 
straits that their survival depends upon private sources of funding.225 
For the Koch brothers and other self-interested oligarchs, this cre -
ates an opportunity to extend the reach of their economic and social 
ideas.
The Kochs have spent tens of millions of dollars over nearly 40 
years to influence academic programs and the direction of U.S. higher 
221 Michael Lind, “The South is holding America hostage,” Salon.com , Oct. 13, 
2013. http://goo.gl/ne7GTW
222 Kenneth P . Vogel, “Koch World 2014,” Politico  Jan. 24, 2014 http://goo.
gl/5NTey3
223 Melissa del Bosque and Jen Reel, “Kochworld: To see how the Koch brothers’ 
free-market utopia operates, look no further than Corpus Christi,” The Texas 
Observer , Oct. 24, 2012. http://goo.gl/T90M4
224 Editorial Board, “Voter Harassment, Circa 2012,” New York Times  Sept. 21, 
2012. http://goo.gl/R4hyN1
225 Doug Lederman, “State Support Slumps Again,” InsideHigherEd.com Jan. 
23, 2012. http://goo.gl/2udvC8  And see Andrew Martin, “Slowly, as Student 
Debt Rises, Colleges Confront Costs,” New York Times , May 14, 2012. http://
goo.gl/28OhQu

Page 84
education, starting at George Mason University (GMU), part of the 
Virginia state university system, where they supported the Institute 
for Humane Studies and the Mercatus Center. According to the 
Investigative Reporting Workshop, between 2007 and 2011 Koch-
controlled foundations gave $30.5 million to 221 universities, over 
half to George Mason.226
At the core of the Kochs’ academic philanthropy is Ayn Rand, 
the novelist and founder of American libertarianism. The Kochs 
have given more than $100,000 to the Ayn Rand Institute in 
Irvine, California. But by far their most important contribution to 
AynRandism comes through their grants to university programs 
intended to modify university curricula, specifically to inject Ayn 
Rand’s solipsistic ideas into thousands of undergraduates.
Details of the Kochs’ academic funding are not often publicized, 
partly because universities have a proud tradition of academic 
freedom and some of them may be embarrassed by the strings at -
tached to Koch funding. However, a public dispute at Florida State 
University (FSU) in the period 2008-2011 lifted the veil of secrecy 
and revealed how the Kochs can dictate terms to recipients of their 
largesse.
In 2007, the Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation approached 
Florida State University, offering a substantial donation – a gift of 
$6.6 million to the FSU Economics Department, which was already 
a stronghold of libertarian ideals. The grant would pay for five new 
faculty positions plus additional support staff, fellowships for gradu -
ate students, and new undergraduate courses.
After they heard grumbling about “outside control” of the uni -
versity, in 2008 two retired faculty members, Kent Miller and Ray 
Bellamy, began looking into the terms of the Koch grant.227 They 
found that the grant required the university to establish an advisory 
226 Charles Lewis and others, “Koch millions spread influence through 
nonprofits, colleges,” Investigative Reporting Workshop , July 1, 2013. http://goo.
gl/R5xtx
227 Kent S. Miller and Ray Bellamy, “Fine Print, Restrictive Grants, and 
Academic Freedom,” Academe  [Bulletin of the American Association of 
University Professors], May-June, 2012. http://goo.gl/FThlN7

Page 85
board whose members were chosen by the Koch Foundation. The 
board was empowered to determine which faculty candidates could 
qualify for Koch funding, and to review the work of professors to 
ensure that it met the “objectives and purposes” of the Foundation. 
Furthermore, the Foundation asserted the right to evaluate faculty 
members in writing and to place those evaluations in each faculty 
member’s permanent university file.
The Koch grant agreement with FSU contained other strings. The 
university was required to establish a new undergraduate program, 
with the foundation empowered to influence selection of the 
program director. Plus the university was required to create a new 
course, “Market Ethics: The Vices, Virtues and Values of Capitalism” 
featuring the narcissistic writings of Ayn Rand. The course would 
be taught to 7,000 undergraduates each year, in sections of 500 
students each.
Students at FSU objected to the influence of Koch funding on cur -
riculum and faculty appointments in the Economics Department.228 
An economics textbook co-authored by FSU economics faculty re -
ceived a grade of “failed” when ranked on how accurately it presents 
climate science.229
After discovering the power of the Kochs to influence university 
policies, Miller and Bellamy went on to examine other grants to FSU 
from conservative/libertarian foundations. They discovered that the 
BB&T Charitable Foundation had given $3 million to FSU in 2008. 
The BB&T Foundation was created by John Allison, former CEO of 
BB&T Corporation, one of the nation’s largest financial services hold -
ing companies. Allison, they discovered, frequently collaborates with 
the Koch brothers, aiming for similar libertarian goals.
228 Jerry Funt, Gladys Nobriga, Lissa Reed and Ralph Wilson, “My view: Don’t 
let Koch hurt academic integrity,” Tallahassee Democrat  April 7, 2014. http://
goo.gl/DYQxI3
229 See the ranking of Gwartney, Stroup, Sobel, and Macpherson, Economics: 
Private and Public Choice, 14th ed.  by Yoram Bauman (Sightline Institute), and 
Dani Ladyka. http://goo.gl/a42ZSh  Accessed Aug. 16, 2014. And see Connor 
Gibson, “FSU Students to Charles Koch: Stop Polluting Climate Change 
Science!,” Greenpeace (blog), April 9, 2014. http://goo.gl/j9yKuD

Page 86
When Miller and Bellamy asked FSU for the BB&T grant agree -
ment, they received a perfunctory 2-page document. That document 
mentioned an attached letter, which was not attached. When Miller 
and Bellamy finally got their hands on the letter they made impor -
tant new discoveries: The BB&T grant required the FSU Department 
of Economics to create yet another undergraduate course with Ayn 
Rand’s work as required reading. Furthermore, a distinguished 
speakers series would be set up, with the Ayn Rand Institute recom -
mending speakers. Plus the grant would support a “Students in Free 
Enterprise” club.
If allowed to continue, intrusive libertarian funding of public 
universities could snowball. As the libertarian “shrink government” 
philosophy infects state legislatures, public funding for universities 
would naturally decline, creating the need for even more outside 
funding by libertarian billionaires intent on modifying curricula and 
faculty priorities.
In 2011 alone, the Koch brothers gave grants to 187 universities. 
On each of these campuses an investigation – by students or oth -
ers – into “strings attached” could yield valuable information about 
the reach of the Kochs into America’s intellectual base. As Miller and 
Bellamy said after their investigation of grants given to FSU, “We 
agree that outside funds are necessary and that donors have a right 
to specify in general the areas of focus for their gifts and to receive 
an accounting of how their money is spent – but nothing beyond 
that.”230
230 Kent S. Miller and Ray Bellamy, “Fine Print, Restrictive Grants, and 
Academic Freedom,” Academe  [Bulletin of the American Association of 
University Professors], May-June, 2012. http://goo.gl/FThlN7

Page 87
The Central Role of the Courts
“The judiciary may be the most important instrument for 
social, economic and political change.”  – Lewis F . Powell, 
Jr., strategy memo, 1971.231
The judicial dimension of the corporate-empowerment strategy has 
evolved over decades, with support provided to think tanks and pri -
vate interest law firms (many of them funded by the Kochs) such as 
the Pacific Legal Foundation , conservative legal networks like the 
Federalist Society , law professors and law and economics projects 
at George Mason University and other law schools , and other 
groups intent upon driving pro-corporate constitutional doctrines 
into every court and regulatory body across the country. As Lewis 
Powell predicted, the results have been tectonic, multi-generational 
and ultimately, hegemonic.232
The key judicial doctrine at the core of this war on democracy has 
been the expansion of corporate claims to constitutional rights – 
especially commercial and political speech. Just as corporate “free 
speech” claims have been used to attack campaign finance regula -
tions, so have commercial speech arguments been used to attack (a) 
product safety and labeling regulations; (b) restrictions on deceptive 
commercial advertising; (c) requirements that corporations disclose 
their activities to shareholders, employees and customers, and (d) 
231 The original Powell memo can be found here: http://goo.gl/0DgLR ; for a 
discussion of the memo and its importance, see the Greenpeace web page on 
the Powell Memo, with an extensive bibliography. http://goo.gl/MYaOkO
232 The history of corporate judicial activism in recent decades is contained in 
part in the books and studies referenced on Greenpeace’s web page about the 
Powell Memo. See http://goo.gl/MYaOkO  See, for example, Steven M. Teles, 
The Rise of the Conservative Legal Movement: The Battle for Control of the Law . 
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2008); Avery and McLaughlin, 
The Federalist Society  (Nashville, Tenn.: Vanderbilt University Press, 2013); Nan 
Aron and others, Justice for Sale  (Washington, D.C.: Alliance for Justice, 1993) 
http://goo.gl/CTa6nV ; Oliver Houck, “With Charity for All,” Yale Law Review , 
July 1984. http://goo.gl/TCt5HS  For a longer-term historical perspective on 
corporate colonization of the U.S. constitution see Ted Nace, Gangs of America: 
The Rise of Corporate Power and the Disabling of Democracy  (San Francisco: 
Berrett-Koehler, 2003). See also Jeffrey D. Clements, Corporations Are Not 
People  (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2012).

Page 88
rules preventing consolidation of media ownership, including radio 
and TV stations. These arguments have gained increased visibility 
(and therefore credibility) as the conservative legal movement has 
grown stronger.233
To make sure judges understand the connections between law and 
libertarian economic theories, for decades the Koch brothers and 
many of their corporate allies (including Exxon-Mobil and Shell 
Oil) have been funding all-expense-paid seminar-junkets for state 
and federal judges.234 One, the Mason Judicial Education Program 
(MJEP) at George Mason University, has been educating judges in 
the subtleties of libertarian thought for 37 years. In that time, more 
4,000 sitting federal and state court judges representing all 50 states 
have participated in at least one of the MJEP’s judicial education 
programs.235 As we’ve seen (above), Supreme Court justices receive 
special opportunities to absorb the Koch brothers’ libertarian view -
points first-hand.
Lewis Powell himself brought his radical corporatist views to the 
Supreme Court after he was nominated by Richard Nixon, joining the 
majority in the Buckley v. Valeo  (1976) decision, which found that any 
restriction on a candidate’s ability to spend any amount of money on 
his/her own campaign was unconstitutional because money is the 
equivalent of speech. Powell then wrote the majority opinion in First 
National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti  (1978), the case that first allowed 
corporations to spend from their treasuries to influence the vote in 
citizen ballot initiatives.236
233 Lee Drutman and Charlie Cray, The People’s Business: Controlling Corporations 
and Restoring Democracy  (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2003); Jeffrey D. 
Clements, Corporations Are Not People  (San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2012); 
Robert L. Kerr, The Corporate Free Speech Movement  (N.Y.: LFB Scholarly 
Publishing, 2008); Tim Wu, “The Right to Evade Regulation; How Corporations 
Hijacked the First Amendment,” New Republic , June 13, 2013. http://goo.gl/
mkfRr
234 Chris Young, Reity O’Brien, and Andrea Fuller, “Corporations, pro-business 
nonprofits foot bill for judicial seminars; George Mason University top host of 
events,” Center for Public Integrity, March 28, 2013. http://goo.gl/gs5ZZG
235 Mason Judicial Education Program, Law and Economics Center, George 
Mason University Law School. http://goo.gl/0ZqOnT  Accessed Aug. 15, 2014.
236 Jeffrey D. Clements, Corporations Are Not People  (San Francisco: Berrett-

Page 89
Citizens United  and McCutcheon  are just two in a series of cases 
brought before the Roberts court by politically-connected activist 
attorneys who have proudly announced their intention to end all 
restrictions on campaign finance.237 At least six cases challenging one 
or more campaign finance limits have been accepted by the Supreme 
Court since Chief Justice Roberts and Associated Justice Alito, both 
George W. Bush appointees, joined the Court.238
“I wouldn’t consider any campaign finance law safe with this 
Supreme Court,” says attorney Paul Ryan of the Campaign Legal 
Center.239
James Bopp, a lawyer from Terra Haute, Indiana, has spent more 
than 10 years bringing strategic lawsuits to chip away at all limits 
on election donations and expenditures. The Citizens United  suit was 
Bopp’s idea, and he was the attorney of record in McCutcheon .240 “If 
we do it right, I think we can pretty well dismantle the entire regula -
tory regime that is called campaign finance law,” he told the New York 
Times  in 2010. “We’ve been awfully successful, and we’re not done 
yet,” he said. The next step in his plan is to roll back all disclosure 
rules. His stated goal is to allow unlimited, secret expenditures by 
individuals and corporations in every referendum or election, federal 
and state, bar none.241
Koehler, 2012), pg. 25.
237 David D. Kirkpatrick, “A Quest to End Spending Rules for Campaigns,” New 
York Times  Jan. 25, 2010. http://goo.gl/WJcW1
238 See David Earley and Avram Billig, “The Pro-Money Court: How the 
Roberts Supreme Court Dismantled Campaign Finance Law,” Brennan Center 
for Justice, April 2, 2014 http://goo.gl/mq23JW ; Rob Hager, “The Plutocratic 
Jurisprudence of the Roberts 5: Episode VII,” OpedNews , April 5, 2014. http://
goo.gl/iXygz9
239 Michael Beckel (Center for Public Integrity), “12-plus states could throw 
out donation caps after McCutcheon ruling,” TucsonSentinel.com , April 7, 2014. 
http://goo.gl/O1UZcq
240 “No. 12-536 In The Supreme Court of the United States Shaun McCutcheon 
and Republican National Committee, Plaintiffs-Appellants v. Federal Election 
Commission On Appeal from the United States District Court for the District 
of Columbia Reply Brief for Appellant Republican National Committee.” http://
goo.gl/juiYuO
241 David D. Kirkpatrick, “A Quest to End Spending Rules for Campaigns,” New 

Page 90
In April, 2014, McCutcheon’s attorney, Dan Backer, filed a new law -
suit challenging all limits on how much PACs can contribute directly 
to candidates and party committees.242 Backer, like James Bopp, has 
made a career out of organizing and filing strategic lawsuits and FEC 
petitions to erode any campaign finance limits remaining on the 
books.
In 2011 Backer and the Federal Elections Commission settled Carey 
v. FEC , an agreement that allows PACs to collect unlimited amounts 
of “soft money” for independent expenditures so long as the money 
is kept separate from money donated directly to candidates.243 (“Soft 
money” is cash that political parties [and now PACs] spend on “par -
ty-building activities” such as get-out-the-vote campaigns, and issue 
ads.) The Carey  decision helped legalize a new kind of “hybrid PAC,” 
which combines the traditional PAC (legally allowed to donate di -
rectly to candidates) with the Super PAC (giving unlimited amounts 
to buy media coverage for candidates) into one well-coordinated 
operation, which Politico  calls a Super Super PAC.244
“Any PAC that doesn’t become a hybrid PAC is run by idiots,” Backer 
said after winning the Carey case.245 Backer incorporated the Tea 
Party Leadership Fund – of which he is treasurer – as a hybrid PAC in 
2012.
Attacking State Limits on Campaign Finance
Now James Bopp, Dan Backer other activist attorneys are using 
their federal court victories to overturn state limits on campaign 
finance.
After the Citizens United  ruling in 2010, 24 states overturned 
York Times  Jan. 25, 2010. http://goo.gl/WJcW1
242  Stop Reckless Economic Instability Caused by Democrats (“STOP REID”) et al. v. 
FEC, filed in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern Division of Virginia. http://
goo.gl/tLdQdh
243 Bill Allison, “FEC surrenders in Hybrid Super PAC Case,” Sunlight 
Foundation, Aug. 24, 2011. http://goo.gl/2vMwpF
244 David Levinthal, “Meet the super super PAC,” Politico , Jan. 21, 2012. http://
goo.gl/iV4Hyl
245 Carey v. FEC. http://goo.gl/gTpKPv

Page 91
their limits on corporate independent expenditures.246 And im -
mediately after the McCutcheon  decision was announced, a campaign 
was begun, aiming to ban state limits on election contributions. 
James Bopp, who represented plaintiffs in both Citizens United  and 
McCutcheon , told the Center for Public Integrity that states would ei -
ther repeal their existing aggregate limits on campaign contributions 
or get sued.
Some states didn’t wait to be sued. Hours after the McCutcheon 
ruling came down, the Massachusetts Office of Campaign and 
Political Finance announced it would “no longer enforce the $12,500 
aggregate limit on the amount that an individual may contribute to 
all candidates.”247
In Minnesota, the Institute for Justice (IFJ) helped file a suit to 
take out state limits on PAC, lobbyist and other “special source” cam -
paign contributions.248 IFJ, which was launched in 1991 with support 
from the Kochs, filed amicus briefs in support of McCutcheon and 
Citizens United in their cases. IFJ received over $1 million in funding 
from the Koch-connected DonorsTrust/Donors Capital Fund  
(DT/DCF ) between 2002 and 2010.249
Other conservative legal groups underwriting the cases that DT/
DCF  has supported include the Federalist Society ($2.19 million in 
2012), Landmark Legal Foundation ($40,000 in 2012), the Judicial 
Education Project ($1,205,000 in 2012), and the Washington Legal 
Foundation ($80,000 in 2012).250
246 Michael Beckel (Center for Public Integrity), “12-plus states could throw 
out donation caps after McCutcheon ruling,” TucsonSentinel.com , April 7, 2014. 
http://goo.gl/O1UZcq
247 Michael Beckel (Center for Public Integrity), “12-plus states could throw out 
donor caps after McCutcheon ruling,” Tucson Sentinel , April 7, 2014. http://goo.
gl/O1UZcq
248 Devin Henry, “Campaign finance lawsuits in Minnesota and other states 
take aim at contribution limits,” MinnPost, April 21, 2014. http://goo.gl/
lVLEYX
249 DonorsTrust and Donors Capital Fund form 990 tax returns available at 
CitizenAudit.org.
250 DonorsTrust and Donors Capital Fund form 990 tax returns available at 
CitizenAudit.org.

Page 92
As soon as he won his Supreme Court case, Shaun McCutcheon at -
tacked state limits (with help from the Koch brothers) by joining the 
New York Progress and Protection (NYPP) PAC  in a suit chal -
lenging the state’s $150,000 limit on contributions to state election 
Super PACs.251 McCutcheon was represented by Michael Rosman of 
the Center for Individual Rights , a group that received $531,000 
from DT and Donors Capital Fund  in 2012.252
NYPP was represented in the case by Michael Carvin, who had pre -
viously brought another free-speech challenge in the U.S. Supreme 
Court – trying to overturn regulations barring campaign contribu -
tions by foreign citizens. The Supreme Court ruled against Carvin’s 
client in the case, which was described by constitutional law scholar 
Prof. Rick Hasen as a “Trojan horse” that, had it been successful, 
could have eventually opened the door to a decision allowing foreign 
corporations and governments to spend money to influence U.S. 
elections.253 (This would be consistent with the larger right-wing 
agenda to allow capital to flow freely, without limit, anywhere in the 
world, as described above.)
After a federal appeals court issued an injunction preventing the 
New York Board of Elections from enforcing the state’s $150,000 
limit, David Koch donated $200,000 to the NYPP .254
As they have already announced, Bopp, Carvin, Backer and other 
attorneys will surely bring new cases to the Court, until they have 
achieved their goals – complete elimination of any and all limits on 
251 See Mijin Cha, “Shaun McCutcheon and Big Money Victorious in New York,” 
Demos  Oct. 28, 2013. http://goo.gl/I9y3od ; Thomas Kaplan, “Court Lifts Limit 
on Contributing to Pro-Lhota PAC,” New York Times  Oct. 23, 2013. http://goo.
gl/VJ2KDE
252 DonorsTrust and Donors Capital Fund, Inc. 2012 form 990 tax returns. 
Available at CitizenAudit.org
253 James Vicini, “Top court backs foreigner campaign donation ban,” Reuters 
Jan. 9, 2013. http://goo.gl/Jx3Mq  and Richard Hasen, “Blumen v. F .E.C. is 
Trojan Horse,” New York Times , Nov. 8, 2012. http://goo.gl/ITZbxJ
254 “NY Limits Lawsuit about Billionaires Buying Extra Helpings of Democracy, 
Public Campaign Action Fund, Nov. 1, 2013. http://goo.gl/wmIhYB ; Chris 
Bragg, “Ulterior Motives Seen for Super PACs,” Crain’s Insider , Nov. 5, 2013. 
http://goo.gl/TLdZGK

Page 93
corporate and individual donations and expenditures on elections. 
And they can be assured of quiet backing from the Kochs and other 
pollutocrats who are in it for the long haul.
Political contributions in state elections follow the same pattern 
visible at the federal level, with “a mere fraction of one percent of 
individual donors [giving] the maximum contributions allowed in 
the nine states that imposed aggregate limits during the 2010 and 
2012 elections.”255 Obviously the point of eliminating state limits on 
campaign contributions and expenditures is to increase the political 
power of the self-interested superrich and drown out the voices of 
ordinary citizens.
“There’s this assault on federal campaign law that’s going on 
around the country. They keep chipping away,” says Bill Allison of 
the Sunlight Foundation. “There’s this very determined, stealth legal 
campaign and it involves establishment figures and people who are 
outside the mainstream. Wherever there’s a limit, they’re looking to 
overturn it.”256
The purpose of the assault on campaign finance restrictions by the 
libertarian plutocrats and the kingpins of carbon is simple and obvi -
ous: If they can change the law to allow unlimited, secret donations 
to elections, they can more easily buy the political power needed to 
keep selling fossil fuels, even if it means destroying the planet as a 
place suitable for human civilization. Individual self-interest must  
come first. It’s the American libertarian way.
255 National Institute on Money in State Politics, “Minimum Give the 
Maximum: Supreme Court Could Unleash Mega-Donors With McCutcheon 
Rule,” Oct. 10, 2013. http://goo.gl/rmOHab
256 Michael McLaughlin, “Heavy-Hitting Republicans Come To NY To Take 
Down Bill De Blasio And Campaign Finance Laws,” Sept. 30, 2013. http://goo.
gl/gx3pz8

Page 94
Blocking the Vote: A Second Front in the 
Pollutocrats’ War on Democracy
“All types of conniving methods are still being used to prevent 
Negroes from becoming registered voters. The denial of this 
sacred right is a tragic betrayal of the highest mandates of our 
democratic tradition.”  
 – Martin Luther King, Jr., “Give us the Ballot,” 1957. http://
goo.gl/zpw7Bt
As every community organizer knows, there are two kinds of politi -
cal power: organized money and organized people, and since the 
time of the pharaohs the two have been competing for dominance. If 
you’re on the side of “organized money,” your main goal is to prevent 
people from getting organized. Keep them divided, to divide and 
rule.
For those intent on rolling back the New Deal, the “divide and 
rule” strategy has two main parts. First, as we’ve seen, it means 
eliminating labor unions. Unions have some ability to bargain for fair 
wages and decent working conditions, so unions must be discredited, 
weakened, or – when possible – outlawed. Second, it’s especially  im-
portant to keep certain people from voting – people of color, youth, 
the elderly, and the disabled.Voters can turn the whole system upside 
down, so votes by the wrong kind of people have to be suppressed, 
one way or another.
The kingpins of carbon have a special interest in suppressing the 
vote. They know that a great majority of Americans – Republican 
and Democrat alike – want to (1) reduce global-warming pollution,257 
(2) eliminate subsidies for dirty-energy companies,258 and (3) speed 
the deployment of low-carbon alternatives that are affordable and 
readily-available off-the-shelf today – such as super-efficient lights, 
heat and motors, followed by renewable sources of energy (solar, 
wind, geothermal, and tidal) – thus creating hundreds of thousands 
257 See Yale Project on Science Communication, “Americans Support CO2 limits 
on Coal-Fired Power Plants,” no date [April, 2014?]. http://goo.gl/q2EZ4i
258 A. Leiserowitz and others, Public support for climate and energy policies 
in November 2013  (New Haven, Ct.: Yale Project on Climate Change 
Communication, 2014). http://goo.gl/6DWxxT

Page 95
of good jobs.259 The kingpins of carbon also know that, to prevent 
“dangerous” global warming, two-thirds of their product must re -
main in the ground, unburned. So these malefactors of great wealth 
are fighting to maintain their immense corporate profits by subvert -
ing democracy.
Just as the kingpins of carbon need to suppress the vote in order to 
survive, the Republican Party is facing the same dilemma: it needs to 
suppress votes in order to survive. It’s a matter of demographics.
Today the Republican Party is defined by race; its supporters are 
overwhelmingly white. In the 2012 presidential election, 88 percent 
of the people who voted Republican were white. Among state-level 
officials elected on the Republican ticket, 98 percent are white.260 So 
long as whites are the majority in the U.S. population, Republicans 
can at least hope to win elections. But as soon as whites become a 
minority, the future of the Republican Party falls into doubt.
The U.S. Bureau of the Census tells us that, if present trends hold 
steady, white people will cease to be a majority in the U.S. in the 
year 2042. In other words, just 28 years from now, Asian, American 
Indian, black, Latino, Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islanders together 
will outnumber what the Census Bureau calls “non-Hispanic whites” 
for the first time in U.S. history.261
Therefore, as U.S. voters become majority Of Color, a white political 
party will either have to (1) learn to appeal to non-whites; or (2) sup -
press or marginalize the non-white vote. So far, Republicans seem to 
prefer the second option.262
259 Brendan Moore and Stafford Nichols, “Americans Still Favor Conservation 
Over Production,” Gallup.com , April 2, 2014. http://goo.gl/4Iwlko  ; Peter 
Montague, Energy Efficiency: Good Jobs, Low Carbon, Available Now  (New 
Brunswick, N.J.: Environmental Research Foundation, 2013). http://goo.gl/
PJEFT
260 Ian Haney Lopéz, Dog Whistle Politics; How Coded Racial Appeals have 
Reinvented Racism and Wrecked the Middle Class  (N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 
2014), pg. 1.
261 Sam Roberts, “Minorities in U.S. set to become majority by 2014,” New York 
Times  Aug. 14, 2008. http://goo.gl/7EdeF5
262 Greg Palast, Billionaires and Ballot Bandits; How to Steal an Election in 9 Easy 

Page 96
In their efforts to suppress the non-white vote, Republicans have 
been joined by the Koch Brothers. Although the Kochs started 
their political lives as advocates for the Libertarian Party, and most 
recently have been funding the Tea Party attack on the Republican 
establishment, their money has also bought them entrée into the 
Republican inner sanctum. As we have seen, the Kochs now play the 
role of gatekeeper for Republican candidates – supplicants like Chris 
Christie, Marco Rubio, and Rick Perry must present themselves for 
dog-sniffing by the Kochs before they can raise enough money to 
mount a serious campaign for the presidency.
Sometimes the Kochs cast themselves as rogue libertarians, and 
sometimes they’re plain-old down-home Republican oligarchs. David 
Koch attended Speaker of the House John Boehner’s (R-OH) Capitol 
Hill swearing-in ceremony in 2011, and he was a delegate to the 
Republican National Convention in 2012. Many of the plutocrats 
who attend the Koch Network  strategy gatherings are big donors to 
Republican Party committees and other powerful Republican groups 
such as the Club for Growth and Karl Rove’s many organizations. 
(Rove, one of the most powerful members of the Republican Party 
establishment, is most famous for having served as George W. Bush’s 
campaign manager and White House advisor and, as one of the 
former president’s detractors put it, “Bush’s brain.”263) During the 
2012 campaign, Koch operative Sean Noble attended twice-a-month 
party strategy meetings hosted by Rove in D.C.264 In early 2014, 
Aegis Strategic, a political consulting firm with access to the Kochs’ 
network of donors, set up shop in Arlington, Virginia, just across 
the Potomac from Washington. Aegis, which helps pick local, state 
and federal candidates, is run by Jeff Crank, a former top executive 
at AFP .265 So despite their libertarian and Tea Party costumery, the 
Kochs are up to their eyeballs in mainstream Republican strategy. 
And that means funding efforts to suppress the non-white vote.
Steps  (N.Y.: Seven Stories Press, 2012).
263 “Karl Rove,” SourceWatch http://goo.gl/zM02MM  Accessed Aug. 20, 2014.
264 Kenneth P . Vogel, “Karl Rove v. The Koch Brothers,” Politico , Oct. 10, 2011. 
http://goo.gl/oYTvf
265 Andy Kroll, “New Koch-Linked Political Firm Aims to Handpick ‘Electable’ 
Candidates,” Mother Jones , Jan. 17, 2014. http://goo.gl/Pn5qWs

Page 97
There are two basic strategies for doing this:
(1) Suppress votes directly: prevent votes from being cast or 
counted;
(2) Dilute votes so they don’t matter.
Suppressing the Vote
There are dozens of techniques for suppressing the votes of black, 
Latino and poor people in general. The most popular and effective 
techniques were developed during the shameful period of American 
history known as “Jim Crow” – from roughly 1880 to about 1965. 
Jim Crow techniques included poll taxes, literacy tests, grandfather 
clauses, and felony disenfranchisement laws. In her book, The New 
Jim Crow , Michelle Alexander reports that these techniques worked 
well: Blacks were poor, so couldn’t pay the poll tax; they had been 
denied education, so could not pass literacy tests; their grandfathers 
had not been allowed to vote, so they could not claim the right to 
vote on that basis – whereas many poor, illiterate whites could. And 
blacks, more often than whites, were charged with felonies, and so 
were disenfranchised.
On its face, this last sentence may sound like the even-handed ap -
plication of justice: blacks more often than whites were charged with 
felonies. However, the reality bears no resemblance to “even-handed 
justice.” For one thing, incarcerating blacks at high rates is relatively 
new.
Since 1865, there have been two campaigns designed to incarcer -
ate black men.266 The first was called “the convict leasing” program, 
which was active from 1870 to World War II. Blacks were jailed, often 
for minor offenses (like talking too loudly to a white woman) or for 
no offenses at all. Once jailed, they were leased out as forced laborers 
(e.g., coal miners) to local or even national corporations, such as U.S. 
Steel. In his Pulitzer-prize-winning book, Slavery by Another Name , 
Wall Street Journal  reporter Douglas Blackmon has revealed that by 
1900 the Southern states had all passed a series of laws that served 
266 Marc Mauer, Race to Incarcerate  [Revised and updated edition] (N.Y.: New 
Press, 1999; 2006).

Page 98
two purposes: they jailed hundreds of thousands of young black men, 
who were then leased out as forced laborers, and they denied those 
men the right to vote.267 This is the origin of our modern habit of 
denying felons the right to vote. It was a technique invented after the 
Civil War to maintain white supremacy, and its cultural legacy still 
lives among us, particularly (though not exclusively) in the South.
Douglas Blackmon writes, “By 1900 the South’s judicial system had 
been wholly reconfigured to make one of its primary purposes the 
coercion of African Americans to comply with the social customs 
and labor demands of whites. It was not coincidental that 1901 
marked the final disenfranchisement of nearly all blacks throughout 
the South. Sentences were handed down by provincial judges, local 
mayors, and justices of the peace – often men in the employ of the 
white business owners who relied on the forced labor produced by 
the judgments.” 268
The convict leasing program served another purpose as well: it 
reduced the need for taxing the rich to pay for government services. 
For example, at one point the state of Alabama was covering 14 
percent of its annual budget with fees received from convict leasing. 
That was money the state did not have to acquire by taxing the rich 
or anyone else besides their captive forced-laborers.
The second campaign to incarcerate (and disenfranchise) blacks is 
the so-called “war on drugs,” which is still going strong today. The 
war on drugs was announced by then-President Richard Nixon on 
June 18, 1971 when he declared psychoactive drugs “Public Enemy 
Number One.” Congress and state legislatures then passed laws that 
were selectively enforced against black people. Not incidentally, laws 
(some old, some new) created the opportunity to deny anyone the 
right to vote if they’re convicted of a felony.
267 On the enactment of felony-disenfranchisement laws, 1865-1880, see 
Angela Behrens, Christopher Uggen, and Jeff Manza, “Ballot Manipulation 
and the ‘Menace of Negro Domination’: Racial Threat and Felony 
Disenfranchisement in the United States, 1850-2002,” American Journal of 
Sociology  Vol. 109, No. 3 (November 2003), pgs. 559-605. http://goo.gl/0YoP22
268 Douglas A. Blackmon, Slavery by Another Name; the Re-Enslavement of Black 
Americans from the Civil War to World War II  (N.Y.: Random House, 2008; Anchor 
paperback edition, 2009), pg. 7.

Page 99
Thirty years into the war on drugs – in year 2000 – Human 
Rights Watch (HRW) issued the first report analyzing who had 
been ensnared and incarcerated by the war on drugs.269 In its open -
ing paragraph, the HRW report stated bluntly, “Ostensibly color 
blind, the war on drugs has been waged disproportionately against 
black Americans.” Since that time, an avalanche of empirical data 
has confirmed the conclusions reached in 2000 by Human Rights 
Watch. The most authoritative source today is Michelle Alexander’s 
book, The New Jim Crow , subtitled Mass Incarceration in the Age of 
Colorblindness .
In 2000, the HRW report noted that, in the U.S., there are five 
times as many white drug users as black, yet 63 percent of those 
entering state prisons for drug offenses are black. Furthermore, 
the report pointed out that, drug offenders in the U.S. “face penal 
sanctions that are uniquely severe among western democracies.” For 
example, drug sentences for people convicted of retailing, or even 
possessing, small quantities of drugs can equal or exceed sentences 
for serious violent crimes like armed robbery, rape, and murder. The 
report noted that politicians and public officials have “turned a blind 
eye to the war on drugs’ staggering racial impact.”
Today, the war on drugs has left large numbers of blacks disenfran -
chised.270 In 2008, a total of more than 7 million Americans were in 
prison, on probation, or on parole. Of these, 5.3 million were being 
denied their right to vote. “That this group consisted so dispropor -
tionately of African Americans and other minorities led the United 
Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to 
call on the United States to automatically restore the franchise to 
those who had completed their criminal sentences,” writes historian 
Alexander Keyssar.271
269 Jamie Fellner, Punishment and Prejudice: Racial Disparities in the War on Drugs  
(N.Y.: Human Rights Watch, 2000). http://goo.gl/ggDxbb . A PDF version that’s 
easier to print and read can be found here: http://goo.gl/9MHYkL
270 For a state-by-state survey of laws and regulations governing voting by ex-
offenders, see “Voting as an Ex-Offender,” NonProfitVOTE.org  web site: http://
goo.gl/T49np6  Accessed Aug. 11, 2014.
271 Alexander Keyssar, The Right to Vote  [Revised Edition] (N.Y.: Basic Books, 
2000, 2009), pg. 277. See the U.N. call at http://goo.gl/A7j12J .

Page 100
But the problem continued. For example, the 2014 report of the 
National Commission on Voting Rights revealed that, in South 
Carolina, blacks make up 27 percent of the voting-age population, 
but 64 percent of those disenfranchised by felony convictions.272 In 
Florida, 23 percent of the black voting-age population has lost the 
right to vote because of felony convictions. To reinstate their right 
to vote in Florida, former felons must wait 5 to 7 years after they are 
released from prison, then apply for clemency.273 In Kentucky, just 
under 25 percent of the black population of voting age has lost the 
right to vote because of a felony conviction. To regain their right to 
vote in Kentucky, former felons must write an essay, produce three 
character witnesses, and pay a fee – reminiscent of literacy tests and 
poll taxes. 274
Similarly, in Iowa, blacks make up 2.5 percent of the population, 
but 25 percent of the prison population. There, the process of ap -
plying for restoration of voting rights is “extremely difficult,” the 
National Commission on Voting Rights was told in 2014: Some 8000 
former offenders are eligible to have their voting rights restored in 
Iowa, but only 25 individuals have so far succeeded.275
The New Literacy Test: Voter ID Laws
Soon after Barack Obama’s 2008 election victory, the Koch brothers 
decided to ruin his presidency,276 and to do their best to prevent any 
272 National Commission on Voting Rights, Hearing Summaries  (Washington, 
D.C.: Lawyer’s Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, Aug., 2014), pg. 91. 
http://goo.gl/p0eDV8
273 National Commission on Voting Rights, Hearing Summaries  (Washington, 
D.C.: Lawyer’s Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, Aug., 2014), pgs. 35-36. 
http://goo.gl/p0eDV8
274 National Commission on Voting Rights, Hearing Summaries  (Washington, 
D.C.: Lawyer’s Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, Aug., 2014), pg. 67. 
http://goo.gl/p0eDV8
275 National Commission on Voting Rights, Hearing Summaries  (Washington, 
D.C.: Lawyer’s Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, Aug., 2014), pg. 46. 
http://goo.gl/p0eDV8
276 Jane Mayer, “Covert Operations; the billionaire brothers who are waging 
a war against Obama,” New Yorker  Vol. 86, No. 25 (Aug. 30, 2010), pgs. 44-55. 
http://goo.gl/M4MJB1

Page 101
more black election victories. It was then that ALEC, the American 
Legislative Exchange Council , started pushing state-level model 
laws resolutions designed to disenfranchise millions of voters. 
Foremost among these bills was ALEC’s  “VOTER ID Act,”277 which 
requires voters to produce certain types of photo identification.278
Over half of the 62 photo-ID bills introduced in 37 states in 2011 
and 2012 were sponsored by members and allies of ALEC . Some 
form of voter-ID law has been passed in 33 states; eight states now 
require photo IDs. 279 In Wisconsin, conservative representatives 
introduced a law that would ban students from using state or college-
issued IDs for proof-of-residency while voting.280
According to the Brennan Center for Justice, 11 percent of the 
voting-age population lacks the kind of ID cards required by the 
strictest of these laws, especially students, people over 65 and 
African-Americans – voters who tend to favor candidates that em -
brace environmental protection.281
277 Center for Media and Democracy , “[ALEC’s] Sample Voter ID Act”(Madison, 
Wisc.: Center for Media and Democracy, no date.) http://goo.gl/Lr82S  Accessed 
Aug. 20, 2014.
278 Center for Media and Democracy, “ALEC’s Legislative Agenda on Voting 
Rights” (Center for Media and Democracy, no date). http://goo.gl/VV7DjC  
Accessed Aug. 20, 2014. And: Lisa Graves, “How the Koch-Funded ALEC Works 
to Deny Voting Rights; Brave New Film Highlights Voter Suppression,” PR 
Watch  Nov. 8, 2011. http://goo.gl/C398ZQ
279 Ethan Magoc, “Many states’ voter-ID laws, including Pennsylvania’s, appear 
to have tie to same U.S. group,” Philadelphia Inquirer , Aug. 15, 2012. http://goo.
gl/sqU5MQ  ; Center for Media and Democracy, “Democracy, Voter Rights, and 
Federal Power,” AlecExposed.org , April 5, 2014. http://goo.gl/iUzfMy  Accessed 
Aug. 20, 2014.
280 Tobin Van Ostern,” “ALEC Behind Voter Disenfranchisement Effort,” 
CampusProgress.org  [now renamed GenerationProgress.org ], March 9, 2011. 
http://goo.gl/QKtGm3
281 Brennan Center for Justice, “Voter ID” (web page dated Oct. 15, 2012). 
http://goo.gl/KZcDAl  Accessed Aug. 20, 2014.

Page 102
ALEC  and a “Fraudulent Fraud Squad” of lawyers, academics and 
conservative think tanks have stoked support for these voter ID laws 
by disseminating bogus talking points and stories about widespread 
voter fraud.282
ALEC’s recommended laws require voters to show government-
issued photo identification (such as a driver’s license) at the voting 
booth. This never used to be required. Typically, you registered to 
vote by showing some evidence of local residence – mail you’ve re -
ceived, an electric bill, a tax receipt. Then when you voted, you signed 
your name and thereafter you could be identified by your signature.
But now Republican-dominated states are demanding a photo ID, 
even if you’ve voted before. To urban white people, this may sound 
simple enough – show ‘em your driver’s license. But for an elderly 
black or Latino person living without a car in a rural area, getting an 
official photo ID requires a birth certificate or passport or naturaliza -
tion papers, then arranging transportation to a government office 
open only during working hours on weekdays (and typically several 
hours away and not necessarily accessible by public transit). Plus it 
requires the payment of fees to acquire the necessary documenta -
tion – an indirect kind of poll tax. Many (elderly, rural) people born 
at home don’t have a birth certificate. Many people who have never 
traveled outside the U.S. are unlikely to have a passport. The effect is 
to disenfranchise large numbers of the targeted populations: anyone 
suspected of being likely to vote liberal or Democrat.
There are dozens of other techniques being used, legally and il -
legally, to discourage voting by people of color, youth, the elderly, and 
the disabled, as documented recently by the National Commission 
on Voting Rights.283 Voting places may be too small to accommodate 
wheel chairs. Or the number of polling places may be reduced, 
282 Richard L. Hasen, “The Fraudulent Fraud Squad; The incredible, 
disappearing American Center for Voting Rights,” Slate, May 18, 2007. http://
goo.gl/mLj3Rs
283 National Commission on Voting Rights, Protecting Minority Voters: Our 
Work is Not Done  (Washington, D.C.: Washington, D.C.: Lawyer’s Committee 
for Civil Rights Under Law, Aug., 2014) http://goo.gl/T0yaTF ; and see National 
Commission on Voting Rights, Hearing Summaries  (Washington, D.C.: Lawyer’s 
Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, Aug., 2014). http://goo.gl/p0eDV8

Page 103
leaving many voters without a convenient place to vote. Or voting 
instructions may be provided in English only, despite legal require -
ments to accommodate voters with limited English proficiency. Or 
the votes of renters may be challenged if their driver’s license and 
their current home address do not match. (Renters move far more 
often than home owners, and they tend to have less cash available to 
update a driver’s license.) Or voter registration rolls may be purged 
frequently, requiring voters to re-register.
Of course, their proponents say these new photo ID laws have 
nothing to do with suppressing the votes of minorities and the poor. 
Heavens, no! They say these laws are needed to push back against the 
tidal wave of voter fraud that has swept the nation in recent years, 
deeply corrupting the sacred election process.
In his even-handed history of the right to vote in the United States, 
1750-2008, Harvard historian Alexander Keyssar says this about 
the period 2002-2008: “... there can be little doubt that a wing or 
faction of the national Republican Party was intent on establishing 
that fraud had become so pervasive that it threatened the fabric 
of American democracy.”284 In 2005, the Senate Republican Policy 
Committee said, “voter fraud continues to plague our nation’s federal 
elections, diluting and canceling out the lawful votes of the vast 
majority of Americans.”285 George W. Bush’s close advisor, Karl Rove, 
said in 2006 it was “beginning to look like we have elections run like 
those in countries where the guys in charge are colonels in mirrored 
sunglasses.”286
284 Alexander Keyssar, The Right to Vote  [Revised Edition] (N.Y.: Basic Books, 
2000, 2009), pg. 280.
285 Quoted by many reliable sources; see for example, Matt A. Barreto, 
Stephen A. Nuño, and Gabriel R. Sanchez, Voter ID Requirements and the 
Disenfranchisement of Latino, Black, and Asian Voters , Brennan Center for Justice, 
Sept. 1, 2007, pg. 6. http://goo.gl/XJBQyw
286 Ian Urbina, “Panel Said to Alter Finding in Voter Fraud,” New York Times  
April 11, 2006. http://goo.gl/97f6Cy

Page 104
This raises a valid question: What is the actual evidence of voter 
fraud in the U.S. today?
In 2007, the New York Times  examined 5 years (2002-2006) of ef -
fort by the Bush Justice Department to uncover and prosecute voter 
fraud.
The Times  recounted very substantial pressure from the White 
House, urging federal prosecutors to find, investigate, and pros -
ecute voter fraud.287 During five years of heightened effort, the 
Justice Department successfully prosecuted 86 individual cases of 
voter “fraud.” However, even those 86 cases did not all seem truly 
fraudulent. For example, Kimberly Prude, 43, of Milwaukee had been 
sentenced to six years’ probation for passing a bad check. During 
the fourth year of her sentence she registered to vote and mailed in 
an absentee ballot, which she mistakenly believed she had the right 
to do. For this crime, she was convicted of voter fraud and given a 
one-year jail sentence. “I find this whole prosecution mysterious,” 
Judge Diane P . Wood of the United States Court of Appeals for the 
Seventh Circuit, in Chicago, said at a hearing in Ms. Prude’s case. 
“I don’t know whether the Eastern District of Wisconsin goes after 
every felon who accidentally votes. It is not like she voted five times. 
She cast one vote.”288
During its five-year ramped-up effort to identify massive voter 
fraud, the Bush Justice Department could find no conspiracies to 
swing elections; all 86 cases of voter fraud led back to individuals, 
not gangs of plotters.
More recently, in 2012, an NBC News investigative team head -
quartered at the University of Arizona examined 2068 allegations of 
voter fraud between 2000 and 2012. Categories of fraud included (a) 
registration fraud, (b) absentee ballot fraud, (c) vote buying, (d) false 
election counts, (e) campaign fraud, (f) casting an ineligible vote, (g) 
voting twice, (h) voter impersonation fraud, and (i) intimidation. Of 
287 Eric Lipton and Ian Urbina, “In 5-Year Effort, Scant Evidence of Voter 
Fraud,” New York Times  April 12, 2007. http://goo.gl/rH7HTp
288 Eric Lipton and Ian Urbina, “In 5-Year Effort, Scant Evidence of Voter 
Fraud,” New York Times  April 12, 2007. http://goo.gl/rH7HTp

Page 105
these, the only category of fraud that could be stopped by a photo-ID 
requirement is (h), voter impersonation fraud. During the 12 years 
investigated, there were exactly 10 known instances of this kind of 
fraud. Announcing their findings, the NBC News team headlined 
their report, “New database of US voter fraud finds no evidence that 
photo ID laws are needed.”289
Diluting Votes
Besides suppressing votes, the second-most-common way to reduce 
the voting power of minorities is to dilute their votes.
There are two basic ways to dilute votes. Both ways depend on 
deciding or drawing the boundaries of a voting district.
At-Large Voting Districts
One way to dilute the black/Latino vote is to hold at-large elections 
– essentially creating only one large voting district that includes 
an entire city or county population. That way the 20 percent or 30 
percent people-of-color vote gets diluted (out-voted) by the majority-
white vote. For example, The National Commission on Voting Rights 
recently heard testimony that blacks make up 20 percent of the 
population in Fayette County, Georgia, but no black has ever been 
elected to the county commission because the county’s at-large elec -
tion system dilutes the black vote. Likewise, in Terrebonne Parish, 
Louisiana blacks comprise 20 percent of the voting-age population 
but they have never been able to elect a black judge because of the 
at-large voting system in Terrebonne County. 290
289 Natasha Khan and Corbin Carson, “New database of US voter fraud finds 
no evidence that photo ID laws are needed.” News21 , web portal of a national 
investigative reporting project funded by the Carnegie Corporation of New York 
and the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation, headquartered at the Walter 
Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass Communication at Arizona State 
University. Aug. 11, 2012. http://goo.gl/nzT1px
290 National Commission on Voting Rights, Hearing Summaries  (Washington, 
D.C.: Lawyer’s Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, Aug., 2014), pgs. 39, 53. 
http://goo.gl/p0eDV8

Page 106
Gerrymandering
In a representative government, representatives are usually chosen 
from more than one geographic district, whether it’s for city council 
or for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives. Every 10 years 
when the U.S. Bureau of the Census produces new demographic data, 
districts may be redrawn. And the people doing the drawing have a 
great deal of power. For example, they can draw districts in a way 
that jams large numbers of blacks and Latinos into just one district, 
minimizing their representation in government. This kind of ger -
rymander is called “packing.”
Alternatively, districts can be drawn in a way that spreads out the 
black or Latino vote into many districts where white majorities can 
prevail. For example, a center-city area that is majority Of Color 
could be placed into several districts, each shaped like a pie-slice 
radiating outward to include large numbers of white suburban vot -
ers – thus diluting (and nullifying) any votes cast by the inner-city 
population. The name for this kind of gerrymander is “cracking.”
Since 2010 the Republican strategy to marginalize “people power” 
by gerrymandering has been coordinated by the Republican State 
Leadership Committee (RSLC) , a national operation that helps 
elect Republicans to state legislatures, where they are able to re-draw 
electoral districts, known as “redistricting.”
“He who controls redistricting can control Congress,” Karl Rove ex -
plained in the Wall Street Journal  in 2010.291 Rove’s Crossroads Super 
PACs and affiliated nonprofits have contributed millions of dollars to 
the RSLC  in recent years.
The RSLC  spent over $39 million on state elections during the 
2012 election cycle, often setting up local front groups to disguise 
its role as an outsider in state campaigns.292 According to the RSLC’s  
own analysis, after the elections of 2010, some 20 legislative bodies 
291 Olga Pierce, Justin Elliott, and Theodoric Meyer, “How Dark Money Helped 
Republicans Hold the House and Hurt Voters,” ProPublica , Dec. 21, 2012. 
http://goo.gl/8xWUen
292 Alexander Burns, “Republican State Leadership Committee splits apart,” 
Politico , Jan. 21, 2014. http://goo.gl/njqEcE

Page 107
previously split or under Democratic control were brought under ex -
clusive Republican control, including Wisconsin, Ohio, Pennsylvania, 
and North Carolina.293 As a result, Republicans have sole political 
control in 23 states. Democrats have similar control in 13 states.
With support from its sister organization, the State Government 
Leadership Foundation (SGLF) , the RSLC  has provided state 
legislators with sophisticated data tracking and mapping software 
through its Redistricting Majority (REDMAP) Project.294 The 
REDMAP web site crows that Republicans won more seats than 
Democrats in the 113th Congress despite “over one million more 
votes cast for Democratic House candidates than Republicans.”295 
That’s what gerrymandering does for you – it cancels out the major -
ity’s preference and hands victory to someone else.
As a reporter for the New York Times  commented recently, “Their 
party’s success has empowered Republican lawmakers in dozens of 
states to redraw legislative districts on both the state and federal 
levels, potentially ensuring their party’s control of the United States 
House of Representatives for the rest of the decade.”296
“Republicans have an opportunity to create 20-25 new Republican 
Congressional Districts through the redistricting process over the 
next five election cycles, solidifying a Republican House majority,” 
says the REDMAP web site.297
293 Nicholas Confessore, “A National Strategy Funds State Political 
Monopolies,” New York Times , Jan. 12, 2014. http://goo.gl/13daVL
294 Alexander Burns, “Republican State Leadership Committee Splits Apart,” 
Politico , Jan. 21, 2014 http://goo.gl/njqEcE ; And: Olga Pierce, Justin Elliott, and 
Theodoric Meyer, “How Dark Money Helped Republicans Hold the House and 
Hurt Voters,” ProPublica , Dec. 21, 2012. http://goo.gl/8xWUen
295 The Redistricting Majority Project (REDMAP) of the Republican State 
Leadership Committee, “2012 REDMAP Summary Report; How a Strategy 
of Targeting State Legislative Races in 2010 Led to a Republican U.S. House 
Majority in 2013, ” www.redistrictingmajorityproject.com, Jan. 4, 2013.  http://
goo.gl/n8i8DB
296 Nicholas Confessore, “A National Strategy Funds State Political 
Monopolies,” New York Times , Jan. 11, 2014. http://goo.gl/13daVL
297 Republican State Leadership Committee, “The Redistricting Majority 
Project [REDMAP],” http://goo.gl/n8i8DB  Accessed Aug. 9, 2014.

Page 108
No doubt about it, the RSLC  is right: gerrymandering works. 
Republicans kept control of the House in the 2012 election even 
though their candidates received 1.4 million fewer votes than 
Democratic candidates.298 After analyzing Florida’s new political 
map, Professor Jonathan Katz concluded that the maps were the 
most lopsided he had ever seen. “They did a really good job of follow -
ing the recipe about how to do a partisan gerrymander,” he said.299
In North Carolina, outside money from RSLC  front groups, along 
with support from Art Pope, an ultra-rich member of the Koch’s 
conservative donor network, helped elect a conservative Republican 
majority in 2010 whose immediate priorities included the creation of 
a new electoral map that opponents saw as a clear case of gerryman -
dering. The legislature, along with governor and former Duke Energy 
executive Pat McCrory also enacted a new “Monster” law requiring 
voter-IDs, changing early voting regulations, eliminating public 
financing and state-sponsored voter registration drives. Lawsuits 
challenging the new law won’t be heard until 2015 – many months 
after the 2014 elections.
So voting rights of minorities, the young, the elderly, and the dis -
abled are under concerted attack by Republicans whose political fu -
ture as a national party is in doubt because – as a matter of strategy 
going back to 1968 – they appeal almost exclusively to white people, 
who are soon to become a minority in the U.S.300
298 Greg Giroux, “Republicans Win Congress as Democrats Get Most Votes,” 
Bloomberg , Mar 18, 2013. http://goo.gl/0Sf9MJ
299 Sarah Ferris, “Florida may be forced to redraw political districts before 
midterms,” Washington Post , May 30, 2014. http://goo.gl/YxbsLK  Accessed Aug. 
20, 2014.
300 Ian Haney López, Dog Whistle Politics: How Coded Racial Appeals Have 
Reinvented Racism and Wrecked the Middle Class  (N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 
2014).

Page 109
Although these attacks are usually seen as driven by Republican 
partisan interests, they have received an enormous amount of sup -
port from the Koch Brothers and their wealthy allies, who have put 
considerable resources into this “deliberate and systematic” attack on 
voting rights, coordinating their efforts through groups like ALEC  
and DonorsTrust .
Other fossil corporations are supporting disenfranchisement 
efforts, too. The RSLC  and the SGLC  have received substantial 
support from the American Natural Gas Alliance, Exxon, Devon (a 
big gas company with fracking operations across the country), and 
the Center for Energy & Economic Development, a coal industry 
front group.301 Although Koch Industries came relatively late to the 
table compared to Devon and Exxon, it has rapidly become one of 
RSLC’s  largest donors, contributing over $356,000 in 2013-2014.302 
Republican Party strategist Ed Gillespie, who led the RSLC from 2010 
until early 2014, acted as a rainmaker for the group, making pitches 
to energy executives in Dallas.303
The Kochs have also bolstered the RSLC’s  strategy with support 
from groups like the Center to Protect Patient Rights (CPPR) , 
a Koch-funded politically active nonprofit that has been involved in 
a contentious Arizona redistricting fight. CPPR  also supported an 
effort to change the way that Pennsylvania’s electoral votes are cast 
before the 2012 presidential election.304
301 “State Government Leadership Foundation, List of Contributions. Cash, 
Non-cash, Inception 2004.” Posted by ProPublica  at http://goo.gl/BPwXmK . 
Accessed Aug. 20, 2014.
302 Center for Responsive Politics, “Top contributors to the Republican State 
Leadership Cmte.” Accessed Aug. 20, 2014. http://goo.gl/KVitH8
303 Nicholas Confessore, “A National Strategy Funds State Political 
Monopolies,” New York Times , Jan. 12, 2014. http://goo.gl/13daVL
304 Kim Barker and Theodoric Meyer, “The Dark Money Man: How Sean Noble 
Moved the Kochs’ Cash into Politics and Made Millions,” ProPublica  Feb. 14, 
2014. http://goo.gl/MHlfGK

Page 110
Congressional Response to Evidence of 
Vote Dilution and Suppression
Efforts to reduce the voting power of people of color, and others, 
have been common in every state, but particularly in the South. 
This is widely understood. Responding to tremendous moral pres -
sure from the civil rights movement, in 1965 Congress enacted the 
Voting Rights Act, which was re-authorized in 1970, 1975, 1982, and 
2006.305
Under the Voting Rights Act, people who suspect that their vote is 
being suppressed have recourse to the federal Department of Justice, 
which is empowered to investigate and take action.
Even better, Section 4 of the Voting Rights Act identified many 
jurisdictions (some states and some counties) with a history of 
suppressing or diluting minority votes. These Section 4 jurisdic -
tions were subject to Section 5 of the Act, which required that any 
proposed changes in voting procedures in those jurisdictions be sub -
mitted to the federal Department of Justice for approval before they 
could become effective. Instead of requiring citizens to bring voter-
discrimination lawsuits after the fact, the Voting Rights Act took 
action to prevent  disenfranchisement. Over the years, many plans for 
vote suppression have been disapproved, and thus prevented, by fed -
eral oversight. Perhaps more importantly, simply requiring oversight 
by federal officials has prevented some jurisdictions from even 
considering  plans to suppress or dilute votes. The Voting Rights Act 
of 1965 has been a pillar of modern American democracy. But no 
more, thanks to the anti-democratic majority of the U.S. Supreme 
Court led by John Roberts.
305 Alexander Keyssar, The Right to Vote  [Revised Edition] (N.Y.: Basic Books, 
2000, 2009), chapter 8.

Page 111
The Shelby County  Decision: Removing a Pillar of Democracy
The conservative attack on voting rights reached a new level with 
the Supreme Court’s June 25, 2013, Shelby County v. Holder  decision, 
which declared unconstitutional Section 4 of the Voting Rights Act 
(VRA).306 [See box: “Who orchestrated the Shelby County  attack on 
voting rights?”] For fifty years, the law had provided a strong federal 
check against state and local swindles that had been used from 
1880 to 1965 to disenfranchise black voters.307 In Shelby County , the 
Supreme Court concluded that the list of state, county or local gov -
ernments with a history of discrimination (Section 4) was outdated, 
and so was unconstitutional. As a result, all jurisdictions are now free 
to modify their voting rules and regulations without prior approval 
from the U.S. Department of Justice, as required by Section 5 of the 
VRA. Once again, it’s open season on black and Latino voters, and 
the young, the elderly and the disabled.
As one observer noted, the “Court reasoned that because the VRA 
has been effective… its protections are no longer needed,” a bizarre 
twist of logic that suggests “their goal is clearly to suppress the 
franchise of persons who would vote against the plutocrats.”308 The 
Court had previously upheld the law as constitutional four separate 
times.309
306 See Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights, “Shelby Co. v. Holder,” no date, 
http://goo.gl/aN5XRA
307 Douglas A. Blackmon, Slavery by Another Name; the Re-Enslavement of Black 
Americans from the Civil War to World War II  (N.Y.: Random House, 2008; Anchor 
paperback edition, 2009), pg. 7.
308 Rob Hager, “Power Grab by the Roberts Five,” Counterpunch  June 28-30, 
2013. http://goo.gl/5efuVT  And see Greg Palast, “Ku Klux Kourt Kills King’s 
Dream Law, Replaces Voting Rights Act With Katherine Harris Acts,” June 24, 
2013. http://goo.gl/qwkl2P
309 Sergio Munoz, “Right-Wing Media Cover Up Supreme Court’s 
Unprecedented Blow to Voting Rights,” Media Matters for America,  June 25, 
2013. http://goo.gl/OkjOnw

Page 112
In the ten months following the Court’s Shelby  County  decision, 
nine states passed “New Jim Crow” laws that include identification 
requirements modeled after ALEC  resolutions.310 Given that there’s 
no evidence of large-scale voter fraud, the motivation behind these 
laws is not in doubt: In a rare moment of candor, one North Carolina 
Republican committee member said the state’s new Voter ID law was 
created to “kick the Democrats in the butt,” by making it harder for 
students and “lazy blacks” to vote.311
310 Steve Yaccinco and Lizette Alvarez, “New G.O.P Bid to Limit Voting in Swing 
States,” New York Times , March 29, 2014. http://goo.gl/oJDOpx
311 Ian Millhiser, “GOP Official Resigns After Saying Purpose of Voter ID Is 
to Suppress Votes of Democrats, ‘Lazy Blacks,” ThinkProgress  Oct. 25, 2013. 
http://goo.gl/kbkeLbWho Orchestrated the Shelby County   
Attack on Voting Rights?
In 2013, in a case known as Shelby County v. Holder , the U.S. 
Supreme Court struck down the Voting Rights Act of 1965 – a tower -
ing victory for a political movement funded by the Koch brothers 
and a handful of other billionaires. With the Voting Rights Act 
disabled, states can now pass laws that have the effect of suppressing 
the votes of blacks, Latinos, Asian-Americans, the young, the elderly 
and the disabled, all of who are presumed to lean Democrat.
The news media tend to present the Shelby County  case as the 
single-handed achievement of a maverick race activist from 
Penobscot Bay, Maine named Edward Blum, a former stock broker 
who has no law degree. However, the history of the case reveals that, 
once Shelby County  was accepted by the Supreme Court, Blum turned 
the role of generating financial and broader political support over to 
DonorsTrust  – the deep-pocket foundation that the Kochs and oth -
er billionaires use to support dozens of nonprofits, many of whom 
are engaged in other attacks on voting rights (including ALEC ).

Page 113
Who Orchestrated the Shelby County  Attack on Voting Rights? Continued
The Koch Brothers and other conservative activists and foundations 
associated with DonorsTrust  (DT) left their fingerprints all over 
the Shelby County  case. It may be one of their proudest achievements, 
promoting, as it does, their libertarian agenda and advancing the 
Republican Party’s strategy for survival in a nation where whites will 
one day be outnumbered by people of color, which is to suppress the 
votes of black, Latinos, and others suspected of favoring Democrats.
True, the Shelby County  litigation was initiated by Blum, but he had 
a lot of help from a radical, partisan, racist network. Blum is a fellow 
at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative think tank that 
also supports climate deniers and has been funded by ExxonMobil 
and by the Koch Brothers.1 Blum is the director and sole employee of 
the Project on Fair Representation (PFR), a nonprofit organization ex -
clusively funded through DonorsTrust , which gave PFR $1.2 million 
between 2006 and 2011.2 On its web site, PFR has described its mis -
sion as “influencing jurisprudence, public policy, and public attitudes 
regarding race and ethnicity.”3
Although Blum was the designing mind of the Shelby County  litiga -
tion, financial support for the case was routed through DonorsTrust  
and Donors Capital Fund  the same two shadowy operation used by 
many Koch Network donors to fund climate denial.
It appears that DonorsTrust  provided more than just a way of 
channeling money to PFR. In 2012, the year the Supreme Court 
agreed to take the Shelby County  case, DT claimed $997,191 in  
 
1 See “American Enterprise Institute,” SourceWatch.org  http://goo.gl/JzIJz  and: 
Greenpeace, “Koch Industries Climate Denial Front Group, American Enterprise 
Institute (AEI),” http://goo.gl/YuTg22  And: Joan Biskupic, “Special Report: 
Behind U.S. race cases, a little-known recruiter,” Reuters  Dec. 4, 2012. http://
goo.gl/ruzUl  And: Morgan Smith, “One Man Standing Against Race-based Laws,” 
New York Times , Feb. 23, 2012. http://goo.gl/jrwMPp
2Ari Berman, “Why Are Conservatives Trying to Destroy the Voting Rights Act?” 
The Nation , Feb. 5, 2013. http://goo.gl/3F3vu
3 Brendan Fisher, “For Bradley Foundation, Challenging Affirmative Action & 
Voting Rights is Part of a Long-Term Crusade,” PR Watch , June 27, 2013. http://
goo.gl/ZLw6x6

Page 114
Who Orchestrated the Shelby County  Attack on Voting Rights? Continued  
expenses for PFR, over $700,000 of which was used to pay Wiley 
Rein,4 a prestigious Washington, DC law firm that argued the Shelby 
County  case before the Supreme Court.5 DT did not claim expenses 
for any of the dozens of other groups for which it provided funding 
that year. Apart from the importance of the Shelby County  case, it’s 
unclear why.
In 2012, DonorsTrust  transferred PFR to a “supporting organiza -
tion,” Project Liberty, Inc., a group that shares the same address as 
both PFR and DonorsTrust .6 Project Liberty’s CEO is Whitney Ball 
– the CEO and President of DonorsTrust .7
The constellation of relationships between individuals associated 
with DonorsTrust  and the Shelby County  litigation includes connec -
tions to organizations and individuals involved in other attacks on 
voting rights and on campaign finance regulations, as well as global 
warming denial.
One of Project Liberty’s two directors is former Wiley Rein attorney 
Allison Hayward, an expert on campaign finance. Hayward, a board 
member of the Center for Competitive Politics,8 has said that there 
is no “empirical data” to prove that private contributions to congres -
sional candidates “redirect recipient incumbents from serving the 
‘public interest’ toward serving ‘special interests.’”9 She is married to 
Steven Hayward, a pundit and scholar who has claimed that global 
warming is not caused by humans.10 Steve Hayward sits on the board 
of Donors Capital Fund , and is a board-level grant advisor for the 
Searle Freedom Trust (SFT), along with Stephen Moore. Searle is one  
4 DonorsTrust form 990 tax return, 2012.
5 Krissah Thompson, “Edward Blum defies odds in getting case to Supreme 
Court,” Washington Post , Feb. 25, 2013. http://goo.gl/nHBJOs
6 See http://www.projectonfairrepresentation.org/contact-us/ . Accessed April 
30, 2014.
7 Project Liberty form 990 tax return for 2011.
8 Allison Hayward, Office of Congressional Ethics. http://oce.house.gov/allison-
hayward.html
9 Allison Hayward, “Democracy After Citizens United; The Flawed Iceberg 
Model,” Boston Review , Sept. 13, 2010. http://goo.gl/nj5qwB
10 Desmogblog, “Steven F . Hayward,” http://www.desmogblog.com/steven-f-
hayward  Accessed Aug. 24, 2014.

Page 115
Who Orchestrated the Shelby County  Attack on Voting Rights? Continued  
of three foundations that Blum says funded the Shelby County  
litigation (see below).
Hayward is currently or formerly affiliated with other climate 
denial front groups funded by foundations he helps direct, includ -
ing the Property and Environment Research Center, the Heritage 
Foundation, the American Enterprise Institute, and the Committee 
For A Constructive Tomorrow.
Stephen Moore, a former member of the editorial board of the 
Wall Street Journal , is another ALEC  advisor 11 and a co-founder of 
the Club for Growth – a Republican-aligned group whose PAC has 
received millions of dollars from the kingpins of carbon and from 
Koch donors.12 Moore is also a former director of Donors Capital 
Fund  (the sister organization of DonorsTrust ) and a regular guest 
at the Koch Network’s strategic retreats for wealthy donors. While 
Moore was on the Journal’s  editorial board, one of the paper’s regular 
editorial contributors was John Fund, an advocate for voter ID legis -
lation. Fund made a presentation about “The Dangers of Voter Fraud 
in the 2010 Elections” at one of ALEC’s meetings.13 In 2013, Fund 
described the Supreme Court’s Shelby County  decision striking down 
a portion of the Voting Rights Act as “a civil-rights victory” because 
it will reduce “racial gerrymandering.”14
11 Connor Gibson (Greenpeace), “Stephen Moore,” PolluterWatch , http://goo.
gl/6AOR36  Accessed Aug. 24, 2014.
12 Koch retreat attendees who donated to the Club for Growth in the 2012 
election cycle include John Bryan (a member of the Club’s leadership council - 
$350,000); John Childs (a Club for Growth board member - $1,125,000); Fred 
Young ($200,000) and Ethelmae Humphreys ($25,000). Koch Industries ties 
to the Club for Growth include Americans for Prosperity’s [AfP] Phil Kerpen, a 
former Club for Growth policy analyst, Frayda Levy, a Club for Growth board 
member who is also an AfP national board member. Both Kerpen and Levy have 
attended Koch network retreats.
13 “American Legislative Exchange Council, Public Safety and Elections Task 
Force, 2010 States and National Policy Summit, December 2, 2010.” Document 
published by Common Cause. http://goo.gl/Dni4yo  Accessed Aug. 24, 2014.
14 John Fund, “A Civil-Rights Victory,” National Review Online , June 25, 2013. 
At http://goo.gl/HhrvdE  Accessed Aug. 24, 2014.

Page 116
Who Orchestrated the Shelby County  Attack on Voting Rights? Continued
DonorsTrust  CEO Whitney Ball is a regular attendee at the Koch 
Network’s  strategy retreats and former director of the Philanthropy 
Roundtable, which also helps coordinate strategy among conserva -
tive donors and foundations. At least four Philanthropy Roundtable 
staffers are graduates of the Koch Associate Program or the Koch 
Internship program, which are both run by the Charles Koch 
Institute. Numerous Philanthropy Roundtable staffers have also 
worked directly for one of Charles Koch’s core organizational opera -
tions, Americans for Prosperity , ALEC , and the Institute for 
Humane Studies .
Ball is also the President and CEO of Donors Capital Fund , Inc., 
the DonorsTrust  partner firm that takes in contributions of $1 
million or more. Kimberly Dennis, the board chair of DonorsTrust  
and Donors Capital Fund , is the former executive director of the 
Philanthropy Roundtable. (More on Dennis below)
In its 2012 tax return, Project Liberty reported ties to “related or -
ganizations,” including the Heritage Foundation (home of Hans Von 
Spakovsky – a leading proponent of the bogus “voter fraud” theory, 
and co-author of a book on the topic with John Fund), the Institute 
for Justice, the Acton Institute, the Federalist Society and the Center 
for Competitive Politics. All of these groups received substantial 
support from DonorsTrust  and/or Donors Capital Fund  in 2012.15 
The Institute for Justice was founded in 1991 with hundreds of thou -
sands of dollar in support from the Koch brothers.16
Although DonorsTrust  shields the identity of its donors, Blum 
told reporters that PFR was funded by the William E. Simon 
Foundation, the Bradley Foundation and Searle Freedom Trust, 
among others.17 The Simon Foundation is named after Treasury 
Secretary William Simon, a key figure in the corporate-empowerment 
movement that created an array of corporate-funded strategic litiga  
15 Project Liberty form 990 tax return for 2012.
16 W. John Moore, “Wichita Pipeline,” N ational Journal , May 16, 1992. http://
goo.gl/4CEUMR
17 Ari Berman, “Why Are Conservatives Trying to Destroy the Voting Rights 
Act?” The Nation , Feb. 5, 2013. http://goo.gl/3F3vu

Page 117
Who Orchestrated the Shelby County  Attack on Voting Rights? Continued  
tion groups in the 1970s, following the advice of Lewis Powell, 
Jr.18 The Bradley Foundation and Searle Freedom Trust have funded 
the Wisconsin-based MacIver Institute, which has hyped bogus 
voter fraud claims to justify Voter ID laws like the one promoted by 
ALEC .19 The Bradley Foundation has also backed groups spearhead -
ing legal battles against campaign finance laws, including The Center 
for Competitive Politics, the Institute for Justice, and James Bopp’s 
James Madison Center for Free Speech.20
Searle Freedom Trust (SFT) has close ties to ALEC  and the State 
Policy Network , which pushed model voter identification laws, 
stoking support for these bills with spurious arguments about wide -
spread voter fraud.21 Kimberly Dennis, President of SFT is the board 
chair of DonorsTrust  and Donors Capital Fund , and the former 
executive director of the Philanthropy Roundtable.
Wiley Rein, the law firm that represented Shelby County, has ties 
to other strategic attacks on voting rights. Michael Toner, who chairs 
the elections-law and government-ethics practice at the firm, is also 
a director of the State Government Leadership Foundation  (see 
above).22
18 Nan Aron and others, Justice for Sale  (Washington, D.C.: Alliance for Justice, 
1993) http://goo.gl/CTa6nV  For more about the history of the conservative 
judicial movement, see the references cited in Greenpeace, “Powell Memo 
Blueprint: Impact on Judicial and Legal Action,” discussing judicial and legal 
actions that followed the strategic blueprint set out in Powell’s 1971 Memo to 
the U.S. Chamber of Commerce: http://goo.gl/MYaOkO
19 “MacIver Institute,” SourceWatch.org . http://goo.gl/5APTRU
20 Kenneth P . Vogel, “Campaign finance reform: R.I.P .?,” Politico , Oct. 13, 2010. 
http://goo.gl/9bjwSB
21 Center for Media and Democracy, “Searle Freedom Trust,” http://goo.gl/
or8ciC  Accessed Aug. 24, 2014.
22 “Michael Toner” (biography). WileyRein. com  http://goo.gl/zPUJgv  .

Page 118
The Newest Koch Campaign: Targeting State and Local Judges
Ominously, in April, 2014 the Washington Post  reported that the 
Republican State Leadership Committee [RSLC] had just announced 
a new “Judicial Fairness Initiative.” The Post  said the RSLC will “begin 
targeting judicial races, bringing outside money and sophisticated 
campaign tactics to one of the last calm backwaters of politics.”312 
State judges haven’t been receptive to many Republican efforts to 
suppress votes, so the RSLC intends to make judicial elections far 
more expensive, thus giving billionaires much greater influence in 
deciding who can become a state judge.
Judicial elections started to get more expensive a few years ago. In 
November 2012, the Editorial Board of the New York Times  observed 
ruefully that 2012 state-level judicial elections “broke previous 
records for the amounts spent on judicial campaigns around the 
country. The dominant role of special-interest money – including
312 Reid Wilson, “Republican group will focus on judicial races,” Washington Post  
April 29, 2014. http://goo.gl/eKUEk7Who Orchestrated the Shelby County  Attack on Voting Rights? Continued
Support for the Shelby County  case also came from other con -
servative legal groups and think tanks, including the Pacific Legal 
Foundation, Cato Institute, Reason Foundation, and the Landmark 
Foundation. 23 Most of these groups have received financial support 
from DonorsTrust  and many also filed briefs in the Citizens United  
and McCutcheon  cases.
23 A list of amicus briefs for both sides of the case can be found in “Shelby 
County v. Holder” at scotusblog.com http://goo.gl/tHiKY . Many of the 
groups that filed will be familiar to those who know the history of the Powell 
Memo. See , Greenpeace, “Powell Memo Blueprint: Impact on Judicial and 
Legal Action,” discussing judicial and legal actions that followed the strategic 
blueprint set out in Powell’s 1971 Memo to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce: 
http://goo.gl/MYaOkO

Page 119
super PACs financed by undisclosed donors – has severely weak -
ened the principle of fair and impartial courts,” the Times  wrote.313 
The new RSLC campaign is simply aimed at intensifying the trend.314
Fourteen states elect judges through partisan contests in which 
candidates run on a party ticket. Nineteen states choose their judges 
via nonpartisan elections. In 26 states, governors can appoint judges, 
and in two states, Virginia and South Carolina, legislatures elect 
judges.
The first major test of the Koch plan to buy control of state courts 
arrived in August, 2014, when the Kochs’ American for Prosperity  
ganged up with the RSCL to try to oust three members of the 
Tennessee Supreme Court.315 They failed. But history tells us that 
defeat will energize the Kochs to try, try again. As the New York Times  
observed, defeat in Tennessee is “unlikely to deter or rattle conserva -
tives who, eyeing the courts as an outlet to augment their public 
policy pursuits, have transformed monotonous judicial elections 
into full-throated campaigns brimming with consultants, television 
advertising, direct mail, and major campaign spending.”316 From now 
on, the state judiciary is under threat.
313 Editorial Board, “Judicial Elections, Unhinged,” New York Times  Nov. 9, 
2012. http://goo.gl/0wh8wN  And see Alicia Bannon and others, The New 
Politics of Judicial Elections 2011-12; How New Waves of Special Interest Spending 
Raised the Stakes for Fair Courts  (Washington, D.C.: Justice at Stake, 2013). 
http://goo.gl/fyQlzw
314 Erik Eckholm, “Outside Spending Enters Arena of Judicial Races, ” New York 
Times  May 5, 2014. http://goo.gl/GYywrv
315 “Buying the Courts; National Conservative Groups Spend Big Against 
Tennessee Supreme Court Justices,” ThinkProgress.com  Aug. 7, 2014. http://goo.
gl/rPahKu
316 Alan Blinder, “Despite Failure, Campaign to Oust Tennessee Justices Keeps 
Conservatives Hopeful,” New York Times , Aug. 9, 2014. http://goo.gl/FE8Rwv

Page 120
Conclusion and Recommendations
Building a Movement for Democracy
Global warming is coming upon us like a freight train. As the 
Pentagon keeps warning us, “The danger from climate change is real, 
urgent, and severe.” More than 80 percent of Americans want action 
to reduce the danger, even if it costs them something.317 So what’s 
stopping us?
Fixing this problem requires government action. And so far the 
fossil fuel corporations and a handful of self-interested billionaires 
have been able to thwart government action. Using their deep 
pockets, they have paralyzed our politics, and now they’re working to 
corrupt our whole system of elections, both legislative and judicial. 
In sum, to protect their right to sell oil and gas, the pollutocrats have 
declared war on democracy. Their stated goals are to “drown govern -
ment in a bathtub,” to give corporations the same rights as people, 
and to eliminate labor unions, worker protections and environmental 
regulations. They’ve made no secret of their goal: they aim to roll 
back the New Deal and the achievements of the civil rights move -
ment.318
What can we do?
The essential first step is to stop thinking of ourselves as passive 
consumers and reassert ourselves as active citizens of a democracy. 
They’ve got money but we’ve got people . So we can get together, agree 
on some common goals, and then work like hell to make things right. 
Yes, our adversaries have made great gains with their campaign to 
roll back New Deal. But we can still organize .
317 “Despite costs, most Americans want action on climate change,” Yale 360  
Feb. 12, 2014 http://goo.gl/2qYKXt  describing Anthony Leiserowitz and others, 
Public Support for Climate and Energy Policies in November 2013  (New Haven, 
Conn.: Yale University, 2014). http://goo.gl/6DWxxT
318 For a libertarian/conservative blueprint for erasing the achievements of the 
civil rights movement, see Clint Bolick and Charles Murray, Unfinished Business; 
A Civil Rights Strategy for America’s Third Century  (San Francisco: Pacific research 
Institute, 1990).

Page 121
This means building coalitions – coalitions that cross all the usual 
dividing lines that our adversaries try to exploit: race, class, ethnic -
ity, culture, faith, and political party. If we get together and stick 
together, we can protect democracy – everyone’s right to vote and to 
keep corrupting money out of politics – and then we can win on our 
individual issues.
But if we can’t get together and stay together, the pollutocrats’ war 
on democracy will likely succeed.
In 2012, a new coalition – with 50 million members – formed to 
fight for democracy: The NAACP , the Communications Workers of 
America (CWA), Sierra Club and Greenpeace joined other environ -
mental, labor, civil rights and government reform groups, creating 
the Democracy Initiative ( http://www.democracyforus.org ), which 
aims to get private money out of our elections (federal, state and lo -
cal), and to restore and protect everyone’s right to vote.319
The Democracy Initiative’s success will depend upon its “50 state 
strategy for democracy fueled by grassroots communities.”320
As the history of the United States tells us, all progressive reform 
has required combined activism in the workplace and in the com -
munity.
Martin Luther King, Jr., reminded us in his prescient speech to 
the AFL-CIO in 1961, that, “If the Negro wins, labor wins.” He 
said, “A crisis confronts us both. Those who in the second half of 
the nineteenth century could not tolerate organized labor have 
had a rebirth of power and seek to regain the despotism of that era 
while retaining the wealth and privileges of the twentieth century. 
Whether it be the ultra-right wing in the form of the Birch societies 
or the alliance which former President Eisenhower denounced, the 
alliance between big military and big industry, or the coalition of the 
Southern Dixiecrats and Northern reactionaries, whatever the form, 
these menaces now threaten everything decent and fair in American 
life. Their target is labor, and the Negro people...”321
319 http://www.democracyforus.org/
320 http://www.democracyforus.org/ .
321 Martin Luther King, Jr.,“If the Negro Wins, Labor Wins,” speech to the AFL-

Page 122
Gar Alperovitz has reminded us how environmental laws in the 
1970s couldn’t have been enacted without union support for the laws 
themselves and for the politicians proposing them. He said, the “ca -
pacity to alter big trends in virtually all advanced nations has almost 
always depended in significant part on the strength not simply of 
politics in general, and not only of movements in general, but also on 
the existence of powerful institutions – above all, labor unions.” 322
Whether our goal is environmental protection, civil rights, a fair 
wage with job security, or defending democracy itself again the king -
pins of carbon, getting together  is essential because coalition is what 
wins .
Policy Recommendations
The reforms listed here can ensure that every citizen of voting age 
can cast a ballot, that every ballot will be counted, and that elections 
are fair and open. Although these reforms will not, by themselves, 
guarantee a well-functioning republic, they are essential steps to 
underpin the civic culture of commitment and participation needed 
for a healthy democracy.
Keep Corporations Out of Elections
Corporations are government-created business structures bestowed 
with certain privileges and advantages (e.g. limited liability, perpetu -
al life, and special tax treatment) designed to enhance their power in 
the marketplace.
The special advantages created by the corporate form obviously 
pose special dangers of corruption in the political sphere. Since the 
earliest days of the republic, the danger of corporations corrupting 
democracy has been understood. In 1907, Congress outlawed cam -
paign contributions by corporations, to prevent them from corrupt -
ing elections to gain further advantages and privileges, as has now 
obviously happened. In short, corporate participation in elections 
violates basic principles of popular sovereignty and representative 
democracy.
CIO Dec. 11, 1961. http://goo.gl/PDYqcb
322 Gar Alperovitz, What Then Must We Do?  (White River Junction, Vt.: Chelsea 
Green, 2013), pgs. 13-14.

Page 123
For more than a decade, the vast majority of Americans have 
believed that corporations have too much influence in government 
and public life.323 The sentiment grew even more acute after Citizens 
United , when 80 percent of Americans said they disagreed with the 
Supreme Court’s decision.324
“We the people” clearly reject the court’s position that money is 
speech to be protected by the First Amendment. Now a campaign is 
under way to pass a constitutional amendment that would reverse 
the court’s ruling, ensuring that democracy is for people, not corpo -
rations.325
As of July 2014, 16 states and nearly 500 cities and towns had 
called on Congress to initiate the amendment process.326
Momentum to pass the amendment is also building in Congress, 
where, at this writing (August, 2014), 50 Senators have co-sponsored 
The Democracy for All Amendment (SJ Res 19) introduced by 
Senator Tom Udall (D-NM). For current information about the status 
of the bill see www.United4ThePeople.org .
323 The numbers reached an all-time high after Citizens United . Nearly nine 
in ten Americans (88 percent) polled in 2011 said big companies have too 
much power in Washington, D.C., an increase from 2000, when 82 percent 
of Americans surveyed either “agreed” or “strongly agreed” that “Business 
has gained too much power over too many aspects of American life.” See “Big 
Companies, PACs, Banks, Financial Institutions and Lobbyists Seen by Strong 
Majorities as Having Too Much Power and Influence in DC,” HarrisInteractive  
June 1, 2011 http://goo.gl/fQJk1L ; Aaron Bernstein and others, “Too Much 
Corporate Power?” Business Week  Sept. 11, 2000. http://goo.gl/GPzxS . In 1936, 
in the midst of the Great Depression, 53 percent of those surveyed believed 
“business and industry leaders” posed a “greater danger to America” than 
“Washington officials” (47 percent). AIPO [Gallup] poll, June 27, 1936, cited 
in Hadley Cantril (editor),  Public Opinion 1935-1946  (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press, 1951), pg. 344. Today, public concern about the power of 
corporations is similar to what it was in the midst of the Great Depression.
324 Dan Eggen, “Poll: Large majority opposes Supreme Court’s decision on 
campaign financing,” Washington Post, February 17, 2010. http://goo.gl/sG0o
325 For an explanation of why it is necessary to amend the constitution see 
“Why Amend The Constitution?” People for the American Way . No date. http://
goo.gl/ZeLY5X
326 For more information see http://moneyout-votersin.org , and see 
“Resources,” united4thepeople.org http://goo.gl/R0GA5P ; and Public Citizen, 
“Democracy is for People,” no date http://goo.gl/t5di3o .

Page 124
Let “We the People” Fund Election Campaigns
As the cost of elections rises year after year, large donors have 
become more important and therefore more influential. As a result, 
average Americans are convinced that elected officials are more 
beholden to big donors than to their constituents. After the 2012 
election, two-thirds of voters said big donors and secret money are 
undermining democracy.327
The Government By the People Act (H.R. 20) would elevate more 
voices and give voters more choices by establishing a system of public 
campaign financing. Public financing is the only practical way to re -
duce the influence of private money in elections. With public financ -
ing, candidates must demonstrate a certain level of popular support 
(getting a certain number of signatures on a petition, for example) 
before they qualify for public money to run their election campaign, 
eliminating their need for big private donations.328
Public financing systems have already proven effective in boosting 
the voices of small donors in Connecticut and New York City.329 A 
package of public financing reforms introduced during New York 
State’s budget negotiations came close to passing in 2014.330
Disclose the True Source of Contributions
Voters should know who is paying for election campaigns, including 
campaign advertisements. Strong disclosure rules have bipartisan 
support, stand on solid constitutional ground, and are relatively 
simple to enact and enforce.331
327 Adam Smith, “New Poll: Voters Push Back Against Big Money Politics,” 
Public Campaign Action Fund, Nov. 13, 2012. http://goo.gl/TRNKUC
328 See The Government By the People Act campaign website, http://www.ofby.
us;
329 For Public Campaign’s list of Fair Elections victories (publicly-financed 
elections), see http://goo.gl/GLrLjO
330 For more information see Public Campaign ( www.publiccampaign.org ),New 
York Working Families Party ( http://workingfamilies.org/states/new-york/ ), 
Citizen Action of New York ( http://citizenactionny.org/ ) and The Brennan 
Center for Justice, NYU ( http://www.brennancenter.org/issues/new-york-
public-financing ).
331 Prof. Heather Gerken, Yale Law School, Testimony before the Senate 

Page 125
The federal DISCLOSE Act (S. 3628, H.R. 4010) would require full 
disclosure of corporate, union and wealthy funding sources behind 
campaigns and political advertisements.332
Additional ways to require disclosure include
• A Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regulation that would 
require corporations to inform shareholders of their political spending,333
• An IRS rule to force politically active 501(c) nonprofits to 
disclose their sources of campaign spending, and
• A rule requiring all government contractors to dis -
closure their political expenditures.334
Restore and Strengthen the Voting Rights Act
As we have seen, the Koch brothers and their Republican Party 
allies have been campaigning to suppress the votes of suspected 
Democrats, including blacks, Latinos, the young, the elderly, and the 
disabled.
In Shelby County v. Holder  the Supreme Court invalidated Section 
4 of the Voting Rights Act (VRA), which lists jurisdictions (some 
states, some counties) that are required to get approval from the 
federal Department of Justice before they can change any election 
rules.335 The Section 4 jurisdictions have a history of suppressing the 
votes of minorities.
Committee on Rules and Administration, July 18, 2014. Available at http://goo.
gl/hWiZ3b
332 A companion bill – The Real Time Transparency Act (H.R. 4442; S. 2207) 
would require timely (within 48 hours) disclosure of donations of $1,000 or 
more. http://goo.gl/bHiqZ5
333 For more on the SEC regulation see the Corporate Reform Coalition, http://
www.corporatereformcoalition.org
334 Elizabeth Kennedy and Anthony Skaggs, “The People’s Business: Disclosure 
of Political Spending by Government Contractors,” Brennan Center for Justice, 
June 16, 2011. http://goo.gl/pAfDki
335 Nine states were covered by the law: Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Georgia, 
Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina, Texas and Virginia. Six others were 
partially covered: California, Florida, Michigan, New York, North Carolina and 
South Dakota.

Page 126
In early 2014, bipartisan leadership in Congress introduced the 
Voting Rights Amendment Act (S. 1945/H.R. 3899) to reinstate 
the key provisions that the Supreme Court stripped away in Shelby 
County .336
Modernize Voter Registration
Civil rights groups including The Advancement Project, the NAACP , 
and The Brennan Center for Justice have mounted legal challenges 
to many of the new laws enacted by 22 states since 2010 that make 
it harder for millions of people to vote. In addition, during the past 
two years, 16 states have passed laws to improve voters’ ability to 
cast their ballots.337 Other states still have inadequate or antiquated 
election standards that could be improved in a variety of ways, 
including:338
• Expand early voting and election-day voter registration;
• Electronically register all consenting citizens when they in -
teract with a wide range of government agencies;
• Make registration portable to let voters stay registered when they move;
• Make election day a state or federal holiday;
336 The act addresses the Supreme Court’s argument for striking down Section 
4 of the Voting Rights Act by establishing a new formula (i.e. set of criteria 
and time period) to determine which state or local jurisdictions would have 
to get approval from the Department of Justice before making any changes in 
voting rules. The new formula requires states with five violations of federal 
law to their voting changes over the 15 most recent years to submit future 
election changes for federal approval. Local jurisdictions would be covered if 
they commit 3 or more violations or one violation with “persistent, extremely 
low minority turnout” in 15 years. The provisions of the bill would currently 
extend this requirement to Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas. Other 
provisions in the bill provide for additional ways to challenge intentional voting 
discrimination, expand the Department of Justice’s ability to monitor elections 
and require the public to be notified of voting changes made within 180 days of 
an election. See The Advancement Project’s summary of the act at http://goo.
gl/sKGdbW  ; Ari Berman, “Members of Congress Introduce a New Fix for the 
Voting Rights Act,” The Nation , January 16, 2014 http://goo.gl/3QpKS6 ; and 
see www.vrafortoday.org/ .
337 Jaime Fuller, “How has voting changed since Shelby County v. Holder?” 
Washington Post , July 7, 2014. http://goo.gl/IwSEHt
338 Brennan Center for Justice, “Voter Registration Modernization,” available at 
http://goo.gl/kbghi3 .

Page 127
• Restore voting rights for all former felons;339
• Pre-register young voters;
• End gerrymandering by establishing rules for fairness, transpar -
ency and public participation in independent redistricting.340
Some of these reforms are included in the federal Voter 
Empowerment Act of 2013 (H.R. 12).341
Supreme Court Justice Louis D. Brandeis once observed, “We can 
have democracy in this country, or we can have great wealth concen -
trated in the hands of a few, but we can’t have both.” Today, we face 
a similar choice: We can let the kingpins of carbon and the fossil fuel 
corporations extract and burn every last bit of coal, oil and gas, thus 
threatening to ruin the earth as a place suitable for human civiliza -
tion, or we can have sensible and democratically-determined energy 
policies. But we can’t have both.
There’s one simple reason why Big Money wants to disenfranchise 
blacks, Latinos, youth, the elderly, and the disabled. It’s because vot -
ing can turn the system on its head. Voting can shift power.
Voting is the basis of every democratic republic – is embodies 
the consent of the governed – and it is a tool that all social move -
ments have always used to achieve their goals. As President Lyndon 
Johnson said when he signed into law the Voting Rights Act of 1965, 
“The vote is the most powerful instrument ever devised by man 
for breaking down injustice and destroying the terrible walls which 
imprison men because they are different from other men.”
339 See ProjectVote.org, “Felon Voting Rights,” http://goo.gl/kAXGf2 ; and 
ProCon.org, “State Felon Voting Laws” http://goo.gl/fygHv
340 Rep. Steve Cohen (D-TN) introduced H.R. 278, “The John Tanner Fairness 
and Independence in Redistricting Act of 2013” to require states to take their 
congressional apportionment out of the political process and place it in the 
hands of an independent redistricting commission. For more information 
about the bill and other ways to ensure proportional representation see 
Fair Vote http://www.fairvote.org  and End Gerrymandering, http://www.
endgerrymandering.com/
341Brennan Center for Justice, “Voter Empowerment Act of 2013,” January 23, 
2013. Available at http://goo.gl/Bjn4qw ; and the Voter Empowerment Action 
Project. http://voterempowermentactionproject.org/

Page 128
When the public demands and exercises its right to vote, elected of -
ficials must either do what the voters want, or face the loss of public 
office in the next election. That’s why the pollutocrats are working 
overtime to corrupt the system, to degrade our democracy from 
one-person-one-vote to one-dollar-one-vote. But we don’t have to let 
them win. Together, in coalition, we can overcome.

Page 129
Appendix A: The Kingpins of Carbon and the 
Koch Brothers' Club of Plutocrats
Below is a list of top political donors in the 2012 federal election 
cycle who are connected to the dirty-energy companies (oil, gas and 
coal) primarily responsible for global warming. Included are individu -
als connected directly (e.g. executives and board members) and – 
where the relationship appears significant – indirectly (e.g. company 
lobbyists, suppliers, and significant investors).
The list was derived from 2012 election data provided to 
Greenpeace by Public Campaign, with assistance from US PIRG and 
Demos. (For more details on the data, see “McCutcheon Money” 
Methodology in Demos and US PIRG’s report. http://www.demos.
org/publication/mccutcheon-methodology ). Public Campaign/
Demos’ list was generated using Sunlight Foundation’s Influence 
Explorer tool ( http://data.influenceexplorer.com/# ), based on data 
provided by the Federal Election Commission, refined and aug -
mented by the Center for Responsive Politics.
After identifying individuals connected to dirty-energy companies, 
we added up these individuals’ total reported federal campaign 
contributions, including both the direct donations to candidates that 
rank them as top direct donors, as well as any reported contributions 
to Super PACs and other election committees. All reported contribu -
tions were included to illustrate that many of these individuals can 
and will spend much more than the pre-McCutcheon limit on direct 
contributions ($123,200). Names with an * after the last name have 
attended the Koch Brothers’ gatherings or given to their political 
projects.

Page 130
The Kingpins of Carbon
Last Name First Name Company Occupation 2011- 2012 
Federal 
Contributions
Abramson Ronald Buchanan 
Ingersoll & 
RooneyAttorney $162,300
Alexander Anthony J/
BeckyFirst Energy CEO Anthony = 
$187,710; Becky 
= $110,500
Alvarez Cesar L Greenburg 
Traurig P .A.Co-Chairman $147,500.00
Ansary Hushang Hon Stewart and 
Stevenson LLCChairman $160,000
Anschutz* Philip/Nancy 
(wife)Anschutz 
CorporationInvestor Philip = 
$72,700; Nancy 
= $100,600
Bechtel* Steve/Riley 
(son)Bechtel Group Steve = $12,740; 
Riley(son) = 
$150,000
Blavatnik Leonard Access 
IndustriesChairman $163,800
Boehly Todd Lawrence Guggenheim 
PartnersPresident $216,198
Cagle Bill Milestone 
Energy, Inc.Engineer $130,800
Cassidy Gerald Cassidy & 
AssociatesLobbyist $214,300
Cazalot Clarence P Jr. Marathon Oil 
CorporationPresident & CEO $140,316
Chazen* Stephen Occidental 
PetroleumCEO $605,100
Childs* John J.W. Childs 
Associates, L.P .Chairman $4,212,700
Chouest Gary/Carolyn 
(wife)Edison Chouest 
OffshorePresident Gary = 
$233,100; 
Carolyn = 
$89,000

Page 131
Cozen Stephen A Cozen O’Connor Founder and 
Chairman$210,300
Craft* Joe (Joseph) Alliance 
Resource 
Partners LP 
(coal)President & CEO $2,601,700
Daschle Thomas A/Linda 
(wife and lobby -
ist)DLA Piper LLP Senior Policy 
AdvisorThomas = 
$125,667; Linda 
= $72,550
DiMenna Joseph/Diana 
(wife)Zweig DiMenna 
Assoc.Investor Joseph = 
$164,100; Diana 
= $164,100
Dow Robert Lord Abbett & 
Co.Executive $103,700
Duff David A Pine Branch 
Coal Sales Inc.Coal Sales $194,100
Eads John Sierra Resources President $132,500
Falbo Thomas Montgomery 
EquipmentOwner $168,300
Fehsenfeld Fred The Heritage 
GroupChairman $208,700
Ferrantino Michael The 
Environmental 
Quality Co.President & CEO $271,600
Flores James C Freeport-
McMorRan Inc.CEO, President, 
and Chairman of 
the Board$359,900
Forrest James C III Rosebud Mining President $213,049
Foster Paul L Western 
Refining 
CompanyPresident $452,525
Gilliam* Richard/Leslie Cumberland 
Resources Corp.President $1,202,800
Greehey William E Nustar Chairman $269,300The Kingpins of Carbon

Page 132
Griffin* Ken/Anne Citadel 
Investment 
GroupFounder, CEO $2,700,500
Hamilton* Fred/Jane BHP Petroleum, 
Hamilton Oil Co.Former 
President, CEO 
and Chair$209,100
Hamm Harold Continental 
ResourcesExecutive $1,136,800
Haslam James Pilot Oil Corp. CEO $380,000
Hatfield Bennett K Patriot Coal 
CorporationPresident/CEO $152,100
Henry James C Henry Resources Retired 
Petroleum 
Engineer$180,150
Hildebrand Jeffery(Jeffrey)/
Melinda (wife)Hilcorp Energy 
Co.President & CEO Jeffery = 
$697,800; 
Melinda = 
$84,200
Krumme George W Krumme Oil Gas & Oil 
Producer$203,450
Maloney Andrew (Drew) 
KOgilvy 
Government 
RelationsCEO $124,750
Mewbourne Curtis/Joanne 
(wife)Mewbourne Oil 
Co.Executive Curtis = 
$312,699; 
Joanne = 
$113,699
Miller Marshall B Jr. Jackson Walker 
LLPAttorney/
Partner$166,500
Moncrief W A Jr. Moncrief Oil 
InteriorsOwner $326,600
Morris Michael G American 
Electric PowerChairman $134,885
Murfin* David Murfin Drilling 
Co.President $130,100The Kingpins of Carbon

Page 133
Murray Robert Murray Energy 
Corp.Chairman, 
President and 
CEO$232,710
Nichols* Larry/Polly 
(wife)Devon Energy 
Co.Exec. Chairman Larry = 
$166,900; Polly 
= $64,900
Patman Carrin F Bracewell & 
Giuliani LLPAttorney $326,985
Petrie* Tom Petrie Partners Chairman $178,600
Phillips Jack R Phillips Machine President $211,816
Pike John Elliott 
AssociatesPortfolio 
Manager$198,950
Podesta Heather Heather Podesta 
& PartnersStrategist and 
Lobbyist$193,800
Podesta Anthony (Tony) Podesta Group President $165,500
Rankin Alfred M Jr. Nacco Industries 
Inc.Executive $127,700
Rastin* Tom Ariel Corp. Vice President $135,800
Rees-Jones Trevor Chief Oil & Gas Founder and 
Chairman$300,800
Robertson* Corbin Quintana 
Minerals CorpCo-Owner $209,850
Rooney Francis Rooney 
HoldingsCEO $160,800
Rowling Robert B TRT Holdings CEO $3,775,800
Russell Thomas/Pam 
(wife)Thomas Russell 
Co.Engineer Thomas = 
$231,310; Pam = 
$86,800
Ryan Robert P Elliott Mgmt. 
Corp.Portfolio 
Manager$176,100
Scheide Judith Scheide Fund Director $199,300
Schweitzer Edmund O Dr. Schweitzer 
Engineering 
LaboratoriesPresident $443,110
Sedwick Jay L Armstrong 
Utility CompanyChairman $140,775The Kingpins of Carbon

Page 134
Senor Daniel Senor Strategies Investment 
Professional$202,800
Simms Donald United Mining 
Equipment Inc.President & CEO $316,300
Soave Anthony L Soave 
EnterprisesChairman $247,200
Spears Williams S Dr. Energy 
EducationFounder $167,200
Stedman Stuart West Stedman West 
Interests, Inc.Owner $219,800
Stephens Warren A Arkansas 
FinanceChairman $692,400
Stephenson Thomas F Sequoia Capital Venture 
Capitalist$164,300
Stone Sheldon M/ 
Cynthia (wife)Oaktree Capital 
Management LPInvestment 
ManagerSheldon = 
$184,100; 
Cynthia = 
$126,600
Thomas Chester Green River 
Collieries, LLCOwner $153,500
Tillerson Rex W ExxonMobil 
CorpChairman and 
CEO$168,800
Toretti Christine J/
Maxwell (hus -
band)S.W. Jack 
Drilling Co.Owner Christine = 
$150,650; 
Maxwell = 
$126,600
Travis Timothy J Eaton Metal 
ProductsExecutive $205,650
Turner Robb Arclight Capital Co-Founder and 
Senior Partner$128,200
Unterman Thomas E Morrison & 
FoersterAttorney $203,624
Vague Richard W Energy Plus Executive $182,750
Van Scoyoc H Stewart Van Scoyoc 
AssociatesPresident $114,400
Vogelstein John Warburg Pincus Senior Advisor $277,900The Kingpins of Carbon

Page 135
Wallace David Wallace 
Electrical 
SystemsBusiness Owner $289,500
Ward* Lew/Myra (wife) Ward Petroleum 
Corp.Founder $195,400
Wareing Peter S Centerpoint 
Energy, Inc.Board of 
Directors$163,584
Watts Mikal C Watts Guerra 
Craft, LLPAttorney $473,630
Wepsic Eric D.E. Shaw & Co. Financial 
Executive$180,100
Wilson Donald DRW Trading 
GroupCEO $162,299
(Buckwald) 
WrightKaren Ariel Corp. CEO $319,950
Wynne Thomas M Alliance 
Resource 
Partners, LPSenior Vice 
President & 
COO$168,500The Kingpins of Carbon

Page 136
The Koch Brothers' Club of Plutocrats
The following is a list of wealthy individuals connected to the Koch 
brothers who also made large political contributions during in the 
2012 Federal election cycle.
The list was compiled by commingling a master list of individuals 
who have attended the Koch brothers’ secret retreats for donors to 
its political causes. Their political contributions were checked using 
the Sunlight Foundation’s Influence Explorer database, which uses 
data reported to the Federal Election Commission, refined and aug -
mented by the Center for Responsive Politics.
Sources for individuals connected to the Kochs include a list 
published by Mother Jones of individuals attending the Palm 
Springs retreat in early 2014 (link: http://www.motherjones.com/
politics/2014/02/koch-brothers-palm-springs-donor-list ), as well as 
a list published by Think Progress of individuals attending the June, 
2010 Aspen retreat (link: http://images2.americanprogressaction.
org/ThinkProgress/secretkochmeeting.pdf  ). In addition, the list 
includes individuals with a direct business relationship with Koch 
Industries, including company lobbyists.
Names with an one asterisk (*) attended at least one of the Koch 
club gatherings.
Names with two asterisks (**) were thanked by name by Charles 
Koch at the 2010 Aspen gathering, although they were not there.
Names with three asterisks (***) are not regular Koch club gather -
ing attendees, but are connected to the Kochs in other ways (e.g. 
business relationship).

Page 137
Last Name First Name Company Occupation 2011–2012 
Federal 
Contributions
Asness* Clifford/Laurel AQR Capital 
ManagementFounding 
PartnerCliff = $51,084 
+ Laurel = 
$143,800
Bachman* Nate/Lynda The Bachman 
GroupFinancial 
AdvisorNate = $194,750
Baxter* Frank/Kathy Frank = Jefferies 
and Company, 
Inc. Ambassador 
to Uruguay 
(2006-2009)Chairman 
EmeritusFrank = 
$254,300 + 
Katherine = 
$18,500.
Bechtel* Steve/Elizabeth Bechtel Group Co-Owner Stephen = 
$132,950 + 
Elizabeth = 
$194,750
Bryan* John/Martha Club for Growth 
Leadership 
Council (retired)Board Member John = 
$718,750 
+ Martha = 
$55,740
Busch* Tim The Busch Firm Lawyer $219,100
Cameron** Ron/Nina Mountaire 
CorporationCEO, Chairman Ronald = 
$155,300 + Nina 
= $113,300
Childs* John J.W. Childs and 
AssociatesChair & CEO $4,212,700
Craft* Joe/Mollie Alliance 
Resource 
Partners LPPresident, CEO Joe = 
$2,414,100 
+ Mollie = 
$169,600.
Crown* Eric Insight 
EnterprisesCo-Founder $144,697
Curry* Ravenel/Beth Eagle Capital 
Mgt. and “Playa 
Grande” resort.Money Manager Ravenel = 
$136,731 + Beth 
= $5,000The Koch Brothers’ Club of Plutocrats

Page 138
Dannenbaum* Jim/Shirley Dannenbaum 
Engineering 
Corp.Chair $528,978 
+ Shirley = 
$78,000
DeVos* Richard/Helen J Amway Executive Dick = $300,000 
+ Helen = 
$12,500
Diefenthal* Edward/Nancy Southern 
Holdings, Inc.CEO Edward = 
$164,600 
+ Nancy = 
$135,500
Eller* Karl/Stevie The Eller 
Company (ad -
vertising)Retired $145,500
Estrin* Melvyn/Suellen Human 
Service Group, 
University 
Research 
Co., LLC, 
Washington GasCEO, CEO, 
Director$150,300 com -
bined
Farmer* Dick/Joyce Cintas 
CorporationChairman Richard = 
$151,243; Joyce 
= $149,243
Farrell* Peter ResMed. Founder and 
CEO$134,400
Fote* Kaye Lynn/
CharlesFirst Data 
ResourcesFormer CEO Kaye Lynn 
= $ 145,000 
+ Charles = 
$127,000
Friess* Foster/Lynette Foster Friess Co. Foster = 
$2,646,172; 
Lynette = 
$41,433
Gilliam* Richard/Leslie Cumberland 
Resources Corp.President $1,176,200
Gore* Susan Wyoming 
Liberty GroupFounder $500,000The Koch Brothers’ Club of Plutocrats

Page 139
Griffin* Ken Citadel 
Investment 
GroupFounder, CEO $2,700,500
Griffin* Anne Aragon Global 
ManagementPortfolio 
Manager$205,600
Hamilton* Fred/Jane BHP Petroleum, 
Hamilton Oil 
Co.Former 
President, CEO, 
and ChairFred = 
$209,100; Jane 
= $8,650
Hamm** Harold Continental 
ResourcesCEO $985,000
Haworth* Dick/Ethelyn Haworth 
FurnitureChairman Richard = 
$205,350 + 
Ethelyn = 
$106,500
Hayden** Jerry/Marilyn Peacock 
EngineeringChairman Jerry = 
$164,000 
Marilyn = 
$55,600
Hubbard* Allan/Kathy E&A Industries 
Inc.CEO Allan = 
$178,250 + 
Kathy = $74,000
Humphreys* Ethelmae Tamko Building 
ProductsChairman $133,600
Humphreys* David/Debra Tamko Building 
ProductsCEO David = 
$606,200 
+ Debra = 
$93,700,
James** Virginia The Club for 
GrowthCo-Founder $1,450,500
Kayne* Richard Kayne Anderson 
Capital AdvisorsChair $188,500
Kendrick* Randy/Wife Datatel Founder Randy = 
$147,900 + Mrs. 
= $92,200
Kirby* Dan Kirby Financial President Dan = $150,200
Koch* Charles Koch Industries CEO $124,100The Koch Brothers’ Club of Plutocrats

Page 140
Koch* Chase/Annie Koch Fertilizer President $124,100
Koch* Julia Koch Industries Homemaker $150,735
Koch* Anna Koch Industries Homemaker $138,000
Kohlhepp* Bob/Linda, and 
familyCintas Corp. Vice Chair Robert = 
$153,700, Brent 
= $59,500;  
Linda = 
$85,300;  
Scott = 92,000.
Kozel* Frank Keystone 
Energy & GasCEO (retired) $172,748
Kuester* Dennis M&I Bank CEO (retired) $127,200
Lacy* Andre Lacy Diversified 
IndustriesChairman $139,500
Love* Tom Love’s Country 
StoresCEO $1,300,550
Luddy* Bob Captive Aire 
SystemsPresident $195,500
Moran** John Dyson-Kissner-
Moran CorpCEO (retired) $171,599
Murfin* David Murfin Drilling 
Co.President $135,275
Negley* Walter/Suzette WWN Corp./TX 
Screw Products, 
Inc.CEO Walter = 
$137,500
Nichols* Larry/Polly Devon Energy 
Co.Executive 
ChairmanDevon Energy = 
$785,200
Patterson* Jim/Dorothy Long John 
Silver’s Seafood 
Shoppes and 
Rally’s pioneerFounder James = 
$240,050 + 
Dorothy = 
$52,500
Petrie* Tom Petrie Partners Chairman $128,600
Pope* Art/Kathy Variety 
WholesalerSr. Executive Art = $181,280 
+ Katherine = 
$91,000
Rastin* Tom Thomas (Tom) = 
$138,300The Koch Brothers’ Club of Plutocrats

Page 141
Robertson* Corbin/Barbara Quintana 
Minerals CorpCEO Corbin = 
209,850 + 
Barbara = 
$163,350
Rogers* Gary/Kathleen Dreyer’s Grand 
Ice CreamFormer CEO Gary = $167,600 
+ Kathleen = 
$144,100
Rooney*** Francis Rooney 
HoldingsCEO Francis Rooney 
= $175,800,
Rowling* Robert TRT Holdings Co-Founder $3,775,800
Rufer* Chris Morningstar 
CompanyFounder $529,325
Schwab** Charles Charles Schwab 
CorporationFounder Charles - 
$458,199 
+ Helen = 
$176,666
Sharp* Rick/Sherry Circuit City Ex-CEO (de -
ceased)Rick = $223,500 
+ Sherry = 
$90,000
Singer** Paul Elliott 
ManagementFounder, CEO $3,055,862
Smith*** Menlof Sunmark Capital Chairman Menlo gave 
$178,976
Stai* Dian/Harlan Owen 
HealthcareChairman Dian = $ 
354,700
Templeton** John (“Jack”) 
Jr./JosephineJohn Templeton 
FoundationPresident $815,300
Ward* Lew/Myra Ward Petroleum 
Corp.Founder Lew = $225,270
Wright* Karen Ariel Corp. CEO $319,950
Young* Fred/Sandra Diversified 
Search, LLCManaging 
DirectorFred = $314,115The Koch Brothers’ Club of Plutocrats

Page 142
Appendix B: What Global Warming is Doing to Us
Here’s a partial catalog of effects we are already experiencing or we 
are on-track to endure within the lifetime of anyone younger than 40 
today:
Heat
The International Energy Agency (IEA) said in 2011, and said again 
in 2014, that we are on track to warm the planet by 11º Fahrenheit 
(6° Celsius) by the end of this century. In 2012, IEA’s lead economist, 
Dr. Fatih Birol, said, “even school children know this will have cata -
strophic implications for all of us.”1
British climate expert Kevin Anderson says even a rise of 7º F . (4° 
C.) would be “incompatible with an organised global community, 
is likely to be beyond ‘adaptation,’ is devastating to the majority of 
ecosystems and has a high probability of not being stable (i.e. 7º F . 
would be an interim temperature on the way to a much higher equi -
librium level).”2
1 Fatih Birol quoted in Michael Specter, “The Climate Fixers,” The New Yorker  
Vol. 88, No. 13 (May 14, 2012), pgs. 96-103 . http://goo.gl/P44jL  and see 
International Energy Agency, Energy Technology Perspectives 2014 Executive 
Summary ( Paris: International Energy Agency, 2014), pg. 2, which says 6° C. 
(11° F .) global average temperature rise is “where the world is now heading with 
potentially devastating results.” http://goo.gl/dlU46m
2 Kevin Anderson, “Climate Change: going beyond dangerous... brutal numbers 
and tenuous hope or cognitive dissonance?” PowerPoint presentation dated 
July, 2011, available on Vimeo: http://goo.gl/9qTJS . And: Kevin Anderson 
and Alice Bows, “Reframing the climate change challenge in light of post-2000 
emission trends,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A.  Vol. 366 
(2008), pgs. 3863-3882. http://goo.gl/0zVGE  And: Kevin Anderson and Alice 
Bows, “Beyond ‘dangerous’ climate change: emission scenarios for a new world,” 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A.  Vol. 369 (2011), pgs. 20-44. 
http://goo.gl/hXFCUX

Page 143
Extremes of Heat
When the average temperature goes up, extreme temperatures go 
up even more.3
Because the oceans are cool, when the global average rise is 7º F ., 
the average rise over land will be 10º or 11º F .4 At the same time, in 
cities – which tend to be hotter than the surrounding countryside 
– the heat index (temperature plus humidity) will rise an average of 
12º to 16º F .5
For these reasons, then, in a 7° F . world – after about year 2050 – 
“the coolest months are likely to be substantially warmer than the 
warmest months at the end of the twentieth century.”6
In New York City toward the end of this century, most sum -
mer days (70 days out of 90) will be hotter than 90° F . – and in 
Philadelphia nearly every summer day (80 days out of 90) will be 
hotter than 90° F .7 In Boston, the hottest-ever day hit 103° F ., so 
3 Christoph Schär and others, “The role of increasing temperature variability in 
European summer heat waves.” Nature  Vol. 427 (2004), pgs. 332-336. http://
goo.gl/SqE0aO  And: David N. Barnett and others, “Quantifying uncertainty in 
changes in extreme event frequency in response to doubled  CO2 using a large 
ensemble of GCM simulations.” Climate Dynamics  Vol. 26 (2006), pgs. 489-
511. http://goo.gl/W8byiJ  And: Noah S. Diffenbaugh and others, “Fine-scale 
processes regulate the response of extreme events to global climate change,” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  Vol. 102, No. 44 (2005), pgs. 
15774-15778. http://goo.gl/TVAWYS
4 World Bank, Turn Down the Heat; Why a 4° C [7° F.] Warmer World Must be 
Avoided  (Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 2012), pgs. 24, 38. http://goo.gl/
JohGMI
5 Robert Steadman, “A universal scale of apparent temperature,” Journal of 
Climate and Applied Meteorology.  Vol. 23 (1984), pgs. 1674-1687. http://goo.
gl/01GjIn  And: Peter C. Frumhoff and others, Confronting Climate Change in the 
U.S. Northeast  (Boston: Union of Concerned Scientists, 2007), pg. 94. http://
goo.gl/XR2yQv
6 World Bank, Turn Down the Heat; Why a 4° C [7° F.] Warmer World Must be 
Avoided  (Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 2012), pg. xv. http://goo.gl/
JohGMI
7 Peter C. Frumhoff and others, Confronting Climate Change in the U.S. Northeast  
(Boston: Union of Concerned Scientists, 2007), pgs. 93-94. http://goo.gl/
XR2yQv

Page 144
by century’s end Boston will reach 115° to 119° F . In NYC, as in 
Washington, D.C., the hottest day ever recorded was 106° F . – so by 
the end of this century the hottest day in those cities will be 118° to 
122° F .
Working outdoors will have to be curtailed by 20 percent or more 
because of the danger of heat stroke.8
The problem of extreme heat is not merely theoretical. In 2003 in 
Europe, a summer heat wave killed more than 70,000 people in 16 
countries.9 A second “mega-heat wave” devastated Europe in 2010. 
That year, in Russia alone, an estimated 55,000 people died, 25 per -
cent of crops failed, and wildfires burned 3900 square miles.10
The Ocean
The ocean ecosystem is under threat from acidification and from 
warming water (both caused by absorption of atmospheric CO2) with 
corals dying, combined with overfishing, and pollution by plastics 
(made from petroleum), pesticides (also from petroleum), plus 
many other petrochemical toxicants, plus fertilizers (mostly made 
from natural gas), plus sewage and silt. In 2014 the International 
Programme on the State of the Ocean (IPSO) said the “cumulative 
impact of this [CO2 absorption] with other ocean stressors is far 
graver than previous estimates. Decreasing oxygen levels in the 
ocean caused by climate change and nitrogen run-off, combined with 
other chemical pollution and rampant overfishing are undermin -
ing the ability of the ocean to withstand these so-called ‘carbon 
perturbations’, meaning its role as Earth’s ‘buffer’ is seriously 
compromised.”11
8 Dunne, John P . and others, “Reductions in labour capacity from heat stress 
under climate warming,” Nature Climate Change  Vol. 3 (2013), pgs. 563-566. 
http://goo.gl/hd3uii
9 Jean-Marie Robine and others, “Death toll exceeded 70,000 in Europe during 
the summer of 2003,” C.R. Biologies  Vol. 331 (2008), pgs. 171-178. http://goo.
gl/XyqlO
10 David Barriopedro and others, “The Hot Summer of 2010: Redrawing the 
Temperature Record Map of Europe.” Science  Vol. 332 (April 8, 2011), pgs. 220-
224. http://goo.gl/3aYcpc
11 International Programme on the State of the Ocean (IPSO), “Latest review of 

Page 145
Worldwide, corals are dying from acidification and from warming 
waters – twin results of CO2 emissions. The chemistry is simple: 
H2O + CO2 = carbonic acid. And the result is simply devastating: “If 
CO2 levels are allowed to reach 450 ppm [parts per million], [coral] 
reefs will be in rapid and terminal decline  world-wide from multiple 
synergies arising from mass bleaching, ocean acidification, and other 
environmental impacts.”12 And: “Coral reefs are the largest living 
structures on the planet. They are also among the most diverse eco -
systems, sheltering or nourishing up to 9 million species – a third of 
all known marine life forms – including 4000 kinds of fish.”13
The ocean produces more than half our oxygen, plus roughly 20 per -
cent of all the protein in the human diet. In addition, the ocean pres -
ently absorbs one-third of all the carbon dioxide that humans emit, 
removing it from the atmosphere. “Scientists believe that there is 
still time to prevent irreversible, catastrophic changes to our marine 
ecosystems but that this requires drastic action within a decade,” said 
the International Programme on the State of the Ocean in 2013.14
Sea Level Rise
On the U.S. East Coast, a 2- to 3-foot rise in sea level is expected by 
2050 and a 6-foot rise by 2100. Combined with an expected increase 
in frequency and severity of storms, the mid-Atlantic Coast will 
endure “[Hurricane] Sandy level storm surges every year by 2050.”15 
science reveals ocean in critical state from cumulative impacts,” on IPSO web 
site, accessed August 12, 2014. http://goo.gl/azomKk
12 J.E.N. Veron and others, “The coral crisis: The critical importance of <350 
ppm CO2,” Marine Pollution Bulletin  Vol. 58 (2009), pgs. 1428-1436, emphasis 
added. http://goo.gl/f3aUF3
13 Richard Stone, “A World Without Corals?” Science  Vol. 316 (2007), pgs. 678-
681. http://goo.gl/FQevK9
14 International Programme on the State of the Ocean (IPSO), “How bad is it? 
Diagnosing the state of the ocean’s health,” on IPSO web site, accessed August 
12, 2014. http://goo.gl/WeMZD
15 Joe Romm, “NOAA: Warming-Driven Sea Level Rise To Make Sandy-Type 
Storm Surges The Norm On East Coast,” Climate Progress,  Sept. 5, 2013. 
http://goo.gl/HBlFoO  Accessed Aug. 13, 2014. Romm was discussing Thomas 
C. Peterson and others, “Explaining Extreme Events of 2012 from a Climate 
Perspective.” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society  Vol. 94, No. 9 (2013), 

Page 146
Furthermore, rising seas force salt water beneath the land (“saltwater 
intrusion”), ruining freshwater aquifers, spoiling farmland, and cor -
roding the critical underground infrastructure of coastal cities and 
towns (electrical and communication systems; traffic controls; gas, 
water and sewer pipes; building foundations; and so on).16
Extinction of Species
If we allow global temperature to rise by 7° F ., approximately 40 
percent of all species on Earth will be at risk of extinction – many 
perhaps as early as 2050 – chiefly because their habitat has changed 
faster than they can adapt.17
Renowned Harvard biologist E.O. Wilson says we are entering a 
new era, which he has named the Eremozoic  – the age of loneliness.18
Loss of Ecosystem Services
In the 7° F . world after 2050, “The limits of human adaptation are 
likely to be exceeded in many parts of the world, while the limits for 
adaptation for natural systems would largely be exceeded throughout 
the world. Hence the ecosystem services upon which human liveli -
hoods depend would not be preserved.”19
pgs. S1-S74. http://goo.gl/9lJKaj
16 Peter Ward, The Flooded Earth; Our Future in a World without Ice Caps  (N.Y.: 
Basic Books, 2010). http://goo.gl/B6VFLG  And: Robert Daley, The World 
Beneath the City  (New York: Lippincott, 1959).
17 Anthony D. Barnovsky and others, “Has the earth’s sixth mass extinction 
already arrived?” Nature  Vol. 471 (2011), pgs. 51-57. http://goo.gl/Kq8uhx  And: 
Chris D. Thomas and others, “Extinction risk from climate change,” Nature  Vol. 
427 (2004), pgs. 145-148. http://goo.gl/uTHg7q  And: Ilya Maclean and Robert 
J. Wilson, “Recent ecological responses to climate change support predictions 
of high extinction risk,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  Vol. 108 
(2011), No. 30, pgs. 12337-12342. http://goo.gl/qnZnny  And: Rachel Warren, 
“The role of interactions in a world implementing adaptation and mitigation 
solutions to climate change,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society  A 
Vol. 369 (2011), pgs. 217-241; see especially pg. 221 and Table 3. http://goo.gl/
Pcwmkl
18 E.O. Wilson, “Only Humans Can Halt the Worst Wave of Extinction Since the 
Dinosaurs Died,” published online, undated [1991?], at http://goo.gl/aolF9t , 
also available here: http://goo.gl/HRJupg  See also E.O. Wilson, The Creation; An 
Appeal to Save Life on Earth  (N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 2006).
19 Rachel Warren, “The role of interactions in a world implementing adaptation 

Page 147
Ecosystem services that may be degraded include the production 
of oxygen in the oceans, pollination of food crops, water purifica -
tion provided by wetlands, the purification of air by forests, the 
protection of coastal areas from storm surges (by mangroves, coral 
reefs, coastal wetlands and salt marshes), the regulation of pests and 
disease, the recycling of waste nutrients, and the removal of carbon 
from the atmosphere.20
Drought and Food Prices
Heat drives moisture out of soil. In a 7° F . world, “sustained dust -
bowl conditions” will extend from Kansas to California. As a result, 
farm yields are expected to decrease for all major cereal crops in all 
major regions of production, which “could result in tens to hundreds 
of millions of additional people at risk from hunger,” says the 
authoritative British Met Office.21 Thus global warming is projected 
to raise food prices 40 percent by 2050 for rice, corn (maize), barley, 
rye, oats, wheat, and sugar, among other staples.22
Of course drought will not be limited to the U.S. Today, at any given 
time, 1 percent of the globe is experiencing drought. In a 7° F . world, 
the area experiencing drought at any given moment will rise to 30 
percent.23
and mitigation solutions to climate change,” Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society  A. Vol. 369 (2011), pg. 234. http://goo.gl/Pcwmkl
20 For more on ecosystem services, see Gretchen C. Daily, editor, Nature’s 
Services; Societal Dependence on Natural Ecosystems  (Washington, D.C.: Island 
Press, 1997).
21 Paul van der Linden, “Climate Impact” (London: Met Office Avoid Project). 
http://goo.gl/MgGpkp  Accessed Aug. 13, 2014.
22 Alvaro Calzadilla, “Climate change impacts on global agriculture.” Climatic 
Change  Vol. 120 (2013), pgs. 357-374. http://goo.gl/mRZaFS
23 Rachel Warren, “The role of interactions in a world implementing adaptation 
and mitigation solutions to climate change,” Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society  A. Vol. 369 (2011), pgs. 217-241; see especially Table 3 and pg. 
231. http://goo.gl/Pcwmkl

Page 148
Fresh Water
Fresh water is already scarce. People need usable water for drink -
ing, cooking, bathing, and sanitation but today “half the people in 
the world don’t have the kind of clean water and sanitation services 
that were available two thousand years ago to the citizens of ancient 
Rome. More than a billion people lack access to drinking water and at 
least that many have never seen a toilet. Half of the hospital beds on 
earth are occupied by people with an easily preventable waterborne 
disease.”24
A 2014 study of global water supply in relation to human popula -
tion concluded that 3 percent of humanity presently lives with 
“chronic water scarcity” (defined as 1000 cubic meters available per 
person per year for all uses, including agriculture). A temperature 
rise of 3.6° F . above today’s average would put 8 percent of global 
population into chronic water scarcity.25 One expected result is more 
conflict as people compete for a shrinking resource.26
But water quantity isn’t the whole story. More than 2/3rds of all 
fresh water is used for agriculture, and the water has to be there at 
the time when the crops need it. In all the world’s major mountain 
ranges – Rockies, Himalayas, Andes, Tian Shan, Kunlun and many 
more – global warming is reducing water storage. Glaciers are melt -
ing and disappearing, and there’s more winter rain, less winter snow 
(thus less snow-pack, so less spring-melt run-off). As the climate 
warms, spring run-off is occurring earlier, sometimes gone before it’s 
needed for summer crops.27 In sum, global warming promises to dis -
rupt ancient patterns of water-use with far-reaching consequences.
24 Michael Specter, “The Last Drop: Confronting the possibility of a global 
catastrophe,” The New Yorker  Vol. 82, No. 34 (Oct. 23, 2006), pgs. 60-71. http://
goo.gl/CZN4qh
25 Jacob Schewe and others, “Multimodal assessment of water scarcity under 
climate change,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  Vol. 111, No. 9 
(Mar. 4, 2014), pgs. 3245-3250. http://goo.gl/YdSVhB
26 Michael Specter, “The Last Drop: Confronting the possibility of a global 
catastrophe,” The New Yorker  Vol. 82, No. 34 (Oct. 23, 2006), pgs. 60-71. http://
goo.gl/CZN4qh
27 Tim P . Barnett and others, “Human-Induced Changes in the Hydrology of 
the Western United States,” Science  Vol. 319 (Feb. 22, 2008), pgs. 1080-1083. 
http://goo.gl/hyNDbd

Page 149
Forests
Forests are important to humans for many reasons. They create 
soil, offer shade, and provide large-scale cooling; they retain (and 
moderate the release of) water, thus holding soils in place and avert -
ing floods; they provide habitat for wildlife, emit oxygen, capture 
and store CO2, and on and on. But now rising temperatures, bigger 
wildfires, massive insect infestations, and longer periods of drought 
interspersed with more intense rainstorms (all from global warming) 
are threatening forests around the globe.
In its 2014 report, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) said, “Increased tree mortality and associated forest dieback 
is projected to occur in many regions [of the globe] over the 21st 
century, due to increased temperatures and drought.”28 Expressed 
that way, the effects of global warming on forests may not sound 
very serious.
However, there is a group of researchers at the Los Alamos National 
Laboratory (LANL) in New Mexico who put it more starkly: For more 
than a decade, biologist Nate McDowell and his colleagues at LANL, 
and at University of New Mexico have been conducting ecosystem-
scale experiments on forest dynamics in the Sevilleta National 
Wildlife Refuge (La Joya, N.M.). From their work, which is funded 
by the National Science Foundation, they conclude that the vast 
majority of the forests in the Southwestern U.S. will be gone by 2050 , 
just 35 years from now. Forests of the Pacific Northwest would follow 
closely behind, “dying off a few decades later,” they believe.29
28 IPCC, 2014: Summary for policymakers. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, 
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution 
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V .R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. 
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. 
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P .R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White 
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New 
York, NY, USA, pg. 15. http://goo.gl/cF6QPf
29 Staci Matlock, “Los Alamos researcher: Dire forecast for state’s forests,” 
The New Mexican  [Santa Fe, N.M.], Oct. 8, 2013. http://goo.gl/0WO4ow  And 
see: Nate McDowell and others, “Mechanisms of plant survival and mortality 
during drought: why do some plants survive while others succumb to drought?” 
New Phytologist  Vol. 178 (2008), pgs. 719-739 http://goo.gl/ViXX4m ; and: 

Page 150
In a recent video produced by the Los Alamos National Laboratory 
Communications Office, Nate McDowell says bluntly,
“From experiments like this [at Sevilleta], from modeling analyses, 
from observations around the world, all the data sets point in one 
direction: globally, in Europe, Asia, North America, Canada, all of the 
models are predicting that by 2100 most forests should be heavily, 
heavily disturbed, if not gone.”30
Meanwhile, human population will increase 40 percent
All the previously-described stresses, dislocations and traumas 
related to global warming will occur simultaneously during a time 
when the global human population will be rising 40 percent by year 
2050, from today’s 7 billion to 9.6 billion. Of course 40 percent more 
people require 40 percent more food, fiber, water, energy, metals and 
other minerals – 40 percent more of everything  just 35 years from 
now.31 (During the same period, U.S. population is expected to rise 
40 to 50 percent.32)
Peter J. Franks and others, “Sensitivity of plants to changing atmospheric CO2 
concentration: from the geological past to the next century,” New Phytologist  
Vol. 197 (2013), pgs. 1077-1094. http://goo.gl/iIkFqR  And: David D. Breshears 
and others, “Tree die-off in response to global change-type drought: mortality 
insights from a decade of plant water potential measurements,” Frontiers in 
Ecology and the Environment  Vol. 7, No. 4 (2009), pgs. 185-189 http://goo.gl/
xjL78m ; and David D. Breshears and others, “Regional vegetation die-off in 
response to global-change-type drought,” Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences  Vol. 102, No. 42 (Oct. 18, 2005), pgs. 15144-15148. http://goo.gl/
QdHc0g
30 Nate McDowell appearing in untitled, undated [2013?] video produced 
by Kevin Roark, Los Alamos National Laboratory Communications Office, 
available on Youtube: http://youtu.be/t8s8XGC2Bto
31 United Nations, World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision  (New York: 
United Nations, 2013). http://goo.gl/UHVnNa
32 Jennifer M. Ortman and Christine E. Guarini. Undated [2013?] “United 
States Population projections: 2000 to 2050.” Washington: U.S. Bureau of the 
Census. http://goo.gl/VWCRTh

Page 151
Violence
The word “rivals” comes to us from a Latin word meaning “one 
taking from the same stream as another.”33 Wars over water, food, 
goods, turf – these have been constants in human history ever since 
agriculture was invented 11,000 years ago.34 Global warming will 
only intensify the pattern.
The most recent report from the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) acknowledges that global warming promotes 
violence: “Climate change can indirectly increase risks of violent 
conflicts in the form of civil war and inter-group violence by amplify -
ing well-documented drivers of these conflicts such as poverty and 
economic shocks. Multiple lines of evidence relate climate variability 
to these forms of conflict.”35
It also works the other way around: violence leads to more harm 
from global warming: “Violent conflict increases vulnerability to climate 
change. Large-scale violent conflict harms assets that facilitate adapta -
tion, including infrastructure, institutions, natural resources, social 
capital, and livelihood opportunities,” the IPCC report says.36
33 Michael Specter, “The Last Drop: Confronting the possibility of a global 
catastrophe,” The New Yorker  Vol. 82, No. 34 (Oct. 23, 2006), pgs. 60-71. http://
goo.gl/CZN4qh
34 Jared Diamond, The World Until Yesterday  (N.Y.: Viking, 2012).
35 IPCC, 2014: Summary for policymakers. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, 
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution 
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V .R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. 
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. 
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P .R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White 
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New 
York, NY, USA, pg. 20. http://goo.gl/cF6QPf  One recent report has examined 
the role of drought from 2006 to 2010 as one of several contributors to Syria’s 
recent conflict in which more than 100,000 people have been killed. See 
Francesca de Châtel, “The Role of Drought and Climate Change in the Syrian 
Uprising: Untangling the Triggers of the Revolution,” Middle Eastern Studies  
Vol. 50, No. 4 (2014), pgs. 521-535. http://goo.gl/Df9W9m
36 IPCC, 2014: Summary for policymakers. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, 
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution 
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V .R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. 

Page 152
Here we can see a positive feedback loop: global warming begets 
violence, which make it harder to avoid further global warming and 
further harm from global warming, which then begets more violence.
What’s at Stake is Civilization Itself
The cumulative impact of these global-warming trends – if govern -
ments allow them to materialize – may well ruin the planet as a place 
suitable for human civilization. As a group of British climate re -
searchers said not long ago, “While one or a few impacts considered 
in isolation may be manageable, a ‘perfect storm’ of multiple severe 
impacts may be catastrophic.”37
Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. 
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P .R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White 
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New 
York, NY, USA, pg.8. http://goo.gl/cF6QPf
37 Mark New, Diana Liverman, and Kevin Anderson, “Mind the gap,” Nature 
Reports Climate Change  Vol. 3 (2009), pgs. 143.144. http://goo.gl/Sb4IUt  
And see: Rachel Warren, “The role of interactions in a world implementing 
adaptation and mitigation solutions to climate change,” Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society  A. Vol. 369 (2011), pgs. 217-241. http://goo.gl/
Pcwmkl