# Archivo original: koch-industries-secretly-fund.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:39:47 -03 2025

greenpeace.org/kochindustries

page 2Greenpeace is an independent campaigning 
organization that acts to expose global environmental problems and achieve solutions that are essential to a green and peaceful future.
Published March 2010 by
Greenpeace USA702 H Street NW Suite 300Washington, DC 20001Tel/ 202.462.1177Fax/ 202.462.4507
Printed on 100% PCW recycled paper
book design by andrew fournier


page 3Executive Summary  pg. 6–8
Case Studies:   
How does Koch Industries Influence the Climate Debate? pg. 9–13
 1. The Koch-funded “ClimateGate” Echo Chamber
 2. Polar Bear Junk Science 3. The “Spanish Study” on Green Jobs 4. The “Danish Study” on Wind Power 5. Koch Organizations Instrumental in Dissemination  
of ACCF/NAM Claims
What is Koch Industries?   pg. 14–16
 Company History and Background
Record of Environmental Crimes and Violations
The Koch Brothers    pg. 17–18
Koch Climate Opposition Funding    pg. 19–20
 The Koch Web
 Sources of Data for Koch Foundation Grants
 The Foundations
 Claude R. Lambe Foundation Charles G. Koch Foundation David H. Koch Foundation
Koch Foundations and Climate Denial   pg. 21–28  
Lobbying and Political Spending    pg. 29–32
 Federal Direct Lobbying Koch PAC Family and Individual Political Contributions
Key Individuals in the Koch Web    pg. 33
Sources   pg. 34–43
EndnotesTable of Contents:
© illustration by Andrew Fournier/Greenpeace

Mercatus Center
Americans for Prosperity
Institute for Humane Studies
Heritage Foundation
Cato Institute 
Manhattan Institute for Policy Research 
Washington Legal Foundation
Federalist Society for Law and Public 
Policy Studies 
Foundation for Research on Economics 
and the Environment 
Pacific Research Institute for Public 
Policy 
Tax Foundation 
Independent Women’s Forum 
Texas Pubic Policy Foundation 
American Council for Capital Formation 
George C. Marshall Institute 
Reason Foundation Fraser Institute
Institute for Energy Research 
Frontiers of Freedom 
National Center for Policy Analysis 
American Council on Science and Health 
Atlas Economic Research Foundation 
Capital Research Center 
American Enterprise Institute
Independence Institute 
American Legislative Exchange Council 
Goldwater Institute 
Property and Environment Research Center 
Mackinac Center for Public Policy 
Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and 
Global Change
Americans for Tax Reform 
State Policy Network 
Media Research Center 
John Locke Foundation 
National Taxpayers Union Foundation

Fraser Institute
Institute for Energy Research 
American Council on Science and Health 
State Policy Network 

page 6Most Americans have never heard of Koch Industries, one of 
the largest private corporations in the country, because it has no Koch-branded consumer products, sells no shares on the stock market and has few of the disclosure requirements of a public company. Although Koch intentionally stays out of the public eye, it is now playing a quiet but dominant role in a high-profile national policy debate on global warming. Koch Industries has become a financial kingpin of climate science denial and clean energy opposition. This private, out-of-sight corporation is now a partner to ExxonMobil, the American Petroleum Institute and other donors that support organiza -
tions and front-groups opposing progressive clean energy and climate policy. In fact, Koch has out-spent ExxonMobil in funding these groups in recent years. From 2005 to 2008, ExxonMobil spent $8.9 million while the Koch Industries-controlled foundations contributed $24.9 million in funding to organizations of the ‘climate denial machine’. 
The company’s tight knit network of lobbyists, former 
executives and organizations has created a forceful stream of misinformation that Koch-funded entities produce and disseminate. This campaign propaganda is then replicated, repackaged and echoed many times throughout the Koch-funded web of political front groups and think tanks. On repeated occasions documented below, organizations funded by Koch foundations have led the assault on climate science and scientists, “green jobs,” renewable energy and climate policy progress. 
This report focuses on activities by Koch Industries and its 
affiliates, as well as the family—and company—controlled foundations which fund organizations that spread inaccurate and misleading information about climate science and clean energy policies. Included is research on the company and the Koch brothers, two of the top ten richest people in the United States. The Koch brothers own the corporation and control its political spending. Also included are newly compiled funding connections from Koch foundations to a vast array of conservative and libertarian organizations and front groups. The report documents the Koch-funded funded groups’ actions and the Koch legacy of climate denial and obstruction of environmental policy. Case studies contained in this report include:Executive Summary
• ClimateGate Echo Chamber—At least twenty Koch-funded organizations have repeatedly rebroadcast, referenced and appeared as media spokespeople in the story, dubbed “Cli -
mateGate,” of supposed malfeasance by climate scientists gleaned from a cache of stolen emails from the University of East Anglia in November 2009. These organizations claim the emails prove a “conspiracy” of scientists and casts doubt on the scientific consensus regarding climate change.
• Polar Bear Junk Science—In a 2007 published ‘junk 
science’ article on polar bears and Arctic climate impacts, the author acknowledged receiving research funding from ExxonMobil, American Petroleum Institute and the Charles G. Koch foundation. The paper, which appeared in the journal Ecological Complexity, was published as a “Viewpoint” piece, rather than new scientific research. It was not peer-


page 7Executive Summary
reviewed and was criticized by leading polar bear and Arctic 
ice scientists for containing “no new research” and drawing unfounded conclusions. Regardless, multiple Koch and Exxon-funded groups rebroadcast the article’s conclusions that polar bears were not endangered by climate change, through their websites and other media outlets. Additional Koch-funded groups and industry groups threatened to sue the Federal government for listing the polar bear.
For years, both openly and behind the scenes, ExxonMobil 
dominated the voice of climate science denial in the national global warming dialogue. However, after a decade of reputation-damaging public disclosures, as well as pressure from scientific organizations, shareholders and senators, ExxonMobil implemented a new public relations strategy under a new CEO, and has begun to moderate its public statements on climate change. ExxonMobil’s website de -
clares:
1 “We have discontinued contributions to several public 
policy research groups whose position on climate change diverted attention from the important discussion on how the world will secure the energy required for economic growth in an environmentally responsible manner.” In spite of publishing this statement and reducing funding to a number of prominent climate denial organizations over the past few years, ExxonMobil continues to support dozens of organizations who are part of the climate denial movement with millions of dollars in annual funding.
2 ExxonMobil has 
responded to public scrutiny by slightly reducing their support of climate denial, and Koch Industries is outpacing ExxonMobil’s funding activities while drawing very little public attention. As ExxonMobil’s silent partner in funding the climate-denial machine, Koch Industries often uses similar and sometimes more aggressive tactics.
Kansas-based Koch Industries is a conglomerate dominated 
by petroleum and chemical interests with approximately $100 billion in annual sales, operations in nearly 60 countries and 70,000 employees. Most of Koch’s operations are invisible to the public, with the exception of a handful of retail brands such as Brawny® paper towels and Dixie® cups, produced by its subsidiary Georgia-Pacific Corporation. Koch Industries has been ranked as the first- or second-largest privately-held company in the United States in recent years, currently ranked second behind Cargill corporation. 
Two brothers, Charles and David Koch, each own 42 percent 
of the company. Part of Koch Industries’ influence is chan -
neled through three foundations, also controlled by the two brothers. This report documents roughly 40 climate denial and opposition organizations receiving Koch foundation grants in recent years, including:
• More than $5 million to Americans for Prosperity Founda -
tion (AFP) for its nationwide “Hot Air Tour”
3 campaign to 
spreading misinformation about climate science and oppos -
ing clean energy and climate legislation.• More than $1 million to the Heritage Foundation, a mainstay 
of misinformation on climate and environmental policy issues. 
• Over $1 million to the Cato Institute, which disputes the 
scientific evidence behind global warming, questions the rationale for taking climate action, and has been heavily involved in spinning the recent ClimateGate story. 
• $800,000 to the Manhattan Institute, which has hosted 
Bjorn Lomborg twice in the last two years. Lomborg is a prominent media spokesperson who challenges and attacks policy measures to address climate change.
© Nick Cobbing/Greenpeace

SINCE THE BEGINNING 
OF THE 2006 ELECTION 
CYCLE, KOCH’S PAC 
SPENT MORE ON 
CONTRIBUTIONS TO 
FEDERAL CANDIDATES 
THAN ANY OTHER OIL -  
 AND-GAS SECTOR PAC.
page 8• $365,000 to Foundation for Research on Economics and the Environment 
(FREE) which advocates against taking action on climate change because warming is “inevitable” and expensive to address. 
• $360,000 to Pacific Research Institute for Public Policy (PRIPP) which 
supported and funded An Inconvenient Truth…or Convenient Fiction,
4 a film 
attacking the science of global warming and intended as a rebuttal to former Vice-President Al Gore’s documentary. PRIPP also threatened to sue the US Government for listing the polar bear as an endangered species. 
• $325,000 to the Tax Foundation, which issued a misleading study on the 
costs of proposed climate legislation. 
This is only part of the picture, because the full scope of direct contributions to 
organizations is not disclosed by individual Koch family members, executives, or from the company itself. 
Contributions through Koch’s political action committee (PAC) are a matter 
of public record. Since the beginning of the 2006 election cycle, Koch’s PAC spent more on contributions to federal candidates
5 than any other oil-and-gas 
sector PAC. For that period, Koch Industries and its executives spent $2.51 million compared to next three biggest contributors: Exxon ($1.71 million), Valero ($1.68 million), and Chevron ($1.22 million).
Koch executives and their families wield political 
influence in other ways too, including direct federal lobbying and campaign contributions. Over the last few years, Koch Industries, Koch employees, and Koch family members:
• Spent $37.9 million from 2006 to 2009 for direct 
lobbying on oil and energy issues, outspent only by ExxonMobil ($87.8 million) and Chevron Corporation ($50 million).
• Spent $5.74 million in PAC money for candidates, 
committees, and campaign expenditures since the 2006 election cycle.
• Contributed at least $270,800 to federal political 
party committees since the 2006 election cycle.
The combination of foundation-funded front-groups, 
big lobbying budgets, PAC donations, and direct campaign contributions makes Koch Industries and the Koch brothers among the most formidable obstacles to advancing clean energy and climate policy in the US. Executive Summary
©Alexey Drovzhinin/Greenpeace

page 9Case Studies: 
How does Koch Industries Influence the Climate Policy Debate? 
Case Study 1: The Koch-funded “ClimateGate” Echo Chamber
In November 2009, anonymous hackers illegally obtained and disseminated thousands of personal 
emails from climate scientists housed on the server of the University of East Anglia. The emails spanned 13 years of correspondence and a handful of selected emails were taken out of context by a number of climate-denier organizations. These organizations, many funded by Koch, claim the emails prove a “conspiracy” of scientists and cast doubt on the scientific consensus on human-caused climate change. 
This incident, dubbed “ClimateGate” by climate-denier groups, has been distorted and repeated 
many times by conservative media and blogs since late November 2009. Twenty organizations, roughly half of the Koch-funded groups profiled in this report, have contributed to the “ClimateGate” echo chamber. Among the most vocal groups are organizations that received over $1,000,000 from Koch foundations since 2005, including Americans for Prosperity, the Heritage Foundation, and the Cato Institute.
1) Americans For Prosperity (received over $5 million from Koch since 2005) hosted a live we -
bcast from Copenhagen
6 on Dec 9th as part of their “Hot Air Tour,” using the “ClimateGate” 
emails as a reason to prevent passage of any progressive global warming policy. During the webcast, Steve Lonegan, AFP’s New Jersey Director, said “ClimateGate” could have uncovered “the biggest hoax our world has ever seen” and vowed not to allow any climate bill to pass the US Senate. Several members of the Copenhagen youth delegation crashed the AFP event and were angrily called “Hitler Youth” by AFP guest speaker and well known climate denier Lord Christopher Monckton. In addition to the Copenhagen webcast, AFP mentions “ClimateGate” in many
7 blog8 posts, including in their protest of the Environmental 
Protection Agency CO2 regulations, known as the endangerment finding.9 
2) The Heritage Foundation (received over $1 million from Koch since 2005) has posted several articles on its website regarding “ClimateGate.” The blogs run the gamut of possible climate-denier angles on the incident, ranging from conspiracy accusations
10, to a history of 
imagined climate scandals11, to effects on world politics12, to supposed negative economic 
consequences from climate legislation.13 
3) The Cato Institute (received over $1 million in grants from Koch since 2005) is the front-group for climate-denier Patrick Michaels
14, who has been a vocal spokesperson regarding 
“ClimateGate”. Within two weeks following the email breach at East Anglia University, Patrick Michaels had appeared in over twenty media interviews
15 on shows including CNN’s 
Anderson Cooper 360, NBC’s Nightly News, FOX’s Fox & Friends, C-SPAN’s Washington Journal, and BBC’s Have Your Say. Michaels, taking one line of an illegally-obtained email out of context, has claimed the scientists have committed a “capital crime”
16 and their actions are 
“akin to filtering what goes in the bible.”17 

page 10In addition to AFP, the Heritage Foundation, and the Cato Institute, about half of the 
Koch-funded climate denial groups detailed in this report contributed to the “ClimateGate” misinformation echo chamber, including: 
American Enterprise Institute
18
Americans for Tax Reform19 
Capital Research Center20 
Fraser Institute21 
George C Marshall Institute22 
Goldwater Institute23 Case Studies: 
How does Koch Industries Influence the Climate Policy Debate? 
Independent Women’s Forum24 
John Locke Foundation25 
Mackinac Center26 
Media Research Center27 
Pacific Research Institute for  
Public Policy28 Reason Foundation29 
State Policy Network30 
Texas Public Policy Foundation31 
Competitive Enterprise Institute32 
FreedomWorks33 
Heartland Institute34 
Case Study 2: Polar Bear Junk Science
In 2007, several prominent climate denial scientists published 
a non-peer reviewed article,35 (Dyck, Soon et al, 2007 “Polar 
bears of western Hudson Bay and climate change: Are 
warming spring air temperatures the ‘‘ultimate’’ survival 
control factor?”) concluding that polar bears are not being 
threatened by anthropogenic global warming. One of the 
paper’s authors, Dr. Willie Soon, disclosed in the acknowl -
edgements section that he had received direct corporate 
funding for the work, stating “W. Soon’s effort for the 
completion of this paper was partially supported by grants 
from the Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation, American 
Petroleum Institute, and Exxon-Mobil Corporation.” (Exxon 
grants to Soon’s organization are detailed below. The exact 
amount received from the Koch foundation was not found 
on its 990 forms. The American Petroleum Institute does 
not disclose the multiple grants it has made to such climate 
denial organizations over the years.) 
The paper, which did not include any new scientific research, 
but drew from other published work, appeared in the journal 
Ecological Complexity as a “Viewpoint” piece. This article 
declared Arctic sea ice decline was less severe than recent 
well founded conclusions in peer-reviewed literature.36 The 
authors question the climate science of Arctic warming and 
the scientific modeling that indicates climate change as a 
threat to polar bear populations. Leading polar bear and 
Arctic ice scientists criticized the article for containing “no 
new research” and drawing erroneous conclusions from 
existing research. Two polar bear experts, Dr. Ian Stirling37 
and Dr. Andrew Derocher38, published a response to the 
paper, stating that the 2007 article did not adequately 
support the claim that non-climate factors were causing the 
polar bear population decline. Stirling and Deroucher wrote, “[The article’s authors] suggest that factors other than climate 
warming are responsible for a decline in the polar bear 
population of Western Hudson Bay… In our examination 
of their alternative explanations, and the data available to 
evaluate each, we found little support for any.”39 
Oil interests and their allies likely realize that polar bear 
protections might hinder oil exploration in the Arctic. In 
addition, because polar bear decline is an iconic symbol of 
the climate crisis, undermining the scientific proof of polar 
bears in peril would potentially delay overall climate policy measures that will reduce oil consumption.
The co-authors of the paper include long time climate 
deniers: Sallie Baliunas,
40 David Legates41 and Tim Ball42.  
Willie Soon and Sallie Baliunas have a documented history  
of receiving money from oil interests. ExxonMobil Foundation 
tax records and company documents confirm a series 
of grants to the Center for Astrophysics, which employs 
both Soon and Baliunas. In 2008, ExxonMobil contributed 
$ 7 6 ,1 0 643 to Soon and Baliunas’ institute, the Smithsonian 
Astrophysics Observatory, with funding totalling over 
$340,000 in four grants since 2005. 
Soon and Baliunas were the authors of another controversial 
climate “junk science” report in 2003, funded by the 
American Petroleum Institute. The paper, “Lessons & Limits 
of Climate History: Was the 20th Century Climate Unusual?”, 
published by another industry-funded think tank, the George 
Marshall Institute,44 attacked the research of climate scientist 
Michael Mann, who has also been a prominent target in the 
“Climategate” controversy detailed above. Soon, Baliunas and 
Legates teamed up on a version of the same paper, pub -
lished in a small journal Climate Research, which generated 

page 11Case Studies: 
How does Koch Industries Influence the Climate Policy Debate? 
such an uproar that the Editor in Chief and several others 
resigned in protest.45 46 Both Soon and Baliunas have been 
associated as spokespeople, advisors and board members 
of multiple Koch-funded climate denial groups over the past 
decade. 
The 2007 polar bear junk science paper prompted a letter to 
ExxonMobil from North Carolina Representative Brad Miller,47 
Chair of the US House Subcommittee on Investigations 
and Oversight, which raised a key question about Exxon’s 
funding, which could well have been asked of Koch and API:
“To people outside the scientific community, one PhD may 
seem like another. Certainly Exxon knows better, however. 
Yet according to Dr Soon, an astrophysicist by profession, 
ExxonMobil funded the development of his “opinions” on 
global warming and its potential impact on polar bear 
populations…The Congress and the Public have a right to 
know why ExxonMobil is funding a scientist whose writing 
is outside his area of expertise to create the impression that 
expert scientists have conducted vigorous, peer reviewed 
work that says the problems with polar bears [and climate 
change] are unproven or unserious.”48 
Exxon responded,49 denying responsibility for Soon’s re -
search and claiming that the paper had undergone a “lengthy 
peer review process.”
The Koch-funded climate denial groups kicked into gear 
before the paper was published. Regardless of the non-peer reviewed status of the Ecological Complexity paper, it gave 
the appearance of a peer reviewed paper. Multiple Koch and 
Exxon-funded groups rebroadcast the story through their 
websites and other media outlets, emphasizing the paper 
and its ‘findings’ that polar bears are not endangered by 
climate change. When the Bush Administration was forced 
to consider listing the polar bear under the Endangered 
Species Act (by a lawsuit brought by Greenpeace and other 
environmental groups), Sarah Palin and her officers in the 
Alaskan government referenced the 2007 Dyck, Soon et al. 
polar bear paper in its formal protest of government action 
to protect the polar bear, even before the paper was even 
published.
50 
Additional Koch-funded groups and industry groups threat -
ened to sue the Federal government for listing the polar bear 
under the Endangered Species Act, including the American 
Enterprise Institute51, the Heritage Foundation52, and National 
Association of Manufacturers.53 
© Nick Cobbing/Greenpeace ©Robert Visser/Greenpeace

page 12Case Study 3: The “Spanish Study” on Green Jobs
Since the creation of new clean energy jobs is a critical 
benefit of climate and energy policy, opponents have 
focused on discrediting ‘green’ jobs. A report appeared on 
this subject in spring of 2009 called the “Study of the effects 
on employment of public aid to renewable energy sources”54 
by Gabriel Calzada Alvarez, an economics professor at King 
Juan Carlos University in Madrid. According to Dr. Alvarez’s 
study, Spain’s policy commitments to renewable energy 
development had actually cost Spain jobs—2.2 jobs lost for 
each clean energy job created. 
The study became a favorite talking point for opponents of 
clean energy, who seized on the study when it was released 
in March—coinciding with the House Energy and Commerce 
Committee discussions on the American Clean Energy 
and Security Act. The study was trumpeted by opposition 
groups, covered by reporters, and repeated in congressional 
testimony by US Representatives opposed to clean energy 
policy and climate mitigation measures.
Despite the fact that the conclusions and methodology 
of the study by Alvarez have been repeatedly proven 
unsupportable55 (most recently by the US’s own National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory56, in addition to ministers with 
the Spanish government57 and independent experts58 ), the 
‘study’ continues to be trumpeted. The study recently made 
its way into fact sheets circulated by clean energy opposition 
group Americans for Prosperity,59 which is founded and 
chaired by David Koch.
Where did the “Spanish study” come from, and who 
promoted it? Several organizations and individuals—each 
supported through the Koch web—have played key roles in 
supporting, disseminating and promoting the research.
• March 2009: The Institute for Energy Research (IER) 
supported60 and disseminated61 the “Spanish study,” released 
in March of 2009.
• April 2009: Patrick Michaels was an early commenter on 
the study62, saying in April 2009 that he wasn’t surprised by 
the findings and that the U.S. should expect similar results 
from stimulus funding on renewable energy.
• May 2009: The Heritage Foundation promoted the report 
in a variety of ways63, including a May 2009 Washington, DC 
briefing. • July 2009: Americans for Prosperity’s Colorado64 chapter 
promoted the study through its blog. 
• July 2009: Americans for Prosperity’s policy director Phil 
Kerpen repeated the study’s findings in July 2009 testimony65 
to the Western Caucuses Bicameral Hearing on Cap & Trade.
• August 2009: American Energy Alliance (AEA), IER’s 
advocacy arm, incorporated the report’s findings into fact 
sheets that it disseminated66 during its “American Energy 
Express” bus tour in August 2009.
• September 2009: Americans for Prosperity’s Texas67 chapter 
posted comments repeating the study’s faulty conclusions. 
• September 2009: Americans for Prosperity’s policy director 
Phil Kerpen repeated the study’s findings in online68 comments. 
Case Study 4: The “Danish Study” on Wind Power
A similar play was conducted a few months later with another 
study linked to the Koch web. The “Danish study,”69 prepared 
by Danish think-tank CEPOS, provides clean energy op -
ponents a means of raising questions about the viability 
of renewable energy and a means of directly criticizing 
President Obama for his statement that Denmark produces 
almost 20% of its electricity through wind power. 
However, the study contains factual errors,71 its conclusions 
have been misrepresented72 and to boot, its findings are 
not particularly relevant to the US.73 The study includes 
errors such as a miscalculation of the electricity production 
from wind in Denmark (they claim 5% of total production in 
Denmark though the real percentage is 20%). In addition, the 
study does not take into account the differences between 
the European and North American electric grids. Case Studies: 
How does Koch Industries Influence the Climate Policy Debate? 
© Greenpeace/ E M

page 13Nevertheless, like the study from Spain, the CEPOS study is 
being promoted and disseminated through many of the same 
organizations in Koch’s web. The “Danish Study” appears to 
follow a similar pattern.
• CEPOS was recently awarded74 a $100,000 grant from 
the Atlas Economic Research Foundation, which has given 
CEPOS “several awards.”75 The Charles G. Koch Foundation 
and the Claude R. Lambe Foundation both support the Atlas 
Economic Research Foundation.
• The Institute for Energy Research is promoting the study 
among its members and Hill staff, as well as online.76 IER 
organized a three-day tour in September 2009 to bring the 
report’s co-author Hugh Sharman and CEPOS chief execu -
tive Martin Agerup to Washington D.C. to explain the study to 
a “wider American audience.” The organization also created 
fact sheets77 that promote the study’s findings and claim 
President Obama is misusing the Danish example.
• Heritage Foundation promoted the study78 on their website.Case Study 5: Koch Organizations Instrumental in 
Dissemination of ACCF/NAM Claims
The Koch web is also playing a role in promoting other 
studies that exaggerate the costs of climate policy. In 2008, 
the Koch-web-funded American Council on Capital Forma -
tion’s (ACCF) teamed up with the National Association of 
Manufacturers (NAM) to sponsor and disseminate a study 
of the economic impact of the Lieberman-Warner Climate 
Security Act. Every step of the way, Koch-funded anti-clean 
energy groups played a key role in moving the NAM/ACCF 
study in the media and at the grassroots level. 
• ACCF funded and co-released the study with NAM. 
• ACCF disseminated the results in presentations at over a 
dozen “Climate Dialogues”79 organized by the U.S. Cham -
ber’s Alliance for Energy and Economic Growth (AEEG).80 
• The (AEEG) “climate dialogues” involved other organizations 
funded through the Koch web, including: 
» The Heritage Foundation which provided speakers  
for some events81 
» Frontiers of Freedom staff and scholars participated82  
in some of the dialogues. Case Studies: 
How does Koch Industries Influence the Climate Policy Debate? 
© illustration by Andrew Fournier/Greenpeace

page 14What is Koch Industries? 
Company History and Background
Koch Industries84 is the second-largest85 privately-held company in the United 
States, a conglomerate of more than twenty companies with $100 billion in annual 
sales, operations in nearly 60 countries86 and 70,000 employees.87 Koch’s industry 
areas span petroleum refining, fuel pipelines, coal supply and trading, oil and gas exploration, chemicals and polymers, fertilizer production, ranching and forestry products.
Koch operates crude oil gathering systems and pipelines across North America. 
Its Flint Hills Resources subsidiary owns refineries in Alaska, Minnesota, and Texas that process more than 800,000 barrels of crude oil daily. The company owns a 3% stake in the Trans Alaska Pipeline System, 4,000 miles of oil and products pipelines in the US, and an 80,000 barrels-per day refinery in Rotterdam.
88 In 
addition, Koch Industries has held multiple leases on the polluting tar sands of Alberta, Canada since the 1990s and the Koch Pipeline Company operates the pipelines that carry tar sands crude from Canada into Minnesota and Wisconsin where Koch’s Flint Hill Resources owns oil refineries.
89
The vast majority of Koch Industries assets are controlled by Charles G. and David H. Koch, two of four sons of the company’s founder, who each own 42% of the company stock. According to 2009 Forbes rankings, the Koch brothers are tied for the 19th richest person
90 in the world, and for ninth richest American,91 each 
worth between $14 and $16 billion.
The corporation’s history dates back to the 1920s when Fred Koch, father to 
Charles and David Koch, developed a process to refine more gasoline from crude oil. When he tried to market his invention, the major oil companies sued him for patent infringement. Koch eventually won a 15 year legal battle, but the controversy made it tough to attract many US customers.
92 Fred Koch went to “My joke is that we’re the biggest company you’ve never heard of.”  —David Koch.83
Koch Industries is present in nearly 60 countries . Some company 
locations include:
 
Argentina  
Australia
Belgium
BrazilCanada
Cayman Islands BWI
ChileChina
Colombia
Czech RepublicEgypt
Finland
FranceGermany
Greece
IndiaItaly
Japan
KoreaLuxembourg
Mexico
New ZealandRussia
Singapore
South AfricaSpain
Switzerland
TaiwanThailand
Netherlands
TurkeyUnited Kingdom
Uruguay
Unites States of AmericaVenezuela

page 15What is Koch Industries? 
Company History and Background
the Soviet Union in 1929, where he persuaded Josef Stalin’s 
authoritarian government to pay him $5 million to build oil refineries.
93 Koch eventually grew disenchanted with Stalinism 
and returned to the United States and helped found the libertarian John Birch Society. Over time, Koch developed US and global pipeline and drilling equipment businesses that profited handsomely by servicing the major oil companies. Fred Koch launched Wood River Oil & Refining in Illinois (1940) and bought the Rock Island refinery in Oklahoma (1947). He folded the remaining purchasing and gathering network into his company, Rock Island Oil & Refining.
94 
Charles Koch renamed the company Koch Industries after his father’s death in 1967. As the new CEO and chairman, Charles began a series of acquisitions, adding petrochemical and oil trading service operations. Koch Industries purchased a Corpus Christi, Texas, refinery in 1981.
95 It expanded its 
pipeline system, buying Bigheart Pipe Line in Oklahoma (1986) and two systems from Santa Fe Southern Pacific (1988). In 1991 Koch purchased the Corpus Christi marine terminal, pipelines, and gathering systems of Scurlock Permian (a unit of Ashland Oil). In 1992 the company bought United Gas Pipe Line (renamed Koch Gateway Pipeline) and its pipeline system extending from Texas to Florida. Koch Industries also acquired USX-Delhi Group, a natural gas processor and transporter.
Koch Industries also diversified its industry areas under the 
leadership of Charles Koch. Currently, the company owns cattle ranches with a total of 15,000 head of cattle in Kansas, Montana, and Texas. In 1998 Koch bought Purina Mills, the largest US producer of animal feed. Lethargic energy and livestock prices in 1998 and 1999, however, led Koch to lay off several hundred employees, sell its feedlots, and divest portions of its natural gas gathering and pipeline systems. Purina Mills filed for bankruptcy protection in 1999 and was acquired by US dairy co-op Land O’Lakes in 2001.
Koch acquired INVISTA, creators of Lycra®
96 fiber and 
Stainmaster® carpet, in 2004 for $4.2 billion from DuPont 
Corporation. 
In 2005, Koch paid over $13 billion for the Georgia-Pacific 
Corporation, one of the world’s largest manufacturers and distributors of tissue, pulp and paper, packaging, dimensional lumber and plywood. The acquisition gave Koch Industries its only recognizable retail products including Quilted North -
ern®, Angel Soft®, Brawny®, Vanity Fair® and Dixie® cups.


page 16Record of Environmental Crimes and Violations:  
The Koch companies have a notorious environmental record. Some of the more 
egregious examples include:
• In 2009, the US Justice Department and EPA announced that Koch Industries’ 
Invista subsidiary would pay a $1.7 million penalty and spend $500 million116 to fix 
environmental violations at facilities in seven states, in an agreement with the US EPA and Department of Justice.
117 
• Leaks on Koch-operated oil pipelines have resulted in major spills in Minnesota in recent years. In December 2009, a Koch pipeline spilled 210,000 gallons of crude oil in Philbrook, MN
118 and another in 2005 spilled over 100,000 gallons in 
Little Falls, Minnesota.119
• In May 2001, Koch Industries paid $25 million to settle with the US Government120 
over a long-standing suit brought by Bill Koch—one of the brothers bought out in 1983—for the company’s long-standing practice of illegally accounting for the amount of oil removed from federal and Native American lands. 
• In late 2000, the company was charged with covering up the 
illegal releases of 91 tons of the known carcinogen benzene from its refinery in Corpus Christi. Initially facing a 97-count indictment and potential fines of $350 million, Koch cut a deal with then-Attorney General John Ashcroft to drop all major charges in exchange for a guilty plea for falsifying documents, and a $20 million settlement.
121 
• In 2000, the EPA fined Koch Industries $30 million for its role in 300 oil spills
122 that resulted in more than three million gallons 
of crude oil leaking into ponds, lakes, streams and coastal waters. 
• In 1999 a Koch subsidiary pleaded guilty to charges
123 that 
it had negligently allowed aviation fuel to leak into waters near 
the Mississippi River from its refinery in Rosemount, Minnesota, and that it had illegally dumped a million gallons of high-ammonia wastewater onto the ground and into the Mississippi. 
• Koch’s negligence toward environmental safety has led to 
tragic losses of life. In 1996, a rusty and corroded Koch pipeline
124 
leaked flammable butane near a Texas residential neighbor -
hood. Warned by the smell of gas, two teenagers drove their truck toward the nearest payphone to call for help, but they never made it. Sparks from their truck ignited the gas cloud and the two burned alive. The National Transportation Safety Board determined
125  that “the probable cause of this accident was the 
failure of Koch to adequately protect its pipeline from corrosion” and the ineffectiveness of Koch’s program to educate local residents about how to respond during a pipeline leak. 
What is Koch Industries? 
Company History and Background
IN 2000, THE EPA FINED 
KOCH INDUSTRIES $30 
MILLION FOR ITS ROLE 
IN 300 OIL SPILLS THAT 
RESULTED IN MORE 
THAN THREE MILLION 
GALLONS OF CRUDE OIL 
LEAKING INTO PONDS, 
LAKES, STREAMS AND 
COASTAL WATERS.
©Alfredo Jagendorfer/Greenpeace

page 17Charles G. Koch. Chief Executive Officer, Koch Indus -
tries. Ranked as 9th richest American, worth $16 billion. 
Born in 1935. Lives in Wichita, Kansas. Co-founder of the Cato Institute.The Koch Brothers
David H. Koch. Executive Vice-President, Koch Indus -
tries. Ranked as 9th richest American, worth $16 billion. 
Born in 1940. Lives in New York City. Co-founder and chairman of Americans for Prosperity.
Charles G. Koch98, born in 1935 , is the CEO and Chairman of Koch Industries.  His father, Fred 
Koch, was a staunch libertarian and a founder of the John Birch Society.99 Like his father, Charles is also an 
ardent supporter of libertarian and conservative organizations. He is a co-founder of the Cato Institute100, the 
Chairman of the Institute for Humane Studies101, and has sponsored multiple conferences102 for entrepreneurs to 
encourage them to fund free-market groups. Charles has even applied his libertarian ideology to the structure of 
Koch Industries, using his own trademarked “Market Based Management”103 to run the entire company. “Just as 
central planning is a failure in running government, so it is at the level of the firm,” says Charles.
The U.S. Senate investigated104 Charles Koch for his alleged role in funding so-called “issue ads” that violated 
campaign law by helping conservative Republican congressional candidates in 1996. Koch Industries has been the largest oil and gas industry contributor to electoral campaigns since the 2006 election
105 cycle. During the 2008 
elections, Koch Industries contributed over $1 .8 million106, 88% to Republican candidates. 
© illustration by Andrew Fournier/Greenpeace
© illustration by Andrew Fournier/Greenpeace

page 18The Koch Brothers
Charles and his brother David were involved in a decades-long family dispute107 with their brothers, 
Bill and Fred, regarding a buy-out of company shares. Bill and Fred claimed that Charles and David 
shortchanged them by $340 million. The vicious lawsuits began in the early 1980s and continued for nearly two decades. 
David H. Koch108, born in 1940,  is Executive Vice-President of Koch Industries,  and 
the CEO of the subsidiary Koch Chemical Technology Group. According to the 2009 Forbes ranking, he is the second-richest
109 person living in New York City, following Michael Bloomberg. In addition to 
his Park Avenue residence, he has homes in Aspen, CO; Southampton, NY; and Palm Beach, FL.110 
Although he’s donated millions to conservative, libertarian organizations, David Koch has only garnered public attention for his non-political philanthropy. Regarding a $100 million naming gift to the New York City Opera and Ballet, he explains “I could afford it.…And, of course, there are beautiful girls.”
111 A few 
of his namesakes include the new David H. Koch Theater at New York’s Lincoln Center, the David H. Koch Dinosaur Wing in New York’s American Natural History Museum,
112 and the new David H. Koch 
Hall of Human Origins113 at Smithsonian’s Natural History Museum in Washington D.C.
David Koch was the 1980 Vice Presidential candidate114 for the anti-regulatory Libertarian Party. Cur -
rently, David Koch is on the Board of Directors for the Cato Institute as well as the Reason Foundation, two right-wing, climate-denier think-tanks. He is also a founding member and Chairman
115 of the Ameri -
cans for Prosperity Foundation, an astroturf group that opposes climate solutions and clean energy.
The Koch Brothers are the 9th Richest Americans
http://www.forbes.com/lists/2009/54/rich-list-09_The-400-Richest-Americans_Rank.html
 William Gates III  $50.0 bil Medina, WA  Microsoft
 Warren Buffett   $40.0 bil Omaha, NE  Berkshire Hathaway
 Lawrence Ellison   $27.0 bil Redwood City, CA Oracle
 Christy Walton & family  $21.5 bil Jackson, WY Wal-Mart inheritance
 Jim Walton  $19.6 bil Bentonville, AR Wal-Mart
 Alice Walton  $19.3 bil Fort Worth, TX Wal-Mart 
 S Robson Walton  $19.0 bil Bentonville, AR Wal-Mart
 Michael Bloomberg  $17.5 bil New York, NY Bloomberg
 Charles Koch  $16.0 bil Wichita, KS Koch Industries 
 David Koch  $16.0 bil New York, NY  Koch Industries 
 Sergey Brin  $15.3 bil Palo Alto, CA Google
 Larry Page  $15.3 bil San Francisco, CA Google
 Michael Dell  $14.5 bil Austin, TX Dell
 Steven Ballmer  $13.3 bil Seattle, WA Microsoft
 George Soros  $13.0 bil Westchester, IL Hedge funds

page 19Koch Climate Opposition Funding:
The Koch Web
The Koch brothers, their family members and Koch Industries 
employees direct a web of financing that supports conserva -
tive and libertarian special interest groups and think-tanks, with a strong focus on fighting environmental regulation and easing limits on industrial pollution.
127 
This web is currently fueling a campaign to oppose clean energy and climate legislation, by funding organizations that generate, disseminate and repeat inaccurate and misleading information about climate science, clean energy and climate policies. This information is then provided to astroturf groups (fake grassroots organizations that are created or sponsored by industries)—some of which are also funded by Koch interests—which use the misinformation to increase opposi -
tion to clean energy policies and climate solutions. 
Koch foundations contributed over $48 million to climate 
opposition groups from 1997 to 2008. The climate debate heated up in 1997 around the Kyoto Protocol international negotiations, galvanizing corporate opposition to climate policy. The volume of funding has increased significantly in recent years as climate policy has gained momentum in the United States. One half of the Koch grants since 1997 were dispersed in recent years, between 2005 to 2008. As a rough indicator of the scale and significance of this invest -
ment, the Koch foundations surpass ExxonMobil and the ExxonMobil Foundation as a funding source to organizations that generate and disseminate misinformation on the science of and solutions to global warming. From 2005 to 2008, the Koch Foundations provided $24.9 million in funding to such groups; during the same time ExxonMobil provided about $8.9 million to groups with similar activities. 
The Koch web spans beyond clean energy and climate 
concerns, and beyond connections plainly visible through publicly available funding trails and records. Many of the organizations funded by Koch are also working against health care reform. Koch’s interests are also advocated through dozens of trade associations (501-C-6’s). Koch Industries nor its owners or officers are required to report potentially millions “Koch’s chief political influence tool is a web of interconnected, right-wing think tanks 
and advocacy groups funded by foundations controlled and supported by the two Koch 
brothers.”–Center for Public Integrity126
of dollars of contributions to these groups, such as U.S. 
Chamber of Commerce, state Chambers of Commerce, the National Association of Manufacturers and its state affiliates, the American Petroleum Institute and others. Comprehensive examination and research of the entire Koch web is ongoing.
Sources of data for Koch Foundation grants  
Foundations disclose major recipients of grants on their IRS 990 forms (tax returns). The data cited in this report comes from the foundations’ IRS 990 tax forms, accessed through the GuideStar database and from data available on the Media Matters Action Conservative Transparency Project: [http://www2.guidestar.org/Home.aspx]  
[http://mediamattersaction.org/transparency]
©Igor Gavrilov/Greenpeace

page 20Koch Climate Opposition Funding:
The Foundations  
Climate denial organizations receive millions of dollars 
in grants made by three Koch-controlled foundations: the Claude R. Lambe foundation; the Charles G. Koch foundation; and the David H. Koch foundation. 
Claude R. Lambe Foundation  
The Claude R. Lambe Foundation is the financier of organizations taking a more visible, active role in day-to-day efforts to oppose clean energy and climate policy. The Foundation contributed $12.2 million to climate opposition groups since 2005. 
The Board of Directors is comprised entirely of Koch 
family members, senior Koch executives and staff who serve Koch foundations:
128 
• Richard Fink — President
• Logan Moore — Secretary 
• Vonda Holliman — Treasurer
• Charles G. Koch — Director
• Elizabeth B. Koch — Director
• Elizabeth R. Koch — Director
• Charles C. Koch — Director 
Charles G. Koch Foundation  
The Charles G. Koch Foundation tends to fund institutes that broadly support efforts to oppose clean energy and climate legislation. The Foundation contributed $11.7 million since 2005 to such climate denial organizations and front groups. 
The Board of Directors
129 of the Charles G. Koch Founda -
tion is nearly identical to that of the Claude R. Lambe 
Foundation: 
• Richard Fink — President 
• Kevin Gentry — Vice President 
• Logan Moore — Secretary 
• Vonda Holliman — Treasurer
• Charles G. Koch — Director
• Elizabeth B. Koch — Director
• Elizabeth R. Koch — Director
• Charles C. Koch — Director David H. Koch Foundation   
The David H. Koch Foundation historically had a wide array 
of conservative, anti-environmental grant recipients. From 1997 to 2008 the foundation contributed over $9 million to climate opposition groups. Since 2005, the Foundation has contributed $1 million to the Americans for Prosperity Foun -
dation (AFP). AFP is the only climate denial organization to recently receive money from the David H. Koch Foundation. David Koch is a co-founder and chairman of AFP. 
The small staff of the David H. Koch Foundation includes:
130 
• David H. Koch — President/Director
• Ruth E. Williams — Secretary
• Vonda Holliman — Treasurer
©Les Gibbon/Greenpeace

page 21For this analysis, Koch foundation grants were tabulated from 1997 to 2008 (the most recent year of available contribution 
information). To simplify the presentation, all grants from the three Koch Foundations have been totaled for each organiza -
tion. Specific donations from each foundation to each organization are detailed at www.greenpeace.org/kochmoney. The list below includes contributions to those organizations that have been documented to be propagating misinformation about clean energy policies and climate science. 
Since 1997, the Koch foundations have contributed over $48 million in grants to climate opposition groups.  
More than half that total, almost $25 million, was given since 2005. 
Total Koch foundation funding
$24,888,282 —Recently contributed to climate opposition groups, between 2005–2008 
$48,510,856 —Total contributed to climate opposition groups, between 1997–2008
Combined grants from Koch foundations (Claude R. Lambe, Charles G. Koch, and David H. Koch Foundations) to climate opposition groups (sorted in descending order by total funding):
Mercatus Center
$9,247,500 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $9,874,500] 
The Mercatus Center
131 is a conservative think-tank at George Mason University, in which Charles Koch sits on the Board 
of Directors.132 The Mercatus Center suggested in 2001 that global warming would be, “beneficial, occurring at night, in the 
winter, and at the poles.”133 In 2009, they conceded that global warming is man-made and problematic but recommend 
doing nothing to cut emissions, instead promoting “work to facilitate movement of people from areas likely to be harmed 
by climate change.”134 
Americans for Prosperity Foundation (AFP)
$5,176,500 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  [No Koch foundation grants received prior to 2005]
Beginning in 2008, Americans For Prosperity
135 organized astroturf “Hot Air Tour” with a hot air balloon136 local events 
across the country to build opposition to clean energy and climate legislation. This astroturf campaign has been repeatedly 
exposed by the media, including the Wall Street Journal’s blog137, Environmental Capital. AFP also runs the “No Climate 
Tax”138 campaign and helped organize the “Tea Parties” tax protests.139 Koch executives Richard Fink and Wayne Gable 
have strong interconnections with AFP. 
Institute for Humane Studies (IHS)
$1,967,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $3,923,457]
The Institute for Humane Studies at George Mason University offers scholarships and career training to libertarian  
students. Charles Koch is the chairman of the IHS board of directors.
140 In a recent article, Mother Jones called the Institute 
for Human Studies a “haven for climate change deniers.”141 Several climate deniers have prominent positions at IHS, 
including: Robert Bradley142, member of the Academic Review Committee and author of Climate Alarmism Reconsidered 
(2003)143; and Fred Singer144, Research Professor at IHS. A number of climate deniers are guest lecturers for IHS, such as 
Bruce Yandle145, Senior Associate146 with Political Economy Research Center, and Kenneth Green147, Resident Scholar148 with 
American Enterprise Institute.
Koch Foundations and Climate Denial

page 22The Heritage Foundation
$1,620,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $3,358,000]
The Heritage Foundation is a conservative think tank149 that misinterprets science and 
policy regarding the climate150 and uses their conclusions to argue against action on global warming. Recently the Heritage 
Foundation has: misinterpreted the impacts of global warming151 on the US economy; twisted news reports to justify claims 
about ‘climate taxes’152; issued deceptive economic analyses and presentations153; and released allegations about economic 
ruin and job losses154 from green stimulus investments by Congress. Heritage Foundation also teamed up with Institute for 
Energy Research (IER155) to promote the widely debunked “Spanish” study.156 
Cato Institute
$1,028,400 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $5,278,400]
The Cato Institute is focused on disputing the science behind global warming and questioning 
the rationale157 for taking action. The organization’s 2009 “Handbook for Policymakers”158 on global 
warming begins with the suggestions that Congress should “pass no legislation restricting emissions of carbon dioxide” and “inform the public about how little climate change would be prevented by proposed legislation.” Robert Bradley, an adjunct scholar at the Cato Institute, is also a founder and the CEO of the Institute for Energy Research. In 2007 the Cato Foundation gave $120,000
159 to New Hope Environmental Services, an “advocacy science consulting firm” founded and run by long-time 
climate science denier Patrick Michaels160, who uses New Hope to publish his World Climate Report, a sort of ongoing 
journal of denial of climate science. Michaels is also a senior fellow at the Cato Institute, which paid him $98,000161 to write a 
book “The Satanic Gases” with fellow climate denier Robert Balling. Over the years, Michaels’ work has been financed by a number of coal and polluter interests
162, including the Western Fuels Association, the Intermountain Rural Electric Association, 
and others. 
The Manhattan Institute
$800,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008 [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $1,325,000]
The Institute publishes climate science denials
163 and has hosted Bjorn Lomborg164, a prominent spokesperson against 
addressing climate change, at Manhattan Institute events165 several times over the last two years.
Washington Legal Foundation (WLF)
$655,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $1,255,000]
WLF publishes articles on the business threats posed by regulation of global warming pollution, such as vulnerability  
to tort claims.166 
Federalist Society for Law and Public Policy Studies
$542,500 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $1,750,700]
The Federalist Society advocates for inaction on global warming: “Global warming is nothing more than an educated guess 
by many of the same scientists who are still arguing about what happened to the dinosaurs. Perhaps we should think care -
fully before putting blind faith in people who cannot explain the simple disappearance of tens of millions of creatures, many of which were the size of locomotives.”
167 
In a Federalist Society Newsletter from 2000, they claim: “The science is not settled (as claimed by Vice President Gore), that it is not “compelling” (as claimed by President Clinton), and that there is certainly no scientific consensus favoring global warming. If anything, the largest number of scientists, some 17,000, signed a petition against the Kyoto Protocol in 1998.”
168 
Koch Foundations and Climate Denial

page 23Foundation for Research on Economics and the Environment
$365,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $1,460,000]
Peter Geddes169, Executive Vice President of FREE170, has advocated against taking action171 
on climate change because warming is “inevitable” and expensive to address. In addition, FREE sponsors seminars for 
federal judges172 that have been criticized for creating judicial conflicts of interest. FREE states173 it only takes money for judicial 
seminars from foundations whose founder is deceased (termed “dead-man foundations” by FREE), and that corporate funding does not fund judicial seminars. However, the Claude R. Lambe foundation has been listed as a funder of at least six seminars since 1997. A 1999 Koch Foundations report questions this rationale, stating “Charles Koch’s control of Koch industries…calls into question the relevance of this term, as defined by FREE, if not the accuracy of the disclosure.”
174 
Pacific Research Institute for Public Policy (PRIPP)
$360,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $1,100,000]
PRIPP supported and funded An Inconvenient Truth…or Convenient Fiction
175, a film attacking the science of global warming 
and intended as a rebuttal to former Vice-President Al Gore’s documentary. The film was produced by PRIPP Senior Fellow 
Steven Hayward and promoted176 by the Heritage Foundation. Hayward is also an IER board member and a fellow at the 
American Enterprise Institute. Hayward and another AEI colleague were exposed177 two years ago for offering to pay IPCC 
scientists $10,000 for critiques of the IPCC findings.
Tax Foundation
$325,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $525,000] 
The Tax Foundation opposed American Clean Energy and Security Act
178 and issued a study179 on the costs of climate change 
legislation. Wayne Gable, a former Managing Director of Federal Affairs at Koch Industries, served as President of the Tax 
Foundation from 1989–1991.
Independent Women’s Forum (IWF)
$290,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $335,000]
IWF has spread misinformation on climate science and touts the work of climate deniers.
180 IWF was run by Nancy Pfo -
tenhauer181 (formerly Nancy Mitchell), who was Koch Industries’ chief in-house lobbyist182 from 1996 to 2001. In 2003, IWF 
affiliated itself with Americans for Prosperity183 (AFP), a group that split from Citizens for a Sound Economy. Pfotenhauer 
served as president and CEO of AFP until 2005184. Pfotenhauer left IWF to work on the McCain presidential campaign. More 
recently, IWF soft-launched a project called Mothers for Educating with Sound Science (MESS)185 including radio appear -
ances questioning the science of global warming and warning of dire impacts of global warming pollution regulation.
Texas Public Policy Foundation (TPPF)
$283,125 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $393,999]
TPPF fellows recently wrote on why reducing global warming pollution won’t work186 and the devastating impact the American 
Clean Energy and Security Act187 would have on all aspects of American life.Koch Foundations and Climate Denial

page 24American Council for Capital Formation (ACCF)
$215,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $225,000]
ACCF has partnered twice with the National Association of Manufacturers to produce and disseminate distorted economic 
analyses188 that overstate the costs of climate legislation and have been prominently featured at US Chamber of Commerce-
organized “forums”189 on climate over the past year. The ACCF/NAM studies have been credibly debunked190 more than once.191 
George C. Marshall Institute 
$210,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $240,000]
The George C. Marshall Institute
192 has a long history of global warming denial, including 
publication of junk science reports funded by the American Petroleum Institute and authored by Sallie Baliunas193, a scientist 
affiliated with several organizations194 receiving money from oil corporations. The Marshall Institute also produced a “Cocktail 
Conversation Guide”195 with suggestions for denying the dangers of global warming in any social setting.
The Reason Foundation
$205,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $1,706,200]
The Foundation promotes the tenets of “Free Market Environmentalism (FME)”196 to argue that those who suffer from the 
effects of global warming have little legal or moral claim for compensation from GHG emitters.
Institute for Energy Research (IER)
$175,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $235,000]
IER supported and promoted the “Spanish”197 and “Danish”198 studies critical of clean energy jobs, both of which have been 
debunked by credible sources. IER also argues that efforts to curb global warming would accomplish little at too great a 
cost199, promotes ACCF/NAM and Heritage Foundation studies200 that exaggerate the costs of climate policy, and discourages 
U.S. leadership201 on the international stage. Robert Bradley, a former Enron executive, is the CEO of IER and one of its 
founders. Thomas Pyle, a former Koch and oil-industry lobbyist, is the President of IER and the American Energy Alliance (AEA), the 501c4 counterpart to IER. AEA was founded by the National Association of Manufacturers and the American Petroleum Institute
202 to fight the BTU tax proposal in 1993, and in recent years funded by ExxonMobil and Koch Industries.203 
AEA has been active in the climate debate, from running ads repeating false claims about the costs of climate legislation to trashing clean energy at town halls
204 around the US.
Fraser Institute
$175,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  [No Koch foundation grants received prior to 2005]
The Fraser Institute
205 publishes in-depth critiques of climate science, including a 110-page report attacking the Intergovern -
mental Panel on Climate Change’s Fourth Assessment report. They also offer lesson plans206 and educational materials207 
designed to encourage children to be skeptical of mainstream climate science.
Frontiers of Freedom
$150,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $175,000]
Frontiers of Freedom208 has actively opposed global warming action for over a decade. As Director of Policy with Frontiers of 
Freedom, Myron Ebell209 assisted in the development of the American Petroleum Institute’s Global Climate Science Communi -Koch Foundations and Climate Denial

page 25cations Plan210, leaked to the public in 1998. Currently, FF hosts dozens of studies211 on its website focusing on climate science 
denial and high estimates of the cost of climate policy. FF reinforced the Tax Foundations’ characterization of climate regula -
tions as a tax on the poor and middle class.212 FF also smears213 climate science and spreads typical climate disinformation.214 
National Center for Policy Analysis (NCPA)
$130,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $570,000]
NCPA disseminates climate science denials215 and exaggerates the economic costs216 of emissions mitigation.
American Council on Science and Health (ACSH)
$125,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[No Koch foundation grants received prior to 2005]
In 1997, ACSH released a position paper217 titled, “Global Climate Change and Human Health,” which claims that cutting 
green house gas emissions, because it would hurt the economy, would be more detrimental to public health than global 
warming. “...policymakers can safely take several decades to plan a response, and scientists will have enough time to develop cost-effective and anti-climate-change strategies.” Among the reviewers of the report were famous climate deniers Sallie Baliunas
218 and Fred Singer.219 
Atlas Economic Research Foundation
$113,800 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $122,300]
Atlas has cosponsored Heartland Institute events
220 dedicated to the proposition that climate change is not a crisis and has 
supported organizations such as the John Locke Foundation221 which has attacked efforts by state elected officials working 
on climate solutions with the Center for Climate Strategies.
Capital Research Center
$110,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $640,000]
CRC’s GreenWatch.org222 website collects information on non-profit environmental advocates, and is heavily biased against 
climate science.
American Enterprise Institute (AEI)
$100,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $150,000]
AEI has a long track record223 of distorting the science and solutions of climate change. Its argu -
ments224 tend to de-emphasize the environmental and economic risks of climate change, exaggerate the costs of addressing 
the problem and question the value of putting a policy in place at all, as illustrated by a recent Wall Street Journal oped225 by 
AEI fellow Steven Hayward.
Independence Institute
$85,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $291,000]
The Colorado-based Independence Institute has hosted events dismissing the “Cult of Climate Change”226 and featuring Cato 
Institute fellows.227 Koch Foundations and Climate Denial

page 26American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC)
$75,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $408,000]
ALEC is one-stop shopping228 for elected officials interested in perusing the wares of an 
array of Koch-funded opposition organizations including IER, ACCF, Mercatus and other sources. ALEC publishes its own 
materials as well, including a “Climate Change Overview for State Legislators”229 which downplays the science and risks of 
global warming and exaggerates the costs of addressing it. The Overview was written by Daniel Simmons, who moved from ALEC to become AEA’s Director of State Affairs. Simmons was at the Mercatus Institute before ALEC and is a graduate of the George Mason University School of Law.
Goldwater Institute
$70,427 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $75,000]
The institute is fighting against passage
230 of a renewable energy standard in Arizona.
Property and Environment Research Center (PERC)
$70,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008 
 [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $174,500]
PERC touts the potential economic benefits231 to American farmers as a reason not to act against climate change. Richard 
Stroup232 is a Senior Fellow233 at PERC and an adjunct scholar234 at the Cato Institute. 
Mackinac Center for Public Policy
$60,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008 
 [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $65,000]
The Michigan-based Mackinac Center spreads climate change denials235 and smears236 prominent climate policy consultants.
Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change
$60,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008 
 [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $85,000]
The Center is run by Sherwood Idso237 and his sons Craig238 and Keith239, long-time climate science deniers. The Center runs 
the climate science denial site http://co2science.org.240 
Americans for Tax Reform (ATR)
$40,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $60,000]
ATR denies the science of global warming and opposes federal policies to address it.241 ATR focused on costs and denial in 
their 2008 “Cost of Government”242 report.
State Policy Network (SPN)
$30,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $39,000]
SPN spreads the climate science denials243 and misinformation244 of the Heartland Institute.Koch Foundations and Climate Denial

page 27Media Research Center (MRC)
$14,030 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $15,005]
The Media Research Center245 is a conservative news organization that analyzes and spins mainstream news content in order 
to counter an alleged “strident liberal bias”.246 MRC has several projects that analyze various types and angles of media. 
These projects, such as the “Business and Media Institute” and “Free Market Project,” have released several reports that 
claim the national media favors247 the environmental view on global warming and excludes climate deniers in their coverage.248 
The Media Research Center has also contributed to the “ClimateGate” echo chamber249, criticizing national media outlets for 
a lack of “ClimateGate” coverage. 
John Locke Foundation (JLF)
$10,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $85,000]
The John Locke Foundation
250 is a conservative think-tank based in North Carolina, focused on local and state issues. JLF 
advocates for inaction on global warming, stating in a 2005 policy brief251 that “a green house gas reduction policy would have 
only costs and no benefits.” In 2007, JLF released a policy report252 that publishes several climate denier myths, intended to 
instruct average North Carolina citizens on refuting global warming. On JLF’s “Right Angles” blog, the “ClimateGate” cover -
age253 calls for a “reconsideration of ‘green’ efforts” and notes that some have tried to rescind the Oscar Vice President Al 
Gore received for An Inconvenient Truth.
National Taxpayers Union Foundation (NTUF)
$5,000 received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $32,500]
In an open letter to Representative Mary Bono-Mack254 and to Representative Walt Minnick255, the National Taxpayers Union 
advocates against the carbon regulatory measures in the American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009 as a “tax hike” 
without acknowledging the environmental or economic benefits. “If Congress deems carbon dioxide emissions to be a prob -
lem worthy of attention, then it should confront them without raising taxes on struggling American families in the process.”
Citizens for a Sound Economy (now FreedomWorks)
No grants received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $6,510,375]
Citizens for a Sound Economy (CSE)
256 was founded by David Koch in 1984, which split in 2003257 into Americans For 
Prosperity and FreedomWorks.258 FreedomWorks is an astroturf group led by former U.S. Representative Dick Armey, with 
a mission of promoting a conservative agenda. The astroturf group tries to cast doubt on the need for climate legislation259, 
declaring: “organizations pushing action on global warming – such as the United Nations, the environmental movement, and 
former Vice President Al Gore – have substantial institutional, ideological, and financial stakes in creating a restrictive new layer of global warming regulation.” FreedomWorks also participates in the echochamber
260 around the “ClimateGate” story.
Competitive Enterprise Institute (CEI)
No grants received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  [Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $471,420]
CEI, among many other statements denying the seriousness of global warming, 
has argued that climate change would create a “milder, greener, more prosperous world” and that “Kyoto was a power grab based on deception and fear.” CEI maintains a website
262 as part of their aggressive campaign to convince the public that 
global warming is uncertain, and has spent considerable time and effort adding to the echo chamber around “ClimateGate.”Koch Foundations and Climate Denial

page 28Center for the Study of Market Processes
No grants received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $50,000]
Pre-cursor263 organization to Mercatus Center. 
Heartland Institute (HI)
No grants received from Koch foundations 2005–2008  
[Total Koch foundation grants 1997–2008: $30,000]
The Heartland Institute264, a Chicago-based, industry-funded conservative think-tank, 
has had a long history of climate denial that continues today. Since 2007, HI has 
hosted their annual International Conference on Climate Change265, where dozens of 
climate deniers converge266 to discuss issues and strategies to oppose climate action. 
On their global warming website, HI has dozens of articles267, dating back to 1996, 
documenting their perspective that the Kyoto Protocol is unnecessary because “greenhouse gas (GHG) levels will unlikely ever pose a problem.”
268 The Heartland Institute has also been a major part of the “Climategate” echo chamber. The Institute 
has posted dozens of blogs to exaggerate the significance of the incident, claiming “the global movement to ‘do something’ about global warming…stands discredited”
269 and “the IPCC should be disbanded as a threat to mankind.”270 In addition to 
blogs, spokespeople from the Heartland Institute271 have commented on “ClimateGate” several times in the media as well.
© Greenpeace/Colin O’Connor©Jiri Rezac/GreenpeaceKoch Foundations and Climate Denial

page 29Note on Sources: Lobbying expenditures as well as federal PAC and individual 
contributions to federal candidates are disclosed on Opensecrets.org. Additional lobbying data can be found at the Senate’s Lobbying Disclosure site.
272 
1. Federal Direct Lobbying273  
Lobbying Summary: Koch Industries spent a total of $37.9 million on oil and gas lobbying from January 2006 to December 2009. During this period in the oil and gas sector, Koch Industries was outspent only by ExxonMobil ($87.8 million) and Chevron Corporation ($50 million). 
• 2009: $12.5 million total,
274 $9 million spent on in-house lawyers. 
• 2008: $17.93 million total,275 $15.3 million spent on in-house lawyers
• 2007: $4.17 million total,276 with $40,000 to Pyle and Associates and $100,000 to 
the Rhoads Group (Thomas Pyle worked at Rhoads Group before starting Pyle and Associates and is now President of IER and AEA).
277 
• 2006: $3.36 million total,278 with $140,000 to Rhoads Group.Lobbying and Political Spending
$3,360,000 
$4,170,000 
$17,930,000 
$12,500,000 $0 
Exxon Mobil 
Chevr on Corp 
Koch 
Industries 
BP 
ConocoPhillips 
Marathon Oil 
American 
Petroleum  
Institute  
Occidental 
Petroleum 
Royal Dutch 
Shell 
Williams 
Companies 2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
 Koch Industries has Spent $37.9 Million on 
Oil and Gas Lobbying Since 2006

page 30It is worth noting that Koch also hires outside lawyers to lobby on its behalf, in some cases the 
same firms that lobby for other groups of which Koch is a member. For example:
• Siff and Lake, $190,000 (2009), $220,000 (2008), $200,000 (2007), which also lobbies for 
Western Fuels Association. 
• Mehlman/Vogel, $200,000 (2009), $120,000 (2008), $20,000 (2007) which also lobbies for 
API (2009, 2008), Business Roundtable (2009, 2008), EEI (2009, 2008) and Energy Future Holdings (2009).
• Pyle and Associates, $40,000 (2007), which also lobbied for the National Petrochemical and 
Refiners Association
279, of which Koch is a member.
• The Rhoads Group, $100,000 (2007) which also lobbies for the National Petrochemical and 
Refiners Association280 of which Koch is a member.
• Hunton and Williams, $60,000 (2009), $150,000 (2008), $80,000 (2007), which also lobbied 
for National Association of Manufacturers (2009, 2008) and Americans for Affordable Climate Policy (2009), Edison Electric Institute (2009, 2008, 2007), Gas Processing Association (2009, 2008) and the Foundation for Environment and Economic Progress (2009, 2008, 2007))
• Capitol Tax Partners, $30,000 (2009), $240,000 (2008), $220,000 (2007), which who also 
lobbies for Edison Electric Institute (2009, 2008, 2007) and National Electrical Manufacturers Association (2008, 2007) 
 In addition, Koch executives serve on the boards of other organizations wielding influence against clean energy and climate policy. The Executive Vice President for Operations Excellence & Compliance at Koch Industries, James Mahoney, is also a vice-president of the National Petrochemical & Refiners Association (NPRA). NPRA significantly increased its lobbying budget in 2009, reporting $1.68 million in direct federal lobbying expenses.
181 This more than doubled the 
lobby spending of the organization from 2008, when its total lobbying budget was $810,000. 
©Greenpeace/Will Rose
©Greenpeace/Bas BeentjesLobbying and Political Spending

page 312. Koch PAC282 
Koch’s political action committee bundles contributions from Koch employees and their spouses. Koch’s 
PAC spent a total of $5.74 million since 2006: $2.04 million in the 2006 cycle, $2.6 million in the 2008 cycle and $1.1 million during the first year of the 2010 cycle. 
From the beginning of the 2006 election cycle, Koch’s PAC spent more on contributions to federal can -
didates
283 and committees than any other oil-and-gas sector based PAC. For that period, Koch Industries 
and its executives spent $3.55 million compared to next three biggest contributors: Exxon ($2.6 million), 
Chevron ($2.08 million), and Valero ($2.03 million).  
$1,000,943 
$2,040,735 
$2,583,549 
$1,113,890 $0 $500,000 $1,000,000 $1,500,000 $2,000,000 $2,500,000 $3,000,000 
Valero PAC 
Koch P AC 
Exxon Mobil P AC 
Marathon Oil P AC 
BP P AC 
Chevr on PAC 
ConocoPhillips P AC 
Occidental Petr oleum 
PAC 
Williams Companies 
PAC 
Halliburton P AC 
Shell Oil P AC 2004 
2006 
2008 
2010 
(mid-cycle data) Koch PAC outspent the PACs of ExxonMobil, 
Chevron, ConocoPhillips and BP since 2004 Lobbying and Political Spending

page 32Koch’s PAC heavily favors Republicans: 88% of its contributions went to Republicans during the 2008 
election284 cycle; 86% went to Republicans in the 2006 cycle.285 Koch’s PAC also heavily favors Republican 
Party committees and leadership. In 2009, Koch’s PAC gave 
• $15,000 to the National Republican Congressional Committee (NRCC), and $15,000 to the National 
Republican Senatorial Committee (NRSC). 
• $5,000 to Restore America PAC ( founded by U.S. Senator Sam Brownback R-TX); $5,000 to Freedom 
Project (founded by U.S Rep John Boehner R-OH); and $10,000 to Cantor For Congress (founded by U.S. Rep. Eric Cantor R-VA)
U.S. House Members receiving more 
than $20,000 from Koch Industries PAC since 2006 election cycle 
KochPAC Recipient (House) Total
Cuellar, Henry (D-TX) $30,500
Cantor, Eric (R-VA) $28,000
Barton, Joe (R-TX) $26,500
Blackburn, Marsha (R-TN) $25,000
Boehner, John (R-OH) $25,000
Kline, John (R-MN) $25,000
Davis, Geoff (R-KY) $24,000
Boyd, Allen (D-FL) $21,500
Boren, Dan (D-OK) $20,500
In addition, Koch owns Georgia Pacific and Flint Hill Resources, employees of which now give money to 
Koch PAC; e.g., Georgia Pacific CEO Patrick Boushka gave $25,000 to Koch PAC in 2008 cycle.
3. Family and Individual Political Contributions
Charles and David Koch, along with their wives, have contributed substantial amounts to federal GOP party committees. Since the 2006 election cycle, Koch family members contributed at least $270,800 to the Republican National Committee (RNC), NRSC, and NRCC. 
• 2006 election cycle: $101,400• 2008 election cycle: $139,000• 2010 election cycle (through end of 2009): $30,400 
No donations to the Democratic National Committee, National Democratic Senatorial Committee, or the National Democratic Congressional Committee were found from these individuals.U.S. Senate Members receiving more than 
$10,000 from Koch Industries PAC since 2004 election cycle 
KochPAC Recipient (Senate) Total
DeMint, James W (R-SC) $20,000
Murkowski, Lisa (R-AK) $20,000
Lincoln, Blanche (D-AR) $18,000
Burr, Richard (R-NC) $15,500
Chambliss, Saxby (R-GA) $15,000
Coburn, Tom (R-OK) $15,000
Roberts, Pat (R-KS) $15,000
Thune, John (R-SD) $15,000
Inhofe, James M (R-OK) $13,500
Vitter, David (R-LA) $12,500
Cornyn, John (R-TX) $12,500
Shelby, Richard C (R-AL) $11,500Lobbying and Political Spending

page 33Fred C. Koch. Founder of Koch Industries (d. 1967)
Charles G. Koch.286 Chief Executive Officer, Koch Industries. 
Ranked287 as 9th richest American (tied with his brother 
David.) Born in 1935. Lives in Wichita, Kansas.
• Co-founder of the Cato Institute
• Chairman, Board of Directors, The Institute for 
Humane Studies
• Member, Board of Directors, The Mercatus Center
David H. Koch.288 Executive Vice-President, Koch Industries. 
Ranked289 as 9th richest American (tied with his brother 
Charles.) Born in 1940. Lives in New York City. 
• Member, Board of Directors, The Cato Institute, 
Washington, D.C.
• Member, Board of Directors, The Reason Foundation, 
Santa Monica, Calif.
• Chairman, Board of Trustees, Americans for Prosperity 
Foundation, Washington, D.C.
Richard Fink.290 Executive Vice-President and member of 
the board of directors of Koch Industries. 
• Board member of Koch subsidiaries Georgia-Pacific 
Equity Holdings, LLC and Flint Hills Resources, LLC.
• First President291 of Citizens for a Sound Economy, 
the forerunner of Americans for Prosperity 
• Co-founder and board member of Americans for 
Prosperity (AFP) Foundation
• Former board member of Americans for Prosperity 
501(c)4 organization
• Director of the Claude R. Lambe Foundation• Co-Founder and Director at the Mercatus Center• Director of the Institute for Humane Studies• Fink was formerly a professor at George Mason 
University, which the Koch web also funds generously. 
William Koch.
292 Bought out by brothers Charles and David.
• Co-chair of the Alliance to Protect Nantucket Sound, formed to fight the Cape Wind offshore wind farm project.
293 
Frederick Koch.294 Bought out by brothers Charles and David.Key Individuals in the Koch Web
Logan Moore.295 Secretary of the Claude R. Lambe Founda -
tion. Also serves as Director of Operations for the Charles G. Koch Foundation. 
Wayne Gable. Former Board of Directors at Americans for 
Prosperity.
297 
Gable was Managing Director of Federal Affairs at Koch Industries and lobbied on Koch’s behalf as recently as 2004.
298 He worked at Citizens for a Sound Economy from 
1986 to 1991, serving as president from 1989 to 1991. He has also served terms as the president of the Tax Founda -
tion, the Charles Koch Foundation, and the Center for Market Processes.
Robert Bradley.
299 CEO of Institute for Energy Research (IER). 
Bradley also holds positions at the Cato Institute, Competitive 
Enterprise Institute, and the Institute for Humane Studies at George Mason University.
Daniel Simmons.
300 Former Director of the Natural 
Resources Task Force at American Legislative Exchange 
Council  (ALEC). 
Simmons is now AEA’s Director of State Affairs. Simmons was at the Mercatus Institute before ALEC and is a graduate of the George Mason University School of Law. ALEC, which also receives funding from the American Petroleum Institute, was critical of President Bush’s climate proposals.
301 
Kevin Gentry.302 Vice-President, Strategic Development304 
for Charles G. Koch Foundation; Director, Strategic Develop -
ment for Koch Industries. 
Between 1997 and 2003, he served as vice president of the 
Institute for Humane Studies and the Mercatus Center, both located at George Mason University.
Steven Hayward.
305 Board Member at IER; Scholar and 
fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. 
Hayward produced An Inconvenient Truth… or Convenient 
Fiction306 for PRIPP, a film attacking the science of global 
warming and intended as a rebuttal to former Vice-President Al Gore’s documentary. Hayward is also an IER board member and a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute.

page 34 ExxonMobil Website. Energy & Environment: Our Views on Climate. 01. http://www.exxonmobil.com/Corporate/energy_climate_views.asp x
 ExxonSecrets Website. 02. www.exxonsecrets.or g
 Americans For Prosperity Website. 03. www.hotairtour.or g
 “An Inconvenient Truth… or Convenient Fiction?” 04. http://www.aconvenientfiction.com/
 05. OpenSecrets.org,  Oil & Gas: Top Contributors to Federal Candidates and Parties, http://www.opensecrets.org/pacs/industry.php?txt=E01&cycle=2010
 Americans for Prosperity, AFP Blog, “Hot Air Tour: LIVE from Copenhagen,” 06. http://americansforprosperity.org/120209-hot-air-tour-live-copenhage n
 Americans for Prosperity: Missouri, AFP Missouri Blog, “ClimateGate Deniers Put in Their Place!” 07. http://www.americansforprosperity.org/120109-climategate-
deniers-put-their-plac e
 American for Prosperity: Pennsylvania, AFP Pennsylvania Blog, “ Exposing the Hot Air in Copenhagen,” 08. http://americansforprosperity.org/120809-exposing-hot-
air-copenhagen
 Americans for Prosperity, AFP Blog, “EPA’s Greenhouse Gases Declaration – Putting America On the Road to Ruin,” 09. FOXNews.com , Phil Kerpen, 7 Dec. 2009 http://
americansforprosperity.org/120709-epas-greenhouse-gases-declaration-putting-america-road-ruin
 The Heritage Foundation, “Copenfrauden: The Scandals Behind Global Warming,” 11 Dec. 2009 10. http://blog.heritage.org/2009/12/11/copenfrauden-the-scandals-
behind-global-warming/#more-2167 8
 The Heritage Foundation, “ClimateGate Heats Up Global Warming Debate before Copenhagen,” 23 Nov. 2009 11. http://blog.heritage.org/2009/11/23/climategate-
heats-up-global-warming-debate-before-copenhagen /
 The Heritage Foundation, “Climate Emails Have Rippling Effects,” 1 Dec. 2009 12. http://blog.heritage.org/2009/12/01/climate-emails-have-rippling-effects /
 The Heritage Foundation, “New Poll Shows More Skepticism on Global Warming,” 3 Dec. 2009 13. http://blog.heritage.org/2009/12/03/new-poll-shows-more-
skepticism-on-global-warming /
 Cato Insitute Website, “Patrick J. Michaels: Senior Fellow in Environmental Studies,” 14. http://www.cato.org/people/patrick-michael s
 Cato Institute Website, “Patrick J. Michaels: Multimedia,” 15. http://www.cato.org/people/pub_list.php?auth_id=21&pub_list= 8
 16. The Washington Examiner , “Patrick Michaels: Climate scientists subverted peer review,” Patrick Michaels, 2 Dec. 2009 http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/
opinion/columns/OpEd-Contributor/Climate-scientists-subverted-peer-review-8613054-78248872.htm l
 17. The Wall Street Journal , “How to Manufacture a Climate Consensus,” Patrick J. Michaels, 17 Dec. 2009 http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704398
304574598230426037244.htm l
 American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, “Climategate and Climate Science,” Steven F. Hayward and Kenneth P. Green, 9 Dec. 2009 18. http://www.
aei.org/issue/10001 6
 Americans for Tax Reform, “Before There Was Climategate: A History Of Scientific Alarmism,” Tim Andrews, 9 Dec. 2009 19. http://www.atr.org/climategate-history-
scientific-alarmism-a430 2
 Capital Research Center Webstie, “Archive for the ‘Climategate’ Category,” 20. http://www.capitalresearch.org/blog/category/climategate /
 Fraser Institute, “New video urges Canadians to ‘Question the Hype’ on global warming,” 7 Dec. 2009 21. http://www.fraserinstitute.org/newsandevents/news/7062.
aspxFinancial information for this report was drawn from primary sources including:  
GuideStar —http://www2.guidestar.org/Home.aspx   
a website containing details on hundreds of foundations, their IRS 990 form submissions.
Media Matters Action Conservative Transparency project http://mediamattersaction.org/transparency/
Conservative and corporate foundation grants are cross-referenced with recipients in a searchable format.
OpenSecrets —http://www.opensecrets.org/  
A “nonpartisan guide to money’s influence on U.S. elections and public policy” contains campaign contribution, 
PAC and lobbying data compiled per donor, per sector and per candidate.
Additional Koch foundation financial documents obtained from the foundations SOURCES:
Endnotes

page 35SOURCES:
 George C. Marshall Institute, “Copenhagen, Climategate, EPA and the U.S. Senate,” Jeff Kueter, Dec. 2009 22. http://www.marshall.org/pdf/materials/776.pd f
 Goldwater Institute, “Does ‘ClimateGate,” expose weird science or political propaganda?” Byron Schlomach, 3 Dec. 2009 23. http://www.goldwaterinstitute.org/
article/418 2
 Independent Women’s Forum Website, Search Results for “climategate,” 24. http://iwf.org/search/results/?cx=001643811821520366255%3Anrzq1-nzg0u&cof=F
ORID%3A11&q=climategate&sa=search&siteurl=iwf.org%2F#94 5
 John Locke Foundation, “Climate-Gate Update: Affects Cary’s Planning,” Kent Misegades, 8 Dec. 2009 25. http://triangle.johnlocke.org/blog/?p=607 8
 Mackinac Center for Public Policy, “’Climategate’ Raises Questions About Money in Science,” 25 Nov. 2009 26. http://www.mackinac.org/1141 5
 Media Research Center, “The Left’s Climategate: A Scandal for Journalism, Too,” Rich Noyes, 3 Dec. 2009 27. http://www.mrc.org/realitycheck/
realitycheck/2009/20091203094216.asp x
 Pacific Research Institute, “Must…Stop…Reading…Blogs…on…ClimateGate,” Robert P. Murphy, 27 Nov. 2009 28. http://liberty.pacificresearch.org/blog/sid.
must-stop-reading-blogs-on-climategat e
 Reason Foundation Website, Search Results for “climategate,” 29. http://reason.org/search/results/?cx=000107342346889757597%3All4jwmwz-2e&cof=FORID
%3A11&q=climategate&sa=GO&siteurl=reason.org%2Fnews%2Fshow%2Fcringing-over-climategate#92 9
 State Policy Network, State Policy Blog, “Search Results,” 30. http://www.statepolicyblog.org/?s=climategate&x=12&y=6&=Searc h
 Texas Public Policy Foundation, Texas Policy Cast, “Complete Archive,” 31. http://www.texaspolicy.com/policycast.ph p
 GlobalWarming.org Website, “Search Results for ‘climategate,’” 32. http://www.globalwarming.org/?s=climategate&x=0&y=0&=G o
 FreedomWorks, “Policy Implications of Climategate,” Nan Swift, 9 Dec. 2009, 33. http://www.freedomworks.org/tags/climate-gat e
 The Heartland Institute Website, “Search Results for ‘climategate,’” 34. http://www.heartland.org/searchresults.html?cx=015397170090247670231%3Arh4cbln1
kz8&cof=FORID%3A11&ie=UTF-8&q=climategate&sa=Search&siteurl=www.heartland.org%2Farticle%2F26532%2FClimategate_A_Willful_Ignorance.
html#91 5
 ExxonSecrets Blog. “Why Does Exxon Care About Polar Bears?” 4 Nov 07 35. http://exxonsecrets.greenpeace.org/blog/kert_davies/2007/11/04/why_does_exxon_
cares_about_polar_bears
 Ecological Complexity, vol 4 issue 3 pages 73-84. 36. http://bit.ly/aqHUl c
 Wikipedia.org. “Ian Stirling.” Accessed 12 Mar 2010. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ian_Stirling37. 
 Polar Bears International Website. http://www.polarbearsinternational.org/polar-bears/what-the-experts-say38. 
 Ecological Complexity Vol 5 issue 3, September 2008 pp 193 –201. 39. http://bit.ly/93H8c y
 PolluterWatch Website. http://www.polluterwatch.com/2009/12/willie-soon-and-sallie-baliunas/40. 
 PolluterWatch Website. 41. http://www.polluterwatch.com/2009/12/david-legates-%E2%80%93-delaware%E2%80%99s-state-climate-denier /
 DeSmogBlog Website. “Timothy Ball and the Oil Industry.” http://www.desmogblog.com/node/127242. 
 ExxonMobil website. Community giving reports. 43. http://www.exxonmobil.com/Corporate/community_contributions_report_public.asp x
 George C. Marshall Institute “Lessons & Limits of Climate History: Was the 20th Century Climate Unusual?” by Willie Soon & Sallie Baliunas, 44. http://www.marshall.
org/pdf/materials/136.pd f
 Mooney, Chris. “Earth Last: James Inhofe proves “flat Earth” doesn’t refer to Oklahoma.”, American Prospect, April 13, 2004 45. http://www.prospect.org/cs/
articles?articleId=760 3
 The Harvard Crimson, “Warming Study Draws Fire: Harvard scientists accused of politicizing research”, Irene Sanchez, September 12, 2003 46. http://www.
thecrimson.com/article/2003/9/12/warming-study-draws-fire-a-study /
 Letter from Rep Brad Miller (D-NC) to ExxonMobil, Oct 17, 2007. 47. http://research.greenpeaceusa.org/?a=view&d=467 5
 Letter from Rep Brad Miller (D-NC) to ExxonMobil, Oct 17, 2007. 48. http://research.greenpeaceusa.org/?a=view&d=467 5
 Letter from ExxonMobil to Rep Brad Miller (D-NC). 6 Nov 2007. 49. http://research.greenpeaceusa.org/?a=view&d=467 4
 State of Alaska letter to Interior Secretary Kempthorne April 9, 2007 50. http://research.greenpeaceusa.org/?a=view&d=467 3
 American Enterprise Institute Website. “Is the Polar Bear Endangered, or Just Conveniently Charismatic?” May 2008. 51. http://www.aei.org/publications/filter.
all,pubID.27918/pub_detail.as p
 Heritage Foundation: The Foundry. “Morning Bell: Blame Canada.” 1 May 2008. 52. http://blog.heritage.org/2008/05/01/morning-bell-blame-canada /
 53. Washington Post . Lydersen, Kari. “Oil Group Joins Alaska in Suing To Overturn Polar Bear Protection.” 31Aug 2008 http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/
content/article/2008/08/30/AR2008083001538.html
 Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Study of the effects on employment of public aid to renewable energy sources, 2009 54. http://www.juandemariana.org/pdf/090327-
employment-public-aid-renewable.pd f

page 36 Natural Resources Defense Council, “Debunking the ‘Spanish Jobs Study’: 9 Inconvenient Truths You Should Know About,” Pete Altman, 23 Sept. 2009 55. http://
switchboard.nrdc.org/blogs/paltman/credit_for_trying_spanish_stud.htm l
 Natural Resources Defense Council, “US Gov’t Debunks ‘Spanish’ Study Promoted by Big Oil Bus Tour,” Pete Altman, 31 Aug. 2009 56. http://switchboard.nrdc.org/
blogs/paltman/us_govt_debunks_spanish_study.htm l
 Natural Resources Defense Council, “Spain Rejects Calzada ‘Spanish Jobs’ Study,” Pete Altman, 20 May 2009 57. http://switchboard.nrdc.org/blogs/paltman/
spain_rejects_calzada_spanish.htm l
 Natural Resources Defense Council, “Imported Lies: Debunking the Spanish Green Jobs Smear,” Pete Altman, 16 April 2009 58. http://switchboard.nrdc.org/blogs/
paltman/imported_lies_debunking_the_sp.htm l
 59. Daily Finance,  “The dirtiest bus tour in America attacks cap and trade bill,” Mark Svenvold, 28 Aug. 2009 http://www.dailyfinance.com/story/company-news/
the-dirtiest-bus-tour-in-america-attacks-cap-and-trade-bill/19142967 /
 60. Timesunion.com,  “Tilting at green windmills,” George Will, 26 June 2009 http://www.timesunion.com/AspStories/story.asp?storyID=814149&category=OPINIO N
 Institute for Energy Research, “Running of the Bull: U.S. ‘Green Jobs’ Rhetoric Runs Smack Dab Into Hard Lessons From Spain,” 31 March 2009 61. http://www.
instituteforenergyresearch.org/2009/03/31/running-of-the-bull-us-green-jobs-rhetoric /
 62. CNSNEWS.com , “Green Stimulus Money Costs More Jobs Than It Creates, Study Shows,” Josiah Ryan, 13 April 2009 http://www.cnsnews.com/Public/Content/
Article.aspx?rsrcid=4645 3
 The Heritage Foundation Website, “Search Results for ‘calzada,’” 63. http://search.heritage.org/search?ie=&site=default_collection&output=xml_no_dtd&client=he
ritageorg&lr=&filter=0&proxystylesheet=heritageorg&getfields=%252A&restrict=Heritage&q=calzada&x=0&y= 0
 Americans for Prosperity: Colorado, AFP Colorado Blog, “What Would Cap-and-Trade Mean for Colorado?” 64. http://www.americansforprosperity.org/070609-what-
would-cap-and-trade-mean-colorado- 0
 American for Prosperity: Texas, AFP Texas Blog, “Cap-and-Trade Energy Tax: Job-Killer With No Environmental Benefit,” Phil Kerpen, 30 July 2009 65. http://www.
americansforprosperity.org/072909-cap-and-trade-energy-tax-job-killer-no-environmental-benefi t
 66. Daily Finance,  “The dirtiest but tour in America attacks cap and trade bill,” Mark Svenvold, 28 Aug. 2009 http://www.dailyfinance.com/story/company-news/
the-dirtiest-bus-tour-in-america-attacks-cap-and-trade-bill/19142967 /
 Americans for Prosperity: Texas, AFP Texas Blog, “The Impact of Waxman-Markey on American Jobs,” Tom Pauken, 67. http://americansforprosperity.org/092309-
impact-waxman-markey-american-job s
 Phil Kerpen, Economic Policy Analysis and Advocacy, 68. http://www.philkerpen.com/?q=node/292 \
 Center for Politiske Studier, Wind Energy: The Case of Denmark, 2009 69. http://www.cepos.dk/fileadmin/user_upload/Arkiv/PDF/Wind_energy_-_the_case_of_
Denmark.pd f
 CBSNews, “Transcript: Obama’s Earth Day Speech,” 22 April 2009 70. http://www.cbsnews.com/blogs/2009/04/22/politics/politicalhotsheet/entry4962412.shtm l
 71. Into The Wind Blog , “The Truth About Wind Power in Demark,” American Wind Energy Association, 15 Sept. 2009 http://www.awea.org/
blog/?mode=viewid&post_id=19 6
 Natural Resources Defense Council, “The Danish Wind Study Spin that Blows,” Pete Altman, 14 Sept. 2009 72. http://switchboard.nrdc.org/blogs/paltman/
the_danish_study_that_blows.htm l
 Natural Resources Defense Council, “The Danish Wind Experience: Truth and Fiction,” Samir Succar, 14 Sept. 2009 73. http://switchboard.nrdc.org/blogs/ssuccar/
the_danish_wind_experience_tru.htm l
 Atlas Economic Research Foundation, “Recipients of 2009 Fisher Venture Grants,” 15 April 2009 74. http://atlasnetwork.org/programs/fisher-venture-grants/
winners /
 Atlas Economic Research Foundation Netowrk, “FVG Winner: CEPOS, Denmark,” 30 April 2009 75. http://atlasnetwork.org/networknews/2009/04/30/fvg-winner-
cepos-denmark /
 Institute for Energy Research, “Something Rotten? Obama Says Danes Receive 20% of Their Power Via Wind; New Study Tells the Real Story,” 14 Sept. 2009 76. 
http://www.instituteforenergyresearch.org/2009/09/14/something-rotten-obama-says-danes-receive-20-of-their-power-via-wind-new-study-tells-the-
real-story /
 Institute for Energy Research, “Fact Shee: Wind Energy- the Case of Denmark,” 77. http://www.instituteforenergyresearch.org/denmark/Danes_Fact_Sheet.pd f
 The Heritage Foundation, “Wind Power: An Expensive and Inefficient Way to Reduce CO2,” 14 Sept. 2009 78. http://blog.heritage.org/2009/09/14/wind-power-an-
expensive-and-inefficient-way-to-reduce-co2 /
 Alliance for Energy & Economic Growth, “AEEG Hosts State Climate Dialogues,” http://www.yourenergyfuture.org/79. 
 Fight Clean Energy Smears Website, “Who’s Behind the Smears?” 80. http://www.fightcleanenergysmears.org/behind_the_smears.cfm#aee g
 Michigan Chamber of Commerce, “Special Event: Michigan Climate Change Dialogue To Be Held May 19 at Michigan Chamber in Lansing,” 81. http://www.michamber.
com/mx/climatechang eSOURCES:

page 37 82. DESMOGBLOG.com , “History and Background of the Alliance for Energy and Economic Growth,” http://www.desmogblog.com/history-background-research-
alliance-energy-economic-growt h
 83. Portfolio.com , “The Price of Immortality,” Gary Weiss, 15 Oct. 2008 http://www.portfolio.com/executives/features/2008/10/15/Profile-of-Billionaire-David-
Koch/index3.htm l
 84. Hoovers , “Koch Industries, Inc.: Company Description,” http://www.hoovers.com/company/Koch_Industries_Inc/cftjki-1.htm l
 85. Forbes.com ,. “America’s Largest Private Companies,” Andrea D. Murphy and John J. Ray, ed, 28 Oct. 2009 http://www.forbes.com/2009/10/28/largest-private-
companies-business-private-companies-09_land.htm l
 Koch Industries Website, 86. http://www.kochind.com/locations.as p
 87. http://www.hoovers.com/koch-industries,-inc./--ID__40267--/free-co-factsheet.xhtm l
 “Koch Industries, Inc.” 88. Hoover’s Company Records . Load date February 26, 2010. Accessed March 2, 2010
 Lacrosse Tribune, “Refinery takes Canadian oil and turns it into gasoline for Wisconsin.” Richard Mial. March 8, 2010 89. http://www.lacrossetribune.com/news/
local/article_e76ad10e-2a6d-11df-8363-001cc4c002e0.htm l
 90. Forbes.com , “The World’s Billionaires 2009,” 11 March 2009 http://www.forbes.com/lists/2009/10/billionaires-2009-richest-people_The-Worlds-
Billionaires_Rank.html
 91. http://www.forbes.com/lists/2009/54/rich-list-09_The-400-Richest-Americans_Rank.htm l
 “Koch Industries, Inc.” 92. Hoover’s Company Records . Load date February 26, 2010. Accessed March 2, 2010
 “Koch Industries, Inc.”93.  International Directory of Company Histories,  Vol. 77. St. James Press, 2006. Reproduced in Business and Company Resource Center. 
Farmington Hills, Mich: Gale Group. 2009. http://galenet.galegroup.com/servlet/BCR C
 “Koch Industries, Inc.” 94. Hoover’s Company Records . Load date February 26, 2010. Accessed March 2, 2010
 95. Koch Industries Website . History Timeline. http://kochind.com/timeline.as p
 Koch Industries Website96. . Industry Areas: Polymers and Fibers. http://kochind.com/IndustryAreas/fibers.asp x
 “Koch Industries, Inc.” 97. Hoover’s Company Records . Load date February 26, 2010. Accessed March 2, 2010
 Koch Industries Website98. , “Charles G. Koch,” http://www.kochind.com/files/kochcharles.pd f
 99. New York Times Magazine . Dec 7, 1986. “Brothers at Odds.” Leslie Wayne.
 “25 Years at the Cato Institute: The 2001 Annual Report,” 2001, pg 10 100. http://www.cato.org/pubs/papers/25th_annual_report.pd f
 101. Institute for Humane Studies at George Mason University , Koch Summer Fellow Program: Frequently Asked Questions Sheet, http://theihs.org/ContentDetails.
aspx?id=648#15 9
 102. The Wall Street Journal, “Private Enterprise: Charles Koch applied the ‘science of liberty’ to become one of the world’s richest men,” Stephen Moore, 7 May 2006 
http://www.opinionjournal.com/editorial/feature.html?id=11000834 3
 103. The Wall Street Journal , “Private Enterprise: Charles Koch applied the ‘science of liberty’ to become one of the world’s richest men,” Stephen Moore, 7 May 2006 
http://www.opinionjournal.com/editorial/feature.html?id=11000834 3
 The Center for Public Integrity, “Koch’s Low Profile Belies Political Power: Private oil company does both business and politics with the shades drawn,” Bob 104. 
Williams and Kevin Bogardus, 15 July 2004 http://projects.publicintegrity.org/oil//report.aspx?aid=34 7
 105. OpenSecrets.org , “Oil & Gas: Top Contributors to Federal Candidates and Parties,” http://www.opensecrets.org/industries/contrib.php?ind=E01&cycle=200 6 
Accessed 7 March 2010
 106. OpenSecrets.org , “Oil & Gas: Top Contributors to Federal Candidates and Parties,” http://www.opensecrets.org/industries/contrib.php?ind=E01&cycle=200 8 
Accessed 7 March 2010
 107. Portfolio.com , “The Price of Immortality,” Gary Weiss, 15 Oct. 2008 http://www.portfolio.com/executives/features/2008/10/15/Profile-of-Billionaire-David-
Koch/index3.htm l
 Koch Industries Website108. , “David H. Koch,” http://www.kochind.com/files/kochdavid.pd f
 109. Forbes.com , “The 400 Richest Americans 2009,” 3 Sept. 2009 http://www.forbes.com/lists/2009/54/rich-list-09_The-400-Richest-Americans_Rank.htm l
 110. Portfolio.com , “The Price of Immortality,” Gary Weiss, 15 Oct. 2008 http://www.portfolio.com/executives/features/2008/10/15/Profile-of-Billionaire-David-
Koch/index1.htm l
 111. Portfolio.com , “The Price of Immortality,” Gary Weiss, 15 Oct. 2008 http://www.portfolio.com/executives/features/2008/10/15/Profile-of-Billionaire-David-
Koch/index1.html
 112. http://www.portfolio.com/executives/features/2008/10/15/Profile-of-Billionaire-David-Koch/index1.htm l
 Press Room of the Smithsonian Institution, “New Exhibition Hall Devoted to Human Origins to Open at Smithsonian’s Natural History Museum in March 2010,” 14 113. 
Oct. 2009 http://newsdesk.si.edu/releases/nmnh_human_origins_announcement_release.ht mSOURCES:

page 38 Libertarian Party Website, “Our History,” 114. http://www.lp.org/our-histor y
 Americans for Prosperity Website, “About AFP - Directors,” 115. http://afpmo.com/index.php?static=45 5
 Department of Justice. Press release: “United States Announces Largest Settlement Under Environmental Protection Agency’s Audit Policy,” 13 April 2009 116. http://
www.justice.gov/opa/pr/2009/April/09-enrd-339.html
 US Environmental Protection Agency, “United States Announces Largest Settlement Under Environmental Protection Agency’s Audit Policy,” Dave Ryan, 13 April 117. 
2009 http://yosemite.epa.gov/opa/admpress.nsf/d0cf6618525a9efb85257359003fb69d/1e9d18f061b4da818525759700632926!OpenDocumen t
 118. http://energypipelinenews.blogspot.com/2009/12/kochs-mpc-line-spills-210000-gallons-of.htm l
 119. http://newstandardnews.net/content/index.cfm/items/366 0
 120. 60 Minutes , “Blood & oil; family feud among brothers of Koch Industries charges of fraud against the company,” Anchor: Scott Pelley. 15 Aug 2001. http://www.
cbsnews.com/stories/2000/11/27/60II/main252545.shtm l
 “Koch Industries, Inc.” 121. International Directory of Company Histories , Vol. 77. St. James Press, 2006. Reproduced in Business and Company Resource Center. 
Farmington Hills, Mich.:Gale Group. 2009. http://galenet.galegroup.com/servlet/BCR C
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “Koch Industries to Pay Record Fine for Oil Spills in Six States,” 13 Jan. 2000 122. http://yosemite.epa.gov/opa/admpress.nsf/0
16bcfb1deb9fecd85256aca005d74df/981d17e5ab07246f852568650062107 9
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “Koch Petroleum Group Sentenced for Minnesota Pollution,” 9 March 2000 123. http://yosemite.epa.gov/opa/admpress.nsf/
d0cf6618525a9efb85257359003fb69d/eae2020401d0bf098525689d00713ea5!OpenDocumen t
 National Transportation Safety Board, Pipeline Accident Summary Report, August 1994. 124. http://www.ntsb.gov/Publictn/1998/PAR9802S.pd f
 National Transportation Safety Board, Pipeline Accident Summary Report, August 1994, pg 5. 125. http://www.ntsb.gov/Publictn/1998/PAR9802S.pd f
 The Center for Public Integrity, “Koch’s Low Profile Belies Political Power: Private oil company does both business and politics with the shades drawn,” Bob 126. 
Williams and Kevin Bogardus, 15 July 2004 http://projects.publicintegrity.org/oil//report.aspx?aid=34 7
 Numerous sources, including 127. http://projects.publicintegrity.org/oil/report.aspx?aid=34 7
 Guidestar Database. 2008 IRS 990 Form, Claude R. Lambe Foundation. http://www2.guidestar.org/Home.aspx 128. 
 Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation Website, “Foundation Officers,” 129. http://www.cgkfoundation.org/about/foundation-staff/
 Guidestar Database. 2008 IRS 990 Form, David H. Koch Foundation. http://www2.guidestar.org/Home.aspx 130. 
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Mercautus Center, George Mason University,” 131. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/orgfactsheet.php?id=10 9
 Mercatus Center, George Mason University Website, “Charles Koch: Board Member,” 132. http://mercatus.org/charles-koc h
 Mercatus Center, George Mason University, Regulatory Studies Program, “Public Interest Comment on the Environmental Protection Agency’s Request for 133. 
Comment on a Petition: Control of Emissions From New and In-use Highway Vehicles and Engines,” 2001 http://mercatus.org/sites/default/files/publication/
The_Environmental_Protection_Agencys_Request_for_Comment_on_a_Petition_-_Control_of_Emissions_From_New_and_In-use_Highway_Vehicles_and_Engines.pd f
 Mercatus Center, George Mason University, “Environmental Quality & Market Processes,” Bruce Yandle, 2009 
134. http://mercatus.org/uploadedFiles/Mercatus/
Events/CHC_Environment%20March%2007_Yandle_pdf.pd f
 Americans for Prosperity Website http://mediamattersaction.org/transparency/organization/Americans_for_Prosperity_Foundation135. 
 136. DESMOGBLOG.com , “Americans for Prosperity: Research and Background Information,” http://www.desmogblog.com/americans-prosperity-history-research-
background-fundin g
 137. The Wall Street Journal , “Astroturfing the Climate Bill,” Russell Gold, 17 Aug. 2009 http://blogs.wsj.com/environmentalcapital/2009/08/17/astroturfing-the-
climate-bill /
 Americans for Prosperity, No Climate Tax Website 138. http://www.noclimatetax.com /
 Washington Post, August 16, 2009, “Loose Network of Activists Drives Reform Opposition.”139. 
 140. Institute for Humane Studies at George Mason University , Koch Summer Fellow Program: Frequently Asked Questions Sheet, http://theihs.org/ContentDetails.
aspx?id=648#15 9
 141. Mother Jones , “Climate Change Deniers Without Borders,” Josh Harkinson, 22 Dec. 2009 http://motherjones.com/environment/2009/12/climate-deniers-atlas-
foundation?page= 2
 The Heartland Institute Website, “Robert Bradley,” 142. http://www.globalwarmingheartland.com/expert.cfm?expertId=17 8
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Robert L. Bradley, Jr.,” 143. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/personfactsheet.php?id=337
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: S. Fred Singer,” 144. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/personfactsheet.php?id= 1
 Institute for Humane Studies at George Mason University145. , “Bruce Yandle,” http://www.theihs.org/PeopleDetails.aspx?id=86 0SOURCES:

page 39 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Bruce Yandle,” 146. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/personfactsheet.php?id=84 7
 147. Institute for Humane Studies at George Mason University , “Kenneth Green,” http://www.theihs.org/PeopleDetails.aspx?id=91 6
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Kenneth Green,” 148. http://exxonsecrets.org/html/personfactsheet.php?id=51 1
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Heritage Foundation, Heritage,” 149. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/orgfactsheet.php?id=4 2
 The Heritage Foundation, “The Economic Consequences of Waxman-Markey: An Analysis of the American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009,” David 150. 
Kreutzer, Karen Campbell, William W. Beach, Ben Lieberman, and Nicolas Loris, 6 Aug. 2009 http://www.heritage.org/Research/EnergyandEnvironment/
cda0904.cf m
 151. DESMOGBLOG.com , “The unequivocal faith of the climate change quibblers,” Kevin Grandia, 8 Jan. 2009 http://www.desmogblog.com/unequivocal-faith-
climate-change-quibbler s
 Natural Resources Defense Council, “Heritage Foundation Fools Itself on Carbon Taxes,” Pete Altman, 2 April 2009 152. http://switchboard.nrdc.org/blogs/paltman/
heritage_foundation_fools_itse.htm l
 153. Climate Progress , “Heritage Foundation pushes ‘completely untrue’ attack on clean-energy jobs with a panel bought and paid for by dirty energy,” 4 March 2009 
http://climateprogress.org/2009/05/04/heritage-foundation-green-jobs-dirty-energy-exxonmobil /
 Center for American Progress, “Green Investment and Jobs: A Response to the Heritage Foundation,” Robert Pollin, 7 Nov. 2008 154. http://www.americanprogress.
org/issues/2008/11/heritage_response.htm l
 Institute for Energy Research, “Spanish Prof. Calzada Joins IER Economist Murphy, U.S. Professor Bogart, at Heritage Forum on ‘Green Jobs,’” Chris Tucker, 1 155. 
May 2009 http://www.instituteforenergyresearch.org/2009/05/01/calzada-joins-economis-murphy-at-heritage-forum-on-green-jobs /
 National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2005 156. http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy09osti/46261.pd f
 Cato Institute Website, “Global Warming,” 157. http://www.cato.org/global-warmin g
 Cato Institute, Handbook for Policymakers, 2009 158. http://www.cato.org/pubs/handbook/hb111/hb111-45.pd f
 Cato Institute, IRS 990 Tax Form, FY 2007 159. http://dynamodata.fdncenter.org/990_pdf_archive/237/237432162/237432162_200803_990.pd f
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Patrick J. Michaels,” 160. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/personfactsheet.php?id= 4
 SourceWatch, “Patrick J. Michaels,” 161. http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php?title=Patrick_J._Michael s
 SourceWatch, “Patrick J. Michaels,” 162. http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php?title=Patrick_J._Michael s
 163. Energy & The Environment: Myths & Facts, 2nd ed, Drew Thornley, April 2009 http://www.manhattan-institute.org/energymyths/myth10.ht m
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Bjorn Lomborg,” 164. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/personfactsheet.php?id=127 3
 Manhattan Institute for Policy Research Website, “Manhattan Institute Events,” 165. http://www.manhattan-institute.org/html/past_events_2008.htm
 Washington Legal Foundation, “EPA ‘Endangerment’ Finding On CO2 Could Expand Climate Change Tort Suits,” Peter Glaser and Carroll W. McGuffey III, Vol. 24, 166. 
No. 26, 24 July 2009 http://www.wlf.org/publishing/publication_detail.asp?id=209 3
 The Federalist Society for Law and Public Policy Studies, “Global Warming is Nothing More than an Educated Guess,” 167. Environmental Law & Property Rights 
Practice Group Newsletter, Vol. 2, Iss. 1, Linda Bowles, 1 May 1998 http://www.fed-soc.org/publications/pubid.1472/pub_detail.as p
 The Federalist Society for Law and Public Policy Studies, “The Road from Rio to Kyoto: How Climate Science was Distorted to Supported Ideological Objectives,” 168. 
Environmental Law & Property Rights Practice Group Newsletter, Vol. 3, Iss. 3, S. Fred Singer, 1 March 2000 http://www.fed-soc.org/publications/pubid.1459/pub_detail.as p
 Foundation for Research on Economics & the Environment Website, “Pete Geddes, Executive Vice President,” 
169. http://www.free-eco.org/staff_geddes.ph p
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: FREE- Foundation for Research on Economics and the Environment, FREE,” 170. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/orgfactsheet.
php?id=3 4
 Foundation for Research on Economics & the Environment, “A Responsible Approach to Climate Change,” 171. Bozeman Daily Chronicle , Pete Geddes, 11 Aug. 2004 
http://www.free-eco.org/articleDisplay.php?id=40 9
 Foundation for Research on Economics & the Environment, Public Policy, Risk Analysis, & the Law: A Conference Series for Federal Judges, State Supreme Court 172. 
Justices, & Law Professors, http://www.free-eco.org/programs_judges.ph p
 Foundation for Research on Economics & the Environment, Press Release, 8 May 2006 173. http://www.communityrights.org/PDFs/Funding/free%202002.pd f
 174. http://www.communityrights.org/TaintedJustice/Chap3.pd f page 24
 “An Inconvenient Truth… or Convenient Fiction?” 175. http://www.aconvenientfiction.co m
 The Heritage Foundation, “An Inconvenient Truth… or Convenient Fiction: Sorting Out Sense from Nonsense on Global Warming,” 176. http://www.heritage.org/press/
events/ev041807a.cf m
 177. Think Progress, “AEI Letter Offers $10,000 Payments Only For Views Critical of the IPCC Report,” Faiz Shakir, 3 Feb. 2007 http://thinkprogress.org/2007/02/03/
aei-letter /SOURCES:

page 40 Tax Foundation, “The ‘Green Jobs’ Myth Behind Cap and Trade,” Patrick Fleenor, 9 Sept. 2009 178. http://www.taxfoundation.org/news/show/25104.htm l
 Chamberlain, Working Paper No. 6, 2009 179. http://www.taxfoundation.org/publications/show/24472.htm l
 Independent Women’s Forum, “Holding the Earth Hostage,” 180. The Washington Times, Carrie L. Lukas, 8 April 2008 http://www.iwf.org/news/show/20230.htm l
 Independent Women’s Forum Website, “Nancy M. Pfotenhauer,” 181. http://www.iwf.org/authors/show/275.htm l
 OpenSecrets.org, “Koch Industries: Lobbyists working for Koch Industries,” 182. http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/clientlbs.php?year=2000&lname=Koch+Industrie
s&id= Accessed 7 March 2010 
 Independent Women’s Forum, “IWF Announces Exciting New Partnership,” 28 Oct. 2003 183. http://web.archive.org/web/20031119043957/http:/iwf.org/
news/031028a.shtm l
 Americans for Prosperity Website, Search results for Nancy Pfotenhauer, 184. http://www.americansforprosperity.org/search/node/nancy+pfotenhauer
 Independent Women’s Forum, “The Steve Largent Show: Mothers for Educating with Sound Science,” Amy Watson, 19 Nov. 2008 185. http://www.iwf.org/iwfmedia/
show/20895.htm l
 Texas Public Policy Foundation, “No Cooling Benefits from Aggressive U.S. Carbon Caps,” Kathleen Hartnett White, 20 Aug. 2009 186. http://www.texaspolicy.com/
commentaries_single.php?report_id=277 1
 Texas Public Policy Foundation, “ACES Wild!” Kathleen Hartnett White, 17 Aug. 2009 187. http://www.texaspolicy.com/commentaries_single.php?report_id=276 8
 American Council for Capital Formation and National Association of Manufacturers, Economic Impact of the Waxman-Markey American Clean Energy and 188. 
Security Act, 2009 http://www.accf.org/publications/126/accf-nam-study
 Alliance for Energy & Economic Growth, “AEEG Hosts State Climate Dialogues,” 189. http://www.yourenergyfuture.org /
 Natural Resource Defense Council, “NAM/ACCF: Distorting their own distorted analysis of climate legislation,” Laurie Johnson, 10 Sept. 2009 190. http://switchboard.
nrdc.org/blogs/ljohnson/namaccf_distorting_their_own_d.htm l
 191. Grist,  “Pay no attention to footnote #5,” Miles Grant, 5 Aug. 2009 http://www.grist.org/article/2009-08-05-pay-no-attention-to-footnote- 5
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: George C. Marshall Institute, GMI,” 192. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/orgfactsheet.php?id=3 6
 George C. Marshall Institute Website, “Dr. Sallie Baliunas,” 193. http://www.marshall.org/experts.php?id=3 8
 194. DESMOGBLOG.com , “Sallie Baliunas,” http://www.desmogblog.com/sallie-baliuna s
 George C. Marshall Institute, 195. The Cocktail Conversation Guide to Global Warming, 23 July 2009 http://www.marshall.org/article.php?id=72 9
 Reason Foundation, “Climate Change: No Harm, No Claim,” Indur Goklany, 12 June 2008 196. http://reason.org/news/show/1003118.htm l
 Natural Resource Defense Council, “Debunking the ‘Spanish Jobs Sudy’: 9 Inconvenient Truths You Should Know About,” Pete Altman, 23 Sept. 2009 197. http://
switchboard.nrdc.org/blogs/paltman/credit_for_trying_spanish_stud.htm l
 Natural Resource Defense Council, “Another Response to the ‘Danish’ Wind Study,” Pete Altman, 16 Sept. 2009 198. http://switchboard.nrdc.org/blogs/paltman/
another_response_to_the_danish.htm l
 Institute for Energy Research Website, 199. http://www.instituteforenergyresearch.org/global-warming /
 Institute for Energy Research, “The Cost of Warner-Lieberman,” 200. http://www.instituteforenergyresearch.org/cost-of-climate-change-policies /
 Institute for Energy Research, “Lost in Translation,” 28 July 2009 201. http://www.instituteforenergyresearch.org/2009/07/28/lost-in-translation /
 TIME, “I Hear You, I Hear You,” Michael Duffy, Ann Blackman, and Nancy Traver, 21 June 1993 202. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/
article/0,9171,978735-2,00.htm l
 203. National Public Radio (NPR), “New Group Tied to Oil Industry Runs Ads Promoting Drilling, Attacking Democrat,” Will Evans, 22 Sept. 2008 http://www.npr.org/
blogs/secretmoney/2008/09/udall_radio_ad.htm l
 204. The Wonk Room, “GOP Team at American Energy Alliance Runs ‘Energy Town Hall’ Oil Bus Tour,” Brad Johnson, 22 Aug. 2009 http://wonkroom.thinkprogress.
org/2009/08/22/dirty-energy-town-hall /
 Fraser Institute, “New report details over-looked scientific evidence against simplistic climate alarmism,” 21 April 2009 205. http://www.fraserinstitute.org/
newsandevents/news/6629.asp x
 Fraser Institute, “Understanding Climate Change: Lesson Plans for the Classroom,” Holly Lippke Fretwell and Brandon Scarborough, 30 June 2009 206. http://www.
fraserinstitute.org/researchandpublications/publications/6819.asp x
 Fraser Institute, “Fraser Institute makes new book on understanding climate change available to teachers and schools,” 6 March 2008 207. http://www.
fraserinstitute.org/newsandevents/news/5184.asp x
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Frontiers of Freedom Institute and Foundation, FOF,” 208. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/orgfactsheet.php?id=3 5
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Myron Ebell,” 209. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/personfactsheet.php?id=28 0
 American Petroleum Institute, Internal Memo, April 1998 210. http://www.euronet.nl/users/e_wesker/ew@shell/API-prop.htm lSOURCES:

page 41 Frontiers of Freedom, Global Warming Papers search results, 211. http://ff.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=blogcategory&id=43&Itemid=7 7
 Frontiers of Freedom, “Cap-and-Trade’s Regressive Tax,” Jillian Bandes, 20 March 2009 212. http://www.ff.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=46 4
 Frontiers of Freedom, “The world has never seen such freezing heat,” Christopher Booker, 5 Dec. 2008 213. http://www.ff.org/index.php?option=com_content&task
=view&id=451&Itemid=7 6
 Frontiers of Freedom, “Once again Congress ignores the will of the people to further a deceptive global warming agenda,” Vincent Gioia, 3 June 2008 214. http://www.
ff.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=440&Itemid=7 6
 National Center for Policy Analysis, “A Skeptical Take on Global Warming,” 15 Sept. 2009 215. Washington Post, Matt Rogers, 10 Sept. 2009 http://www.ncpa.org/sub/
dpd/index.php?Article_ID=1844 0
 National Center for Policy Analysis, “Cap and Trade Hurts the Economy Without Helping the Environment,” 21 Aug. 2009, 216. Smiley Pete Publishing , Kathy Gornik, 6 
Aug. 2009 http://www.ncpa.org/sub/dpd/index.php?Article_ID=1835 5
 American Council on Science and Health, “Global Climate Change and Human Health: A Position Paper of the American Council on Science and Health,” Sidney 217. 
Shindell and Jack Raso, 1 Oct. 1997 http://www.acsh.org/publications/pubID.868/pub_detail.as p
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Sallie Baliunas,” 218. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/personfactsheet.php?id= 3
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: S. Fred Singer,” 219. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/personfactsheet.php?id= 1
 Atlas Economic Research Foundation Network, “Atlas Cosponsors Heartland Ecent on Climate Change,” 15 Jan. 2009 220. http://atlasnetwork.org/
networknews/2009/01/15/atlas-cosponsors-heartland-ecent-on-climate-change /
 221. Newsobserver.com,  “The Locke Foundation’s donors,” 14 Nov. 2007 http://projects.newsobserver.com/tags/atlas_economic_research_foundatio n
 Capital Research Center, Green Watch.org, 222. http://www.capitalresearch.org/gw/index2.htm l
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, AEI,” 223. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/orgfactsheet.php?id= 9
 American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research Website, “Energy and Environment,” 224. http://www.aei.org/ra/ 5
 American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, “No: Alternatives Are Simply Too Expensive,” Steven F. Hayward, 21 Sept. 2009 225. http://www.aei.org/
article/10105 0
 Independence Institute, “Join us for an evening of environmental hysteria and the cult of climate change. With special guest,” Cult of Climate Change, 226. http://www.
i2i.org/main/page.php?page_id=18 0
 Independence Institute, “Climate of Extremes,” 227. http://www.i2i.org/main/page.php?page_id=23 9
 American Legislative Exchange Council, Energy, Environment, and Economics, 228. http://www.alec.org/AM/Template.cfm?Section=Energy_Publicatio n
 American Legislative Exchange Council, “Climate Change Overview for State Legislators,” Daniel R. Simmons, Esq., 229. http://www.alec.org/am/pdf/energy/
CCOverview.pd f
 Goldwater Institute, “Goldwater Institute Will Appeal Ruling on Corporation Commission Renewable Energy Rules,” 8 Sept. 2009 230. http://www.goldwaterinstitute.
org/article/365 2
 Property & Environment Research Center, “The Benefits of Climate Change,” Daniel K. Benjamin, Vol. 25, No. 3, Sept. 2007 231. http://www.perc.org/articles/
article906.php
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Richard L. Stroup,” 232. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/personfactsheet.php?id=84 5
 Property & Environment Research Center Website, “Senior Fellow Richard L. Stroup,” 233. http://www.perc.org/bio.php?staff_id=1 5
 Cato Institute Website, “Richar L. Stroup: Adjunct Scholar,” 234. http://www.cato.org/people/richard-strou p
 Mackinac Center for Public Policy, “Just the Facts,” 7 May 2007 235. http://www.mackinac.org/article.aspx?ID=851 2
 Mackinac Center for Public Policy, “Michigan’s Climate Consultant Skews Cost Estimates,” 20 May 2008, 236. The Detroit News , Paul Chesser, 14 May 2008 http://
www.mackinac.org/article.aspx?ID=947 2
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Sherwood Idso,” 237. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/personfactsheet.php?id=1 4
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Craig Idso,” 238. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/personfactsheet.php?id=1 5
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Keith Idso,” 239. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/personfactsheet.php?id=1 6
 CO2 Science Website, 240. http://co2science.org /
 Americans for Tax Reform, Search Results for “Global Warming,” 241. http://www.atr.org/index.php?search_term=global+warming&search_submit=1&button =
 Americans for Tax Reform, Cost of Government Day, 2008 242. http://www.atr.org/pdf/2008/071508ot-cogdreport.pd f
 State Policy Network, “Environmental Exchange”, Vol. 2, Iss. 7, 1 April 2009 243. http://www.spn.org/publications/environmental-exchange-vol-2-issue- 7
 State Policy Network, “Environmental Exchange,” Vol. 2, Iss. 11, 31 July 2009 244. http://www.spn.org/publications/environmental-exchange-volume-2-issue-1 1SOURCES:

page 42 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Media Research Center, MRC,” 245. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/orgfactsheet.php?id=11 0
 Media Research Center Website, “About Media Research Center,” 246. http://www.mrc.org/about/aboutwelcome.as p
 Business & Media Institute, Global Warming Censored, 247. http://www.businessandmedia.org/specialreports/2008/GlobalWarmingCensored/
GlobalWarmingCensored_execsum.as p
 Media Research Center, Clamoring for Kyoto: The Networks’ One-Sided Coverage of Global Warming, 2001 248. http://www.mediaresearch.org/
specialreports/2001/sum/kyoto01.as p
 Media Research Center, “The Left’s Climategate: A Scandal for Journalism, Too,” Rich Noyes, 3 Dec. 2009 249. http://www.mrc.org/realitycheck/
realitycheck/2009/20091203094216.asp x
 250. DESMOGBLOG.com,  “John Locke Foundation launches a same-ol, same-ol North Carolina misinformation campaign,” Kevin Grandia, 26 July 2007 
http://www.desmogblog.com/john-locke-foundation-launches-a-same-ol-same-ol-north-carolina-misinformation-campaig n
 John Locke Foundation, “Global Warming Policy: NC Should Do Nothing,” 12 April 2005 251. http://www.johnlocke.org/acrobat/spotlights/
spot_253_-_climate_change.pd f
 Joel Schwartz, A North Carolina Citizen’s Guide to Global Warming, 2007 252. http://www.johnlocke.org/acrobat/policyReports/globalwarmingguide.pd f
 John Locke Foundation, “Climate-Gate Update: Affects Cary’s Planning,” Kent Misegades, 8 Dec. 2009 253. http://triangle.johnlocke.org/blog/?p=607 8
 National Taxpayers Union, “An Open Letter to Representative Bono Mack: Oppose Cap-and-Trade Tax Hike!” 18 June 2009 254. http://www.ntu.org/
news-and-issues/energy-environment/bono-mack-cap-and-trade.htm l
 National Taxpayers Union, “An Open Letter to Representative Minnick: Oppose Cap-and-Trade Tax Hike!” 18 June 2009 255. http://www.ntu.org/news-
and-issues/energy-environment/minnick-cap-and-trade.html
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Citizens for a Sound Economy and CSE Educational Foundation, CSE,” 256. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/
orgfactsheet.php?id=2 7
 SourceWatch, “Citizens for a Sound Economy,” 257. http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php?title=Citizens_for_a_Sound_Econom y
 Media Transparency, “FreedomWorks Challenges Progressive Organizations,” Bill Berkowitz, 31 July 2004 258. http://old.mediatransparency.org/story.
php?storyID=4 0
 FreedomWorks Webstie, “Issues: Global Warming,” 259. http://www.freedomworks.org/issues/global-warmin g
 FreedomWorks, “Policy Implications of Climategate,” Nan Swift, 9 Dec. 2009 260. http://www.freedomworks.org/tags/climate-gat e
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Competitive Enterprise Institute, CEI,” 261. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/orgfactsheet.php#src3 0
 262. GlobalWarming.org, “Climategate and consensus nonsense,” Fran Smith, 18 Dec. 2009 http://www.globalwarming.org/2009/12/18/climategate-
and-consensus-nonsense /
 Mercatus Center, George Mason University Website, “Richard Fink: Board Member,” 263. http://mercatus.org/richard-fin k
 ExxonSecrets.org, “Factsheet: Heartland Institute, Heartland,” 264. http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/orgfactsheet.php?id=4 1
The Heartland Institute, The 2009 International Conference on Climate Change, 265. http://www.heartland.org/events/NewYork09/index.htm l
 266. DESMOGBLOG.com,  “Denier Conference Readies for Round Three,” Jeremy Jacquot, 1 June 2009 http://www.desmogblog.com/denier-
conference-readies-round-thre e
 The Heartland Institute Website, Search Results for “Kyoto,” 267. http://www.globalwarmingheartland.com/research.cfm?TopId=55 4
 The Heartland Institute, “Global Warming: a Status Report,” Fred Singer, 1 Nov. 2002 268. http://www.globalwarmingheartland.com/Article.
cfm?artId=1063 9
 The Heartland Institute, “Climategate: An Opportunity to Stop and Think,” 269. Investor’s Business Daily, Joseph Bast, 23 Nov. 2009 http://www.
heartland.org/full/26407/ClimateGate_An_Opportunity_to_Stop_and_Think.htm l
 The Heartland Institute, “Climategate: A Willful Ignorance,” 270. Alan Caruba’s Blog, Alan Caruba, 5 Dec. 2009 http://www.heartland.org/article/26532/
Climategate_A_Willful_Ignorance.htm l
 The Heartland Institute Website, “Posts Tagged Climategate,” 271. http://fromtheheartland.org/?tag=climategat e
 Lobby Disclosure Act Database Website, 272. http://soprweb.senate.gov/index.cfm?event=selectfield s
 United States Senate, Public Disclosure, Filing Lobbying Documents, 273. http://www.senate.gov/pagelayout/legislative/g_three_sections_with_
teasers/lobbyingdisc.ht m
 OpenSecrets.org, “Lobbying: Oil & Gas- Year 2009,” http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/indusclient.php?year=2009&lname=E01&id= Accessed 7 274. 
March 2010
 OpenSecrets.org, “Lobbying: Oil & Gas- Year 2008,” http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/indusclient.php?year=2008&lname=E01&id= Accessed 7 275. 
March 2010

page 43 OpenSecrets.org, “Lobbying: Oil & Gas- Year 2007,” http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/indusclient.php?year=2007&lname=E01&id= Accessed 7 March 276. 
2010
 277. http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/lobbyist.php?year=2007&lname=Pyle%2C+Thomas+J&id=Y0000010160 0
 OpenSecrets.org, “Lobbying: Oil & Gas- Year 2006,” http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/indusclient.php?year=2006&lname=E01&id= Accessed 7 March 278. 
2010
 National Petrochemical & Refiners Association Website, “Regular Members,” 279. http://www.npra.org/forms/MemberDirectory/viewMemberDirectory?rep
ortType=regular# K
 National Petrochemical & Refiners Association Website, “Regular Members,” 280. http://www.npra.org/forms/MemberDirectory/viewMemberDirectory?rep
ortType=regular# K
 OpenSecrets.org, “National Petrochemical & Refiners Assn 2009.” http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/clientsum.php?year=2009&lname=National+Petr281. 
ochemical+%26+Refiners+Assn&id= Accessed 7 March 2010
 OpenSecrets.org, “PACS: Koch Industries,” 282. http://www.opensecrets.org/pacs/lookup2.php?strID=C0023648 9 Accessed 7 March 2010
 OpenSecrets.org, “Oil & Gas: Top Contributors to Federal Candidates and Parties- Year 2010,” 283. http://www.opensecrets.org/industries/contrib.
php?ind=E01&cycle=201 0 Accessed 7 March 2010.
 OpenSecrets.org, “Oil & Gas: Top Contributors to Federal Candidates and Parties- Year 2008,” 284. http://www.opensecrets.org/industries/contrib.
php?ind=E01&cycle=200 8 Accessed 7 March 2010.
 OpenSecrets.org, “Oil & Gas: Top Contributors to Federal Candidates and Parties- Year 2006,” 285. http://www.opensecrets.org/industries/contrib.
php?ind=E01&cycle=200 6 Accessed 7 March 2010.
 Koch Industries Website, “Charles G. Koch,” http://www.kochind.com/files/KochCHARLES.pdf286. 
 Forbes.com,287.  “The 400 Richest Americans: #9 Charles Koch,” 17 Sept. 2008 http://www.forbes.com/lists/2008/54/400list08_Charles-Koch_Z9KL.
html
 Koch Industries Website, “David H. Koch,” 288. http://www.kochind.com/files/KochDavid.pd f
 289. Forbes.com,  “The 400 Richest Americans: #9 David Koch,” 17 Sept. 2008 http://www.forbes.com/lists/2008/54/400list08_David-Koch_QMFE.htm l
 Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation Website, “Richard Fink,” 290. http://www.cgkfoundation.org/about/foundation-staff/14 /
 The Center for Public Integrity, “Koch’s Low Profile Belies Political Power: Private Oil Company Does Both Business and Politics with the Shades Drawn,” 291. 
Bob Williams and Kevin Bogardus, 15 July 2004 http://projects.publicintegrity.org/oil/report.aspx?aid=34 7
 292. Forbes.com,  “The 400 Richest Americans: #134 William Koch,” 17 Sept. 2008 http://www.forbes.com/lists/2008/54/400list08_William-Koch_J4JE.
html
 Brooks, Walter. “Osterville billionaire oil man behind stealth move to stop the wind farm”. Cape Cod Today, March 16, 2006.293. 
 294. Forbes.com,  “The 400 Richest Americans: #134 William Koch,” 17 Sept. 2008 http://www.forbes.com/lists/2008/54/400list08_William-Koch_J4JE.
html
 Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation Website, “Logan Moore,” 295. http://www.cgkfoundation.org/about/foundation-staff/9 /
 Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation Website, “Logan Moore,” 296. http://www.cgkfoundation.org/about/foundation-staff/9 /
 Americans for Prosperity Foundation Website, 297. http://web.archive.org/web/20050812004349/http:/www.americansforprosperity.org/about.htm l
 OpenSecrets.org, “Lobbying: Gable, Wayne- Year 1999,” 298. http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/lobbyist.php?lname=Gable%2C+Wayne&id=Y000000524
70&year=199 9 Accessed 7 March 2010.
 Institute for Energy Research Website, “Staff,” 299. http://www.instituteforenergyresearch.org/staff/
 Institute for Energy Research, “Daniel R. Simmons,” 300. http://www.instituteforenergyresearch.org/staff/daniel-r-simmons /
 American Legislative Exchange Council, The State Factor, “Get Your Money for Nothing and Your Credits for Free,” Marlo Lewis, Jr., Dec. 2002 301. http://
www.alec.org/AM/Template.cfm?Section=Search&section=NR_Archives&template=/CM/ContentDisplay.cfm&ContentFileID=11 3
 Philanthropy Roundtable Website, “Annual Meeting Bios A-L,” http://www.philanthropyroundtable.org/content.asp?contentid=516302. 
 Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation Website, “Kevin Gentry,” 303. http://www.cgkfoundation.org/about/foundation-staff/15 /
 OpenSecrets.org, “Donor Lookup: Find Individual and Soft Money Contributors,” http://www.opensecrets.org/indivs/index.php?capcode=f7zpv&name=g304. 
entry&state=VA&zip=&employ=koch&cand= Accessed 7 March 2010.
 American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research Website, Scholars & Fellows, “Steven F. Hayward,” 305. http://www.aei.org/scholar/2 8
 “An Inconvenient Truth… or Convenient Fiction?” 306. http://www.aconvenientfiction.com /

© Jiri Rezac / Greenpeacegreenpeace.org/kochindustries