# Archivo original: liquid-natural-gas-a-roadbloc.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:48 -03 2025

Liquid Natural Gas:
A roadblock to a
clean energy future
clean energy now   

 
  
Table of Contents 
Liquid Natural Gas: A roadblock to a clean energy future   Page i 
 
A New Global Warming Challenge       Page 1 
Time Bomb or Terrorist Target       Page 9 
Transforming Baja California into a Dirty Energy Zone    Page 15 Liquid Natural Gas: Derailing California’s Golden Dream   Page 26 LNG’s Global Blood Trail        Page 31 
 
        
Acknowledgements 
 
This report was written by John Coequyt and Katie Albrecht with assistance from Lynda Arakelian, Lauren Gilbertson, Kristin Casper and Arturo Moreno.   Greenpeace would like to thank Bill Powers, Co-Chair of the Border Power Plant Working Group, for his assistance in the writing and analysis of this report.  This report draws heavily on the work of the RACE Coalition, of which Greenpeace is a member, and analysis completed for the Coalition by Synapse Energy Economics.      
 
 
About Greenpeace 
 
Since 1971, Greenpeace as been a leading voice for the environmental movement.  
Greenpeace works around the world to protect oceans and ancient forests, and to fight toxic pollution and genetic engineering, global warming and nuclear threats.  Without compromise, Greenpeace takes on powerful political and corporate opposition to protect the future of our planet.
 

 
 iLiquid Natural Gas: A roadblock to a clean energy future 
 
Over the past few years, fueled by rising natural gas prices, some of the world’s largest multinational corporations began searching for new sites for Liquid Natural Gas (LNG) terminals.  Very early in this process these corporations identified the Northern most State in Mexico, Baja California, as a prime target for LNG development.  Hoping to avoid strict environmental laws and local opposition to coastal development in California, yet still have easy access to the United States, corporations like Sempra, Shell, ChevronTexaco, Marathon and ConocoPhillips proposed LNG terminals on the Baja California coast, just South of the California border.  The first proposed projects, which were inappropriately located in residential neighborhoods, were driven away by local residents who feared for the safety of their families.  However, two environmentally and socially flawed projects remain on the Baja California coast.  The first, a joint project of Sempra and Shell, is currently proposed near a resort community on a pristine stretch of the Baja California coast.  The environmentally destructive terminal would use millions of gallons of seawater every day, potentially impede migrating whales, and put the safety of the local retirement community at risk.  ChevronTexaco has proposed a second terminal on the Coronado Islands eight miles off the coast.  ChevronTexaco was handed the lease for the islands in a midnight deal that has angered residents and politicians equally.  The project would endanger the bountiful wildlife on the island and could also impede whale migration.      The construction and operation of the LNG terminals in Mexico will degrade the environment and the Sempra/Shell terminal will put local communities at substantial risk in the event of a major accident or terrorist attack.   But, it doesn’t have to be that way.  Now is the time to shift away from dangerous dependence on fossil fuels and towards global investments in renewable energy, conservation and energy efficient technologies.  
Greenpeace is asking that: 
 
1. California policy makers not commit the state to long-term contracts to 
Liquid Natural Gas from either Mexico or California.  
 
2. Multinational companies and the governments of California and Mexico 
invest in clean energy technologies, such as wind and solar power, creating good local jobs without risking the public’s health and safety.   
 
  

 
 iiDerailing California and Mexico Clean Energy Commitments  
 
The fast tracking of LNG within the California government threatens the tremendous strides that the renewable energy industry had made in the State.  Efforts are underway within the State of California to promote LNG over energy efficiency and renewable energy resources in conflict with the official policy of the State articulated only two years ago in the Energy Action Plan.  There is no reason to fast-track LNG investments.  California can meet its future energy demands without building any LNG terminals.  If the State pursues aggressive energy efficiency goals, retrofits the old inefficient coastal power plants, and expands the States renewable energy goals, the State can reduce natural gas demand by one-third, the equivalent of three LNG terminals.   
California can reduce natural gas demand by on e-third 
 
Gas Demand, Projected Demand Increase by California Natural Gas 
Utilities, Supply/Demand Reduction Options 
 Gas Quantity,  
(mmcfd)  
Average daily natural gas use in California, 2001 
 6,600  
Projected increase in gas demand over 2002 baseline, 2006-2016 
 0-2001 
Average projected daily natural gas delivery from one LNG terminal 
 700-800  
Total Reduction in California gas demand from conservation measures 
and accelerated renewable portfolio standard (20% by 2010) 
 1,100 – 1,5002 
Total Reductions assuming 30 percent renewable portfolio standard (a) 
 1,800 – 2,3003 
Source: Synapse Energy Economics, 2004 
(a) Estimated from CEC baseline. 
 
The development of LNG infrastructure in California and Baja California threatens the State’s ability to combat global warming.  The use of natural gas that has been liquefied and transferred across the Pacific reduces the difference between natural gas power plant CO
2 emissions and coal power plant emissions by nearly half.  Yet more importantly, by 
reaching beyond the traditional boundaries of North America to South America, Russia and the Far East, the development of LNG terminals on the West Coast would open up nearly limitless quantities of natural gas to the energy markets in those states.  This shift threatens to turn natural gas, previously viewed as a “transitional” fuel, into a permanent source of global warming gasses.    
                                                           
1 Derived from presentations by PGE, SoCalGas, and SDGE at CEC/CPUC Natural Gas Workshop, Dec. 9-10, 2003. 
2006-2016 demand increase in SoCalGas/SDGE territory: 0 mmcfd.  In PGE territory: 0-200 mmcfd.  
2 Derived from Synapse Energy Economics evaluation submitted in March 23, 2004 RACE coalition comments in CPUC 
Utility Long-Term Natural Gas Procurement Proceeding, Rulemaking  04-01-25  
3 Derived from Synapse Energy Economics evaluation submitted in March 23, 2004 RACE coalition comments in CPUC 
Utility Long-Term Natural Gas Procurement Proceeding, Rulemaking  04-01-25 

 
 iiiIn Baja a renewable energy developer Fuerza Eolica is planning to build a 340 MW wind 
farm on Mexican side of the California border.  This wind power, when combined with an upgrade of Cerro Prieto, would produce enough power to eliminate the need for the inefficient gas/oil burning state owned power plants in Rosarito.  But those investments are unlikely if even one of the LNG terminals in Baja California and signs long term contracts for all of the State’s natural gas needs.  
Time Bomb or Terrorist Target? 
 
As the number of proposed LNG facilities in North America has grown to national prominence, so have the safety concerns.  These concerns were escalated after a study by the Algerian government into an accident at a LNG terminal indicated that LNG leak was responsible for the explosion.  Additional concerns over the cost and feasibility of protecting an LNG terminal in Boston, which was closed again during the Democratic Convention, are spilling into the debate over costs and dangers at facilities across the United States and into Mexico, where politicians are debating who will ultimately pay for security at LNG facilities in Baja California.  It is likely that accident and terrorism safeguards will be updated in the United States to reflect new information and concerns since September 11
th.  But it remains to be seen 
whether these efforts will extend south of the border into Mexico.  Neither Sempra/Shell nor Chevron-Texaco has indicated that they intend to implement any additional safety or security measures.  
LNG’s Global Blood Trail 
 
Greenpeace and other environmental and social justice groups are currently opposing the development of LNG facilities on the West Coast.  We stand together in an effort to protect not only the communities both in California and Mexico, but also the impacted communities around the world.  From the partially contact indigenous communities in Peru to the residents of war torn Indonesia, to Sakhalin Island in Russia, the expansion of the Oil and Gas industry into new and sensitive areas represents a global threat for which the governments of the world are ill prepared.       

 
 1Chapter 1. A New Global Warming Challenge 
 
 
Global warming threatens to devastate the world’s natural climate system.  Over the past 
century, the earth’s surface temperature has risen by about one degree Fahrenheit, and 
mounting evidence indicates that most of the recent warming can be attributed to human 
activities, such as the burning of oil, coal and gas.  While a rise in temperature of just one 
degree may not sound threatening, that change in temperature is enough to cause 
unpredictable weather patterns with devastating results.  Global warming is implicated 
for intensifying extreme weather conditions such as floods, droughts, wildfires, 
hurricanes and heatwaves and causes problems ranging from the spread of infectious 
diseases to the destruction of power lines and crops.  The impacts of global warming not 
only impact our health; they also result in billions of dollars of expenses for relief efforts 
and insurance costs.  
  
The burning of coal, gas and oil releases carbon dioxide (CO2) into the atmosphere, 
which is the primary cause of global warming.  The United States is responsible for over 
a quarter of the world’s carbon emissions, while representing only four percent of the 
global population.  Instead of spending billions of dollars increasing dependency on fossil 
fuels (coal, gas and oil), the U.S government and powerful oil companies should invest in 
alternative, renewable sources of energy.  The current trend towards an increased 
dependence on Liquid Natural Gas (LNG) is frightening because it increases reliance on 
environmentally destructive fossil fuels and significantly delays the possibility of moving 
towards renewable energy sources by creating a costly infrastructure for LNG.  This is 
especially true of the West Coast of North America which, unlike the East Coast, 
currently has no LNG terminals or LNG infrastructure. 
 
This report analyzes the impacts of two proposed LNG regasification sites on the 
environment and local communities of Baja California and the Coronado Islands in 
Mexico.  The construction and operation of the LNG regasification terminals at these 
sites will both severely degrade the environment and put existing local communities at 
substantial safety risk in the event of a major accident or terrorist attack.   But, it doesn’t 
have to be that way.  Now is the time to shift away from dangerous dependence on fossil 
fuels and towards global investments in renewable energy, conservation and energy 
efficient technologies.  
 
What is liquid natural gas (LNG)? 
 
 
Liquid Natural Gas (LNG) is the liquid form of natural gas.  In a process called 
liquefaction, natural gas is condensed at minus 260 degrees Fahrenheit. Liquefaction 
greatly reduces the volume of natural gas making it economically feasible to transport 
LNG great distances via special tankers.  The tankers deliver the LNG to receiving 
terminals, such as those proposed in Baja California, where the LNG is converted back to 
natural gas and delivered to customers.  The creation of this LNG receiving infrastructure 

 
 2will increase the United States’ and Mexico’s dependence on foreign fossil fuels and 
open up Mexico’s energy market to exploitation by multinational corporations. 
 
 
 
Shell/Sempra LNG terminal in Baja California 
 
Shell International Gas Limited and Sempra Energy LNG Corp have jointly proposed a 
Liquid Natural Gas (LNG) receiving terminal in Baja California1.  The two companies 
will own and operate the $600 million facility.  The proposed location for the terminal is 
on the Costa Azul in Mexico, 23 km Northwest of the city of Ensenada.  The terminal has 
a designed natural gas delivery rate of 1000 million cubic feet per day (mmcfd).2  A 64 
km pipeline will stretch northwards from the terminal to the Industrial Park, El Florido, in 
the municipality of Tijuana.   
 
The Baja California site was chosen after evaluation of potential coastal sites near the 
U.S. border.  The final decision was made based on zoning, proximity to population 
centers, and proximity to deep water. The Shell/Sempra LNG terminal will be located 
within 2 miles of one of the most of the popular tourist resorts, Bajamar.  The associated 
pipeline will pass through an inland route that avoids residences, but has a more negative 
environmental impact as compared to other proposed routes.     
 
The Baja California LNG terminal will occupy 40 acres of coastal land, with 24 
additional acres being used for the service road.  It will take three and a half years to 
construct, requiring approximately 1,000 construction workers.  Construction of the 
pipeline will disrupt nearby communities and will take one year to complete.  After 
construction, 30-40 technical workers will be required to operate the facility.  It is likely 
that already trained individuals will fill all of the higher-paid, skilled positions. Members 
of the local community are not likely to fill these higher-paying jobs.  In addition, 35 
contract workers will be hired for services such as security, catering, cleaning, and 
maintenance.  
 
The terminal will unnecessarily harm the coastal environment.  Shell and Sempra plan to 
use at least 100 million gallons per day of seawater to regasify the LNG at the terminal.  
This process is expected to kill 100 percent of any sea life entrained in the seawater used 
for regasification.3   
 
There is concern that construction will destroy archeological remains dating back 
thousands of years. The archeologists who conducted the review are scrambling to study 
the site before the evidence is lost forever. 

 
 3Chevron-Texaco Proposed LNG terminal at the Coronado Islands4 
 
Chevron-Texaco has proposed an offshore LNG terminal that will use oil and gas 
industry technology to construct a receiving and regasification site in 20 meters of water, 
13 km off the coast of Tijuana, Mexico.  The terminal will have an average capacity of 
700 mmcfd.5  The LNG terminal will be located just 600 meters east of the Coronado 
Islands and will cost $650 million dollars to build.  Construction will last at least three 
years and is expected to require 1,200 construction workers.  
 
The offshore LNG terminal at the Coronado Islands will receive LNG from a 
ChevronTexaco-owned exploitation site located in the Gorgon gas fields off the coast of 
Western Australia.  The site of the proposed ChevronTexaco LNG liquefaction plant in 
Barrow Island, Australia is highly controversial due to the unique habitat Barrow Island 
provides for a number of unique or endangered species.  The LNG receiving terminal off 
the Baja California coast will have the capacity to store 250,000 cubic meters of LNG.  
The LNG will be warmed using seawater and then shipped through a new underwater 
pipeline that will join Baja California’s existing energy infrastructure.  The gas will be 
available to customers in Northern Baja California and throughout the West Coast of the 
U.S.  
 
The offshore site was chosen based on the natural breakwater provided by the Coronado 
Islands.  Another consideration was the distance that an offshore site provided from 
residential communities. The site is within 600 meters of the Coronado Islands, critical 
habitat for a number of marine bird species.  A major concern is the impact of lights from 
the terminal on birds nesting on the island. 
 
How does LNG contribute to global warming? 
 
LNG uniquely increases the emissions of CO2 into the atmosphere. The 
composition of natural gas emissions are identical whether it has been converted to LNG 
or burned straight from gas.  However, the processes necessary to convert and transport 
LNG are energy intensive.  As shown in Table 1, the process of converting natural gas 
into a liquid, transporting it across the Pacific Ocean, and then returning it to its gaseous 
form, known collectively as the “LNG supply chain,” requires an increased natural gas 
consumption of 18-22 percent.6 An additional 11 to 18 percent increase in CO2 emissions 
is likely to occur because of high CO2 content in the raw source gas being converted to 
LNG and exported to Mexico.7  The CO2 in the source gas may be vented to atmosphere 
during processing.   
 
The combined impact of venting CO2 during processing and the energy penalty of 
the LNG supply chain would increase CO2 emissions by roughly 20 to 40 percent over 
California’s current emissions from domestic sources of natural gas (see Table 1).  This 
increase significantly closes the gap between coal and natural gas with respect to global 
warming gases.   
 

 
 4Table 1.  Transportation of liquid natural gas to California would significantly 
increase greenhouse gas emissions 
 
Process Step Additional Gas Use 
(Percent) 
Domestic Natural Gas  Basecase 
Liquification 9 – 10 
Transport  7 – 9 
Regasification 2 – 3 
Carbon Dioxide in Gas 0 – 18 
Total Additional Gas Consumed 18 – 40  
Source: Powers Engineering 2004, June 1, 2004 Global LNG Summit presentation. 
  
The coal industry claims that LNG increases gas consumption by 30 percent8 over natural 
gas for the liquefaction and regasification alone which is nearly three times the Powers 
Engineering estimate.  The discrepancy stems from the age and thus efficiency of the 
LNG infrastructure.  The Powers Engineering study assumes the most efficient 
technology available, while the coal industry used the current condition of plants when 
conducting its study.   
 
The net result of the increase in global warming emissions is that natural gas power 
plants burning high CO2 natural gas that has been shipped as LNG to California would 
have a global warming impact that falls in-between coal and domestic natural gas (see 
Table 2).  In other words, LNG power plants will only reduce global warming pollution 
by about half as much as a domestically produced natural gas versus current electricity 
from coal.  Given the tremendous worldwide reserves of natural gas that could be shipped 
to developed countries for decades, this difference is significant. 
 
Table 2.  Liquid natural gas power plants  
Power Plant Type 
 Global Warming Gas Pollution 
Natural gas – low CO2 domestic gas 
 400 g/Kwh  
Liquid Natural Gas  
 480 g/Kwh  
Liquid Natural Gas – high CO2 (a) 
 560 g/Kwh  
Coal – Advanced IGCC 
 660 g/Kwh (b) 
Coal – pulverized coal 
 770 to 830 g/Kwh (c) 
 
Source: http://www.ieagreen.org.uk/sr1p.htm 
(a) Assumes a 40 percent increase in CO2 emissions, see above. 
(b) Three demonstration integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) plants exist in the U.S.  
Gasification plants turn coal into gas, and are touted as the next generation of coal-burning power 
plants, but have not been embraced by industry.  Assumes a 50 percent thermal efficiency. 
(c) Half of U.S. electricity is generated from pulverized coal.  Assumes 40 – 43 percent efficiency. 

 
 5 
Because of the small difference between LNG and coal power plants, renewable energy 
and conservation investments are much more effective in slowing global warming and 
produce a multitude of co-benefits. California’s natural gas demand can be reduced by 
2,300 mmcfd through conservation and renewable energy measures, avoiding the 
emission of 100 billion pounds of CO2 per year. This would reduce California’s natural 
gas consumption by a third, and the equivalent of removing more than 10 million 
passenger cars per year from the road.1 
 
The proposed LNG terminals will serve U.S. demand almost entirely 
 
While the two proposed LNG sites in Baja California will primarily serve the California 
market, both Shell/Sempra and Chevron-Texaco claim that these plants will eventually 
also provide LNG in quantity to the Baja California market. The Mexican government 
has stated that the terminals built in Mexico will serve the U.S market. A report presented 
by the Mexican Secretary of Energy, Felipe Calderon Hinojosa, states, “Mexican LNG 
terminals could supply directly to the south of the United States.”2 
 
Sempra Energy continues to assert that it will sell the majority of the natural gas from its 
LNG terminal to Mexico.  In response to Greenpeace’s request for information, a Sempra 
official stated “[Greenpeace’s letter] incorrectly stated that Energia Costa Azul is being 
built solely for the benefit of the United States. In fact, when our facility is completed in 
2007, we expect that Mexico will consume about half of the gas from the plant and 
virtually all of the output by the middle of the next decade.”3 
 
A review of the natural gas use in Baja California shows that the demand is nowhere near 
the proposed LNG supply, and shows that Baja California could only use a fraction of the 
natural gas that one LNG terminal would provide.  The peak amounts of natural gas used 
in Baja California, excluding the power plants that serve the U.S. market, is 
approximately 250 mmcfd when all the power plants are running.  The average natural 
gas use is considerably less, in the range of 150 to 200 mmcfd.  The Shell/Sempra LNG 
terminal will have a peak capacity of 1,300 mmcfd.  The Chevron-Texaco site at the 
Coronado Islands will have a capacity of 1,000 mmcfd.4    
 
No new power plants are currently proposed or under construction in Baja California.  
The typical lead-time between permit application and an operational project is at least 
three years.  There will be no new large natural gas customers in Baja California when 
the proposed Costa Azul and Coronados Islands terminals begin operation in 2007.  
Power plants serving the Baja California market are also served by existing long-term 
natural gas contracts.  As shown in Table 3 below, less than 10 mmcfd of the planned 
                                                           
1 Environmental Protection Agency (assumes auto emissions of 10,000 pounds of CO2 per year). 
2 Hinojosa, Felipe Calderon, Secretary of Energy, Mexico. “Opportunities for LNG Terminals in Mexico.” 
LNG Ministerial Summit December 2003. Available from http://www.usea.org/lngsummitpresentations.htm 
3 May 21, 2004, from Michael J. Murray of Sempra 
4 California Energy Commission, March 2004.  

 
 6output of 2,300 mmcfd, or less than one percent, could be purchased directly for use in 
Baja California in 2007.  
 
Table 3.  Mexico’s natural gas demand is far less than LNG output 
 
Power Plant/Industry Capacity 
MW Daily gas use 
(mmcf/d) (a) Contract 
Expires Power 
Use 
CFE Rosarito 550 64 2010 (b) Mexico 
Intergen  500 58 2013 Mexico 
CFE Rosarito (gas/oil) 650 120 2010 Mexico 
Mexicali Local Use  NA <10 Unknown Mexico 
Subtotal Mexico 1,700 252   
     
Intergen  560 70 No California 
Sempra Mexicali  650 76 No  California 
Subtotal California Export 1,210 146   
     
Total  2,910 398   
(a) assumes an annual capacity factor 70 percent 
(b) Available from http://www.sempratrading.com 
 
The lack of natural gas infrastructure and demand in Baja, along with the fact that 
California ratepayers are being asked to bear the burden of $200 million in costs to 
modify the SDGE natural gas pipeline transmission system, indicates that much of the 
Baja California LNG supply is expected to serve the California market.  The $200 million 
in pipeline upgrades is needed to reverse flow and allow the importation of large 
quantities of natural gas from LNG terminal(s) located in Baja California to the U.S 
market. 
 
Renewable Energy Options for Baja California 
 
The opportunity cost of fostering dependency on natural gas in Mexico is enormous.  
Northern Baja California currently meets about 40 percent of its electricity requirements 
through geothermal plant, Cerro Prieto.  Cerro Prieto currently produces 720 MW and 
has the potential to reach 1,500 MW9.  Additionally, clean energy production from solar 
and wind energy technologies have tremendous potential in Baja California.  The 
mountainous area between Tijuana and Mexicali includes some of the best sites in 
Mexico for producing wind energy.  A prime site for solar power production, there are an 
average of 290 sunny days per year in Baja California, with seven hours of sunlight per 
day.   
 
In Baja, Fuerza Eolica is planning to build an additional 340 mw of wind power on 
Mexican side of the California border.  This wind power, when combined with an 
upgrade of Cerro Prieto, would produce enough power to eliminate the need for both 
CFE power plant in Rosarito, and would easily replace the inefficient gas/oil plant. 
 

 
 7There is also tremendous demand for renewable energy in Mexico.  A poll completed by 
the Commission for Environmental Cooperation found that 94 percent of energy buyers 
in Mexico would like to purchase renewable energy, and 90 percent would accept a 
requirement that they purchase renewable energy.10 
 
Table 4. Renewable Energy Options for California and Baja California11 
Energy Options (a) Cost 
($/kwh) (b) 
Natural gas combined-cycle power plant (baseload) 0.05 
Natural gas simple cycle power plant (peaking) 0.16 
Wind 0.05 
Solar Photovoltaic (residential) (f) 0.25 
Solar thermal (residential) 0.14-0.17 
Geothermal (flash) 0.05 
Energy conservation (c) 0.03-0.06 
San Diego Gas and Electric 2004 residential charge 0.15 (d) 
CFE, North Baja California 2004 residential charge  0.22 (e) 
(a) California Energy Commission, Comparative Cost of California Central Station Electricity Generation 
Technologies, August 2003, page 3 and 11. 
(b) “levelized direct cost”—assumes life of project natural gas cost in $5/MMBtu to $6/MMBtu range. 
(c) California Consumer Power and Conservation Financing Authority, “Clean Growth: Clean Energy for 
California’s Economic Future- Energy Resource Investment Plan.” February 2002, Table 6-2, pg.54. 
(d) Includes only metered kwh usage charge and “electric energy charge”, April 2004. 
(e) Includes only December 2003 published CFE summer usage charge based on 1,000 kwh/month. 
(f) California Energy Commission, Energy Power Calculator; SEIA cost calculations. 
 
The combination of renewable energies in Mexico could produce at least 50 million to 
100 million MWh of energy.12  In southern California, the unsubsidized price for 
residential solar power is approximately 25 cents per kwh.13  The current residential 
power rate in Baja California is 22 cents per kwh (see Table 4). This difference is 
negligible when the cost of environmental degradation and safety issues associated with 
LNG are included. 
 
Mexico has tremendous potential for solar thermal energy.  A report by the European 
Solar Thermal Industry Association and Greenpeace states that with the right incentives 
and policies Mexico could generate 1,290 MW of power at solar power stations by 
2015.14 
 
Mexico also has great potential for energy efficiency, the Mexico’s Comisión Nacional 
para el Ahorro de Energía (CONAE) estimated that Mexico can reduce energy 
consumption by 20 percent, saving the country 100,000 million pesos every year.   
 
                                                           
1 Available from www.shell.com 
2 California Energy Commission, West Coast LNG Projects April 29, 2004.   
3 July 15, 2003 envr coalition comment letter on USCG DEIS for ChevronTexaco Port Pelican offshore 
LNG project, Gulf of Mexico. 
4 Available from www.chevrontexaco.com 

 
 8                                                                                                                                                                             
5 California Energy Commission, West Coast LNG Projects, April 29, 2004. 
6 B. Powers, July 6, 2004 PowerPoint presentation to CalEPA, Sacramento. 
7 Both the Gorgon gas field (NW Australia, source of ChevronTexaco LNG) and the Tangguh gas field 
(Indonesia, source of Sempra/Shell LNG) are high in CO2. 
8 Coal Industry: Utility Fax Alert #681, July  9, 2004. 
9 Conversations with Alejandro Abril, Dirctor of CFE Geothermal Projects 
10 http://www.cec.org/files/PDF/ECONOMY/breceda_es.pdf 
11 Powers Engineering, “Worldwide View of Global Supply Chains” Global LNG Summit June, 2004. 
12 Munoz, Enrique Caldera.“Potencial de la Energia Eoloelectrica en Mexico,” Investigacion elaborada para 
Greenpeace Mexico, 1999.  
13 California Energy Commission, Clean Power Estimator. 
14 Greenpeace, Solar Thermal Power: 2020 Exploiting the Heat From the Sun to Combat Climate Change. 

 
 9Chapter 2. Time Bomb or Terrorist Target 
 
 
As the increasing number of proposed LNG facilities in North America has grown to 
national prominence in the United States, so have the safety concerns.  These concerns escalated after a study by the Algerian government into an accident at a LNG terminal indicated that LNG vapor was responsible for the explosion.  In addition, concerns over the cost and feasibility of protecting an LNG terminal in Boston is spilling into the debate over costs and dangers at facilities across the United States and into Mexico, where politicians are debating who will ultimately pay for security at LNG facilities in Baja California.      It is likely that accident and terrorism safeguards will be updated in the United States to reflect new information and concerns since September 11
th.  But it remains to be seen 
whether these efforts will extend south of the border into Mexico.  Neither Sempra/Shell nor Chevron-Texaco has indicated that they intend to implement any innovative safety or security measures.   
A recent accident in Algeria raises new questions about the safety of LNG 
 
The LNG industry claims that new LNG facilities are no longer dangerous.  They claim that the disaster in Cleveland in 1944 that killed 128 people, and the non-fatal vapor cloud releases in Boston in 1988 and the UAE in 1978, are problems of the past.  But the fatal January 2004 accident that destroyed a good portion of an Algerian LNG liquefaction plant indicates that the industry has not solved its safety problems and provides dramatic evidence that these facilities should not be located near people.    The new report by the Algerian government, presented at a LNG conference in Qatar in March 2004, states that “large amount of liquid gas escaped from a pipe and formed a cloud of highly flammable and explosive vapor that hovered over the facility. The cloud exploded after coming into contact with a flame source.”  According to leading LNG safety experts, the accident in Algeria could occur at plants like the ones being proposed in Baja Mexico.
1 
 
Multinational companies move LNG terminals to Mexico to avoid U.S. opposition 
 
The safety concerns that LNG sites invite are one of the reasons that people across the U.S have fought to ensure that LNG facilities are not built in their cities.  The Mayor of Boston, Thomas M. Menino, sued to keep LNG tankers out of Boston harbor after the Sept. 11 attacks.  Menino lost that court fight but maintains LNG tankers should not enter metropolitan areas due to safety concerns.  Boston fire officials told a state panel in February 2004 that they remain unprepared to deal with the potential disaster stemming from an explosion aboard one of the giant tankers that carries LNG through Boston Harbor.
2 
 

 
 10Massive security measures are now involved in bringing each LNG tanker into Boston.  
Since Sept. 11 at least a dozen vessels clear a safety and security zone two miles ahead and one mile behind the ship - and the Coast Guard also inspects the tankers offshore.  The security measures taken to guard LNG related equipment from terrorist attacks in the U.S demonstrate an implicit recognition of the extreme potential danger that LNG terminals create no matter where they are constructed.    LNG terminals have been defeated in Vallejo (California), Oxnard (California), Eureka (California), Harpswell (Maine), Mobile (Alabama), Tijuana and Rosarito, (Mexico).  All of these proposed sites were withdrawn when local residents declared that they did not want the LNG terminals in their communities.  These communities cited “serious safety concerns”
3 as their reason for refusing these LNG terminals.  Successes in these seven 
cities demonstrate that local resistance is an effective means of preventing poorly sited LNG terminals from being completed.    
LNG facilities pose a terrorist and safety threat to local communities 
 
A recent report of the U.S. Congressional Research Service identified LNG terminals, tankers and pipelines as prime terrorist targets. In the United States, federal warnings about Al Qaeda threats since September 11, 2001 have repeatedly mentioned energy infrastructure. On the morning of Sept. 11, 2001, top officials in the White House situation room expressed an almost immediate fear of an attack on the Boston LNG plant, according to the former White House terrorism chief Richard A. Clarke.
4 
 The Congressional Research Service report outlines the potential for an attack on LNG facility as a “serious hazard.” Although there has not yet been a terrorist attack on LNG tankers or land-based facilities, gas and oil pipelines and oil tankers have been attacked in at least six countries, including the 2002 attack on the French oil tanker Limberg off the 
Yemeni coast by a bomb-laden boat.
5  Paul W. Pafomak explains why LNG tank 
facilities may be targeted; "because LNG infrastructure is highly visible and easily identified, it is also potentially vulnerable to terrorist attack...LNG is inherently volatile and is usually shipped and stored in large quantities."
6 
 Potential hazards include pool fires, which occur when combustible gas-air mixture burns above a pool of leaked LNG. "Such pool fires are intense, burning far more hotly and rapidly than oil or gasoline fires," the report adds. "Many experts agree that a pool fire, especially on water ... is the most serious LNG hazard."
7  It is also the consensus that 
such a fire could not be extinguished.  If LNG were released in an attack, it would most likely ignite immediately. However, if the LNG escaped without catching fire, a cloud of the gas could drift elsewhere and cause a fire, according to the report. Beyond physical damage, an attack on a LNG facility, especially one serving a large percentage of the population of California, could have a tremendous ripple effect on the California economy.  

 
 11In Alabama, a similar LNG terminal proposal for the City of Mobile led the Mobile 
Register to conduct research, which it claimed “revealed significant flaws in the research 
used by the (federal) government when approving the construction of such facilities.” Leading LNG scientists warned that an accident or terrorist attack involving a tanker could lead to a fire a mile wide, inflicting second-degree burns on people two miles away,” leading to overwhelming local public opposition to the $600 million ExxonMobil proposal.
8 
 A study by Lloyd's Register of Shipping presents a chilling examination of what might happen if terrorist attacked a LNG tanker. According to the study, terrorists who blew relatively small holes in the inner and outer hulls of a LNG tank could trigger an escalating series of explosions and fires. The ship, said the Lloyd's study, "would become a total loss with a continuous fire that would be inextinguishable until all gas had been consumed."
9 
 James A. Fay, professor emeritus at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a leading expert on LNG and former chairman of the Massachusetts Port Authority board, believes a boat bomb, like the one used against the USS Cole in 2000 or the French oil tanker Limburg  in 2002, would cause at least half of the ship's cargo to seep over the water and 
ignite in a raging blaze. "There's no doubt that with a big enough bomb you can blow a hole in the side of the vessel and the cargo will burn," Fay said.  "It's well understood that for the big fires we're talking about that distances like half a mile or so, you can get second-degree burns to exposed skin in about 30 seconds..."
10 
 "In just over three minutes, the fire could spread two-thirds of a mile from the ship. There is nothing safety officials can do in such a case. They would have no time to evacuate people or to put out the fire.... Like the attack on the World Trade Center in New York City, there exists no relevant industrial experience with fires of this scale from which to project measures for securing public safety."
11 
 Jerry Havens, a University of Arkansas professor and expert in both fires and weapons of mass destruction, agrees with Fay's assessments.  Haven’s concern is primarily with the lack of security measures required in the transport of LNG.  In testimony before the House Subcommittee on Energy Reforms given on June 22, 2004, he commented that spills from a LNG tanker could require an exclusion zone of several miles in order to protect the public.  He also emphasized that “present regulations do not require the address of spills from a tanker at the facility”.
12 Dr. Havens agrees with the findings of 
Lloyd's Register and is also concerned that the entire tanker could be lost in fire if attacked, a concern that has recently been validated by consultants to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC).      
New studies indicate need for larger safety zones  
 
The FERC has received important new evidence regarding the safety of LNG tankers. On May 13, 2004, FERC’s consultant, ABS Consulting, Inc, found that the 2001 LNG 

 
 12hazard study previously relied on by the FERC was flawed in both its methodology and 
its conclusions, and that there is a lack of data on the consequences of an accident or act of sabotage involving tankers carrying LNG. ABS also found that the previous study, by Quest, underestimated both LNG vapor cloud dispersion distances and thermal radiation zones associated with major LNG release events.
13 
 The report concluded that if the tanker's hull and cargo tanks were successfully breached, a pool fire could burn victims up to 4,600 feet away. Such an event could cause "severe pain" within 13 seconds and third-degree burns within 50 seconds.  The report only analyzed the effect of a 20 percent loss of LNG, even though scientists are concerned that any breech of the hull would result in a total loss of the cargo.  The safety zone required for a full breech of the tanker would likely be several miles.  It is critical that the Mexican Government, the State of California and FERC expand their LNG siting considerations to include this new evidence. Though tankers are the most vulnerable aspects of the LNG supply chain, current U.S. and Mexican regulations do not require safety zones for tanker accidents or acts of terrorism. Despite this, it is not clear whether FERC will apply the ABS recommendations to currently proposed LNG terminal sites, or whether multinational corporations operating in Mexico would adopt those regulations.    
Who will protect LNG facilities in Mexico? 
 
There is concern in Mexico about who will pay for security precautions.  These costs are growing quickly in the U.S, where communities are paying up to millions of dollars per year for tanker and terminal security.  Manuel Bartlett, a PRI senator, Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, a founding member of PRD, and other politicians warn, “Mexico will be forced to provide security for a project that will be part of the U.S. energy system.”
14 
They also “contend the [Chevron-Texaco] project would violate Mexico's sovereignty and compromise its national security.”
 15  
 The cost of protecting each LNG shipment to Boston, the only LNG receiving plant in an urban area in the United States, is about $80,000 per tanker.  This includes a contribution of about $30,000 per tanker from the surrounding communities and the state.
16  The cost 
of this protection has been rising as the measures become more extreme, matching the increasing fear of attack.  Currently, safety measures include “maritime patrol boat escorts, helicopters, police divers, fire fighting tug boats, and the closing of the Tobin Bridge - the U.S. Route 1 commuting expressway, which LNG ships clear by less than 10 feet. In addition, Massachusetts State Police cruisers are placed strategically along the shore to watch for possible land-based missile attacks.”
17 
 In the United States LNG facilities are considered “critical assets” that warrant special protection.  For this reason, Senator John F. Kerry, the Democratic Presidential candidate, is pressuring Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge to raise the terrorist threat level from elevated to high in Boston when weekly LNG tankers enter the port in Everett. "The Everett LNG facility should be considered a critical asset that warrants 

 
 13enhanced protective measures consistent with those implemented when the threat level 
was elevated to Orange in December 2003," Kerry wrote.18 
 Despite the precautions taken with the LNG facilities in the USA, little planning has been done regarding how to safeguard the proposed LNG sites in Baja California.  The double standard generally evident in the decision to build dangerous facilities in Mexico, after they have been refused by local opposition groups in multiple U.S. states including Louisiana, Maine and California, is especially evident when the security of the sites is scrutinized.  Neither Shell/Sempra nor Chevron-Texaco outlines any security plan relevant to the threat of a terrorist attack on the proposed sites in Baja California.  In contrast to the degree of concern over the existing LNG sites in the U.S, the lack of analysis and foresight regarding the proposed sites in Baja California indicates an increased risk of terrorist attack and demonstrates a lack of responsibility and concern from Shell/Sempra and Chevron-Texaco.     
Mexico has a history of fuel storage accidents 
 
Historically, fuel storage in Mexico has been risky business.  In 1984, over 500 people were killed in an explosion at liquid petroleum gas (LPG) terminal in Mexico City.  The same LPG terminal experienced a second failure in 1996; four more lives were lost.    LPG is not the only fuel to have caused a tremendous loss of life in a Mexican City.  A leak of hexane from a PEMEX operated factory in Guadalajara, Mexico devastated the area.  Over 20 city blocks were flattened by blasts from the series of explosions.
19  As a 
result of this explosion, 15,000 people were left homeless, at least 1,500 people were injured and 170 people were killed.
20  Natural gas has also been the source of a deadly 
explosion in Mexico.  In 1996, a natural gas leak caused an explosion that killed 6 people and injured 30.  The history of fuel storage explosions in Mexico is long and deadly.  It has not been one specific form of fuel that has caused these deaths, but  many different non-renewable energy sources.  Shell, Sempra, Chevron-Texaco and PEMEX state that LNG is a safer energy source, despite recent accidents in Algeria and the potential for terrorist attacks.  Each of these previous sources of energy has been touted as “safe” and the results have been deadly.  
Offshore LNG facilities still require security 
 
Even offshore LNG facilities, while not posing an imminent safety hazard, will require extensive security measures because of the economic consequences of an attack on a facility that supplies such a large volume of Southern California’s natural gas. According to the U.S. Congressional Research Service:   
Offshore oil and gas facilities...have been attacked in the past during wartime and in territorial disputes. Since September 11, 2001, international concern about terrorist attacks on these platforms has grown. 

 
 14Some experts believe terrorists attacks against offshore platforms have 
been on the rise recently in countries with a history of terror activity.... Because offshore oil and gas facilities are remote, isolated, and often lightly manned, some experts believe they are more vulnerable to terror attacks than land-based facilities....if several new offshore terminals were attacked in the future, the effects on natural gas availability and prices could have serious consequences for U.S. energy markets.
21 
 LNG facilities in Mexico would be a terrorist target only because they are supplying a large amount of natural gas to the United States.  Although it is not clear right now that Mexico will use any significant amount of natural gas from these facilities, it is possible that Baja California could become dependent upon natural gas once an LNG receiving terminal is built.  The dependency of both the United States and Baja California on natural gas would dramatically increase the value of the site as a terrorist target.  If an LNG receiving terminal were attacked, the economic and social consequences would be severe.  The industry standard given for restoring a LNG receiving terminal to functional capacity is four years.  Dependency on the centralized power of LNG creates a tremendous opportunity for terrorists to strike and cause lasting chaos in both the United States and Mexico.   
                                                           
1 Raines, Ben. “Report Sheds New Light on LNG Blast in Algeria.” Mobile Register  April 14, 2004. 
2 Daniel, Mac. “Fire Officials Voice Concerns on LNG Threat.” The Boston Globe  February 27, 2004. 
3 Fenske, Sara. “Welcome to Fire Island.” Houston Press  May 27, 2004. 
4 Bender, Bryan. “US feared 9/11 hit in Boston, book says: LNG site in Everett was considered at risk,” Boston Globe, 
March 23, 2004. 
5 Paformak, Paul W.  “Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) Infrastructure Security: Background and Issues for 
Congress,” Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, September 9, 2003.  
6 Ibid 
7 Ibid 
8 Finch, Bill. “Poll finds growing opposition to LNG Majority in Mobile and Baldwin counties against 
terminal in Mobile Bay,” Mobile Register  March, 2004. 
9 LNG Watch: “Samoa LNG: What is it?” February, 2004. 
10 Energy Security , January 21, 2004. 
11 Ibid 
12 Hearing before the Subcommittee on Energy Policy, Natural Resources and Regulatory Affairs, U.S 
House of Representatives  testimony, June 22, 2004. 
13 ABS found that in the scenario most often cited as a sample tanker sabotage case, a flammable LNG 
vapor cloud could travel as far as 18,000 feet (over three miles) before dissipating, and that thermal radiation from an LNG pool fire at the tanker could cause second-degree burns at a distance of 4,600 feet within 30 seconds. Available from http://www.ferc.gov/industries/gas/indus-act/lng-model 
14 Lindquist, Diane. “LNG Controversy Heating Up: Mexico’s opposition leaders criticize plans for 
terminals off Baja.” San Diego Union Tribune  April 7, 2004. 
15 Ibid 
16 Paformak, Paul W.  “Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) Infrastructure Security: Background and Issues for 
Congress,” Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, September 9, 2003. 
17 Howland, Jonathan. JINSA  April 1, 2004. 
18 Bryan Bender, “U.S Feared 9/11 Hit in Boston, Book Says.” The Boston Globe  March 23, 2004. 
19 Staten, Clarke EMT. “Explosions rip Mexican City” Emergency News Net, April 22, 1992. 
20 Eisner, Peter. “Mexico Reels from Explosion” Newsday  April 24, 1992.   
21 Paformak, Paul W.  “Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) Infrastructure Security: Background and Issues for 
Congress,” Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, September 9, 2003.  
 

 
 15Chapter 3. Transforming Baja California into a Dirty Energy Zone  
 
Hoping to avoid strict environmental laws and local opposition to coastal development in 
California, yet still have easy access to the United States, corporations like Sempra, Shell, ChevronTexaco, Marathon and ConocoPhillips proposed LNG terminals on the Baja California coast, just South of the California border.  The first proposed projects, which were inappropriately located in residential neighborhoods, were driven away by local residents who feared for the safety of their families.  However, two environmentally and socially flawed projects remain on the Baja California coast. 
 
 
Secret deal hands Coronado Islands to Chevron-Texaco 
 
In order to build the proposed LNG terminal at the Coronado Islands site, Chevron-
Texaco had to secure a concession, or a right to use public assets, from the Mexican federal government. The Ministry of Communications and Transport (SCT) is the branch of the government responsible for issuing concessions.  The SCT and Chevron-Texaco quietly negotiated a deal to hand over control of the Coronado Islands to the 
multinational corporation for 30 years. The SCT announced that the solicitation for a 
concession for the use of federal waters would be made on December 8, 2003.  However, the notice was not published until December 29, 2003, a time when the public would pay little attention to the announcement.
1 
 The information regarding the concession did not appear in any of the expected locations.  It was not published on the web page of the SCT or the standard public website of the Interior Ministry, which is a violation of the Federal Law of Transparency and Access to Governmental Public Information.    The delayed release of the announcement that a solicitation for a concession to use public assets was timed to correspond with the holiday season in Mexico.  The notice specified that parties interested in the concession must express interest before January 12, 2004.  Mexico was on holiday until January 5, leaving one week for an interested party to obtain, complete and deliver the necessary documents.  If these documents were not delivered by 2 PM on January 12, 2004, the interested party was not able to participate in the upcoming tender.
2   
 The timing of the release, and the lack of publication of the document on readily accessible sites, demonstrate a lack of transparency in the negotiation of the tender, and the subsequent granting of exclusive rights to use the Coronado Island site for 30 years to Chevron-Texaco.    The exceptional conservation value of these islands has been recognized by the Mexican Federal Congress, which exhorted the relevant Federal agencies to create a natural protected area for the Baja California Pacific islands, including the Coronado Islands, as well as San Benito, Cedros, Guadalupe, San Martín, San Jerónimo, and Todos Santos (Congreso de la Unión 2003) on July 23, 2003.  

 
 16Shell has misrepresented their intentions in the past 
 
In May 2003, the Border Power Plant Working Group (BPPWG) used the courtroom to 
highlight the unfair practices of California’s Sempra Energy and InterGen, a power generation venture of Shell.  Sempra and Shell were in the process of constructing transmission lines to connect power plants just across the border to United States’ markets.  The BPPWG filed suit against the Department of Energy (DOE), as the DOE granted the permits necessary to import power to the U.S. along the transmission lines.  Federal Judge Irma Gonzalez initially appeared to set higher pollution reduction standards for the region.  However, she eventually ruled in favor of the DOE after taking into consideration the economic impacts of shutting down the plants.   
 
Shell had agreed to install smog reducing Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) technology, considered to be Best Available Control Technology (BACT), on its two export turbines by the time of commercial startup in June 2003.  The company was initially unwilling to install BACT on the two remaining turbines supplying power to Mexico.  Pressure from citizens, local government, and California federal politicians ultimately forced InterGen to capitulate and agree to install SCR on the two domestic turbines as well.
3   
 
Despite their written commitment, InterGen did not install SCR on one of the export turbines before startup in June 2003.  The plant operated without control from the summer 2003 through January 2004.  One reason that Judge Gonzalez did not shut down the power plants during the remedy phase of the court case was InterGen’s insistence that its plant’s emissions would be controlled to less than significant levels through the use of SCR.    
 
Shell – as InterGen – misrepresented itself to the court, the DOE, and to the community, which was directly impacted by the unexpectedly high emission levels.    Although the failure of Intergen to install SCR was pointed out to the DOE by the Border Power Plant Working Group in November 2003, InterGen continued to operate the affected turbine until January 2004.  The company agreed to stop operating the turbine only in response to a threat of a complete shutdown by the DOE.
4   As a result of this “breach of faith,” 
Senator Diane Feinstein of California negotiated an accelerated SCR installation schedule for the remaining two Intergen turbines in January 2004.  The initial spring 2006 SCR 
installation target date has been advanced to the spring of 2005. 
 
Violation of the Constitution  
According to a group of Mexican Federal legislators and local activist groups, the 
proposed LNG terminals in Baja California and the Coronado Islands also violate the Mexican Constitution. Their argument stems from Article 27 of the Mexican Constitution, which states:   Ownership of the lands and waters within the boundaries of Mexico 
belong to the State, and the State has direct ownership of all natural resources including petroleum and all solid, liquid and gaseous 

 
 17hydrocarbons.  No petroleum or hydrocarbon concessions may be granted, 
and the State must manage the exploration and development of such products in accordance with terms established in the regulatory law.
5  
 The independence of Mexican oil and gas from foreign interests has been a matter of national pride since 1938 when the company Petroleos Mexicanos was created.
6 
 According to the legislators, President Vicente Fox attempted to sidestep the Mexican Constitution in order to open the energy sector to private investors.  However, the legislators filed a constitutional challenge in the Supreme Court on July 4, 2001.  The legislators claimed that President Fox announced an amendment to the Constitution that would allow for increased investment by the private sector. Proposing an amendment to the Constitution is a function reserved exclusively for the Congress.   The Mexican Supreme Court ruled against President Fox’s changes on February 26, 2004.  The Supreme Court declared “that President Vicente Fox had overstepped his authority in raising the amount of power that the Federal Electricity Commission could buy from private companies that generate more than they need to fuel their own operations.”
7 
 
Legal battle over environmental permits for Sempra LNG terminal 
 
Fifteen lawsuits that challenge environmental permits issued to Shell/Sempra have been 
filed in Mexican Courts.  The flood of lawsuits caused a temporary injunction against the permit to be issued in November of 2003.
8   The injunctions were lifted in March 2004 
when the Mexican City courts declared that the suits had merit.  Although Shell/Sempra now claim that they are moving ahead “in full force and effect”,
9 the removal of the 
injunction actually indicates that the lawsuits are proceeding within the Mexican Court System.  Shell/Sempra’s claims that the legal problems have been completely resolved may be designed to reassure investors.   
The LNG terminals do not help the local economy in the long-term 
 
The LNG terminal proposed by Shell/Sempra will require 1,000 workers during the 
construction phase.  This phase is expected to last 40 months.  When construction is completed, the LNG terminals will employ between 30 and 40 technical workers.
10  It is 
unclear if these workers will be from the local community or not, but as the job requires specific technical skills, it is expected that the company will bring workers in from other locations who have already completed the necessary training.    Chevron-Texaco plans on employing 1,200 construction workers during the construction phase.  The estimated number of local jobs that will be indirectly created is 2,400.  Chevron-Texaco does not further articulate how these jobs will be created.  However, the Chevron-Texaco and Shell/Sempra terminals are similar in size and employment expectations are similar.   Chevron-Texaco claims that placing an LNG regasification terminal in Mexico will move Mexico from the end of the natural gas supply chain to the beginning. However, Mexico 

 
 18is really being placed near the end of one of the longest supply chains in history.  It will 
take 18 days for LNG from Chevron-Texaco’s proposed LNG liquefaction site in Australia to reach the West Coast of Mexico.
11  Importing LNG from the proposed 
Sakhalin Island site in the Russian Far East will take a minimum of 11 days one-way.12  
The amount of CO 2 emitted during the transportation process increases with the length of 
the voyage.  Despite Chevron-Texaco’s claim, Mexico is not being moved to the beginning of the supply chain, and it is not moving in the direction of energy independence as this implies.   
The LNG terminal is bad for the economy in Baja California 
 
The economy in Baja California relies heavily on tourism, and the importance of tourism 
to the area is growing steadily.  In 2003, almost three billion U.S dollars were generated from Baja California travel and tourism, and that amount is growing at a rate of 6.7 percent annually.
13  Strong growth in this sector is expected to continue and increase 
because of investments being made in the area. The tourism sector is critical to Mexico, as the factory jobs that Mexico depends heavily upon are being moved to countries with cheaper labor.  While Baja California has not lost many jobs at the border assembly plants to lower cost labor abroad, the tourism industry is seen as an essential means of stabilizing the economic situation in the state.
14 
 The tourism industry is largely focused on expanding ecotourism.  To that end, the state government created a series of ecotourism circuits in each of the six major regions of Baja California.  These ecotourism circuits take tourists through historic missions, natural hot springs, cave paintings and archaeological sites.  More traditional tourism is still based almost entirely on the natural surroundings of the area. Activities include seaside spas, wilderness and beach camping, deep-sea fishing, beach horseback riding, golf, kayaking, hiking, scuba diving and sailing.
15   
 The ecotourism industry is a major driving force in the economy of Baja California.  The proposed LNG terminals on the coastline and the Coronado Islands will introduce unsightly terminals and tankers to the area, hampering the tourism industry.   The tourism industry requires both skilled and unskilled labor and provides many job opportunities.  The LNG terminals will reduce the number of tourism related jobs and will create very few local jobs.   
 
Sempra/Shell terminal jeopardizes Bajamar Resort  
 
A popular tourist resort, Bajamar, is located within 2 miles of the LNG terminal proposed by Shell and Sempra.  Developer Roberto Valdes spoke out against the LNG terminal, “I think Ensenada city and state government officials need to put a hold on the project and consider if it is wise to jeopardize the safety and peace of mind of people who are living and investing in the Bajamar resort”.
16  Valdes is especially concerned because the recent 
explosion at an LNG facility in Algeria caused damage up to seven miles away. An accident of similar magnitude at the Sempra/Shell LNG terminal would put Bajamar residents and property in danger.  If the Bajamar resort is perceived as a risky investment, investors will be hesitant to continue to purchase property in the area.  

 
 19 
Chevron-Texaco’s proposed terminal would damage tours to the Coronado Islands 
 
The LNG terminal proposed by Chevron-Texaco would compromise critical marine bird habitat and greatly damage the tourist appeal of the Coronado Islands. The islands provide a prime habitat for a threatened species of marine bird, the Xantus Murrelet.  This bird and its chicks are particularly sensitive to light pollution during the nesting season.  The huge terminal, brilliantly lit at night, will be only 600 meters from the South Coronado Island.  The Islands also offer encounters with Sea Lions, Harbor Seals, octopus, Horn Sharks, Moray Eels, Garibaldis, and purple coral for divers and nature viewers out for day trips.  Chevron-Texaco’s LNG terminal would be an eyesore at this beautiful site and decrease both the popularity of the Islands and the revenue that tourism to the Islands generates.  
PEMEX will not gain from LNG importation 
 
The proposed LNG terminals will not help Petroleos Mexicanos (PEMEX), the state 
owned energy firm, in the long term.  Although the LNG regasification sites will be located in Mexico, they will be owned and operated by multinational companies.  Due to legal constraints, PEMEX will be a partner of the LNG terminal developers, although PEMEX will not be a primary benefactor of income generated from the sale of the regasified LNG.  In fact, PEMEX could become one of the largest customers of the multinational corporations. PEMEX hopes to purchase enough natural gas from Shell/Sempra and ChevronTexaco to be able to export it to the U.S, where demand is 
Proposed LNG terminals have been rejected by communities 
 
In both Tijuana and Rosarito, when citizens became informed about the potential dangers associated with the proposed LNG terminals, the community opposed the proposed terminals, and the developers abandoned the projects.  In Tijuana, Marathon Oil  attempted to construct an LNG regasification 
site. However, the people living in that area fought against the LNG 
terminal because they realized that they were going to be undertaking 75 
percent of the risk, for, at most, 10 percent of the natural gas. The community became educated about the dangers of the proposed LNG terminal, and rallied against the terminal when they realized the damaging environmental and health impacts it created. Faced with such strong local opposition, the federal and local governments decided to enforce the Tijuana Urban Development Plan, which had zoned the area for "low impact tourism". Marathon Oil was forced to discontinue its plans for the terminal.  In Rosarito, El Paso Energy and Conoco Phillips  proposed an LNG 
terminal that met with strong local opposition and was forced to stop its construction plans.  The local citizens were angered by the proposed the location of the LNG site - near a power plant owned by Petroleos Mexicanos. The people living near the Petroleos Mexicanos power plant refused to allow an additional plant to devastate their health, 
neighborhoods and the environment.
 

 
 20high.17  However, it is highly unlikely that multinational corporations like Sempra/Shell 
and ChevronTexaco will allow PEMEX to make any significant profits on the natural gas they intend to sell to the United States.  This PEMEX export concept does little to help the situation in Baja California, where energy prices are high, and many are unable to afford electrical service.    According to a recent analysis of the North American market for natural gas, PEMEX customers are also unlikely to gain financially from the importation of LNG into Mexico.  Although some commentators have stated that LNG imports will reduce the cost of natural gas, recent analysis
18 of the economics of natural gas in North America indicates 
that LNG importation will cause essentially no natural gas price depression either locally (at point of importation) or nationally.  This is not surprising since the finding basically confirms that LNG developers will not be “shooting themselves in the foot” financially by undercutting gas prices with LNG.  The static North American natural gas models being used by many to show a dramatic price depression with the importation of LNG are inappropriate models because they fail to take into account the depletion of low-cost conventional natural gas in North America.  There are insufficient supplies of low-cost domestic gas left for it to remain at the margin, so higher cost unconventional gas must be drilled. The abundant, higher cost domestic sources of gas, such as conventional (small gas field), unconventional, and arctic will be the marginal source of supply—with or without LNG importation—and these higher cost supplies will set the domestic price of gas at $4.00 to $4.50/MMBtu.  Because these will set the market price of gas, “injections” of imported LNG will have little or no impact on the marginal price of natural gas. 
  
Environmental Harms in Mexico 
 
 
Although both of the proposed terminals in Baja California will have a significant impact 
on the surrounding environment, neither Sempra/Shell nor ChevronTexaco are making any significant effort to use the best available technology to reduce or avoid these impacts by investing in alternative, clean energy sources.  In fact, both projects are being pushed forward in the absence of completed scientific study of the potential impacts.  Furthermore, the past practices of these companies, particularly Sempra and Shell, show that they are willing to put their profits ahead of environmental and social concerns.  
Seabirds and the Coronado Islands 
 
The Coronado Islands, located off the Baja California coast in Mexico, just below the 
border about 20 miles south of San Diego, will be placed in serious jeopardy by the proposed LNG regasification terminal.  The Coronado Islands are uninhabited and remain largely isolated.  The species that inhabit the islands have not adapted to human activity.  The proposed LNG sites expose these previously isolated islands to damaging forms of human activity.  

 
 21 
The construction and general operation of the terminal, along with the tankers supplying the terminal, will have a continuous impact on the islands.  The LNG terminal will cause distinct disturbances to the globally significant species of seabirds that inhabit the Coronado Islands. There are ten species of seabirds that use the Coronado Islands as their breeding grounds.  Of these ten species, seven are listed as either threatened or endangered in the U.S or Mexico. The numbers of seabirds inhabiting the Coronado Islands are significantly lower than historical numbers due to impacts from habitat degradation as well as the prevalent use of the pesticide DDT which causes harmful thinning of the birds’ shells.
19  While these seabird populations are currently rebounding, 
the proposed LNG terminal would make it very unlikely that these seabirds would continue to increase in number.  There are a number of factors linked to the LNG terminal that could cause continued loss of seabird populations. The construction of the terminal would introduce previously unknown sounds and sights to the islands. Surface nesting seabirds, such as the Brown Pelican, Double-crested, Brandt’s, and Pelagic Cormorants, flee their nests when they are disturbed, leaving eggs unprotected.  These vulnerable eggs are then susceptible to gull predation.  A study conducted by Anderson and Keitt (1980) showed that 80 percent or more of eggs are lost due to human disturbances and the gull predation that follows.
20  
The construction of the LNG terminal, and the subsequent operation of the terminal, would result in a severe threat to the already-endangered Brown Pelican, and would drastically reduce the populations of the Double-crested, Brandt’s and Pelagic Cormorants.  Another category of seabird that inhabits the Coronado Islands is nocturnal seabirds.  The Coronado Islands are at least 8 miles from any sources of light pollution, ensuring a proper nocturnal period for the seabirds that have evolved to be active only during the nighttime in order to avoid predators.  The LNG terminal will require extensive lighting for safety purposes.  The required lighting threatens nocturnal seabirds in two distinct ways.  First, the lighting increases the risk of predation to nocturnal seabirds by illuminating their habitat during their active hours. Two types of seabirds, auks and storm petrels, breed only at night.  The light pollution caused by the LNG terminal will disturb the breeding process while simultaneously exposing the active seabirds to predatory gulls and falcons.  Seabirds are attracted to light.  Mortality rates will increase as birds fly into lights and structures surrounding the lights.
21   
 The Xantus’s Murrelet is especially threatened by the light pollution that will be introduced to the Coronado Islands if the LNG terminal is built.  This species is important to protect because of reduced population numbers.  The Xantus Murrelet was listed as threatened by the California Department of Fish and Game in February 2004. This bird is extremely light sensitive.  The world’s largest population of this endangered seabird gathers in the nearshore waters of the Coronado Islands from January through July.
22  
 

 
 22A Potential threat to migrating whale populations 
 
The LNG tankers will also impact the marine life in the ocean surrounding the LNG regasification site.  The waters off the coast of Baja California are particularly important to the gray whale population, which returns to the Baja California waters each year to reproduce.    The potential harms to the gray whale population from the proposed regasification site at Baja California have not yet been formally studied, although two studies are in the preliminary stages.  ChevronTexaco has recently commissioned a study by the Hubbs Sea World Research Institute and Shell has commissioned a study by the Center for Scientific Research and Advanced Study (CICESE) located in Ensenada, Mexico.    Past research demonstrates that the two most significant threats to the gray whale population are pollution and the disturbance of calving lagoons. The LNG regasification site at the Coronado Islands will sit directly in the middle of the migration path that gray whales follow each spring.    While the specific impact of the LNG tankers is unknown, the massive size of the tankers, coupled with the frequency of their visits, is certain to increase the threat to the gray whale population.   A peer-reviewed scientific study showing that construction and operation of the LNG terminals would have a minimal impact on ocean life, particularly the gray whale population, must be conducted and disclosed before construction begins.  
Unnecessary seawater use at terminals will impair marine ecosystems 
 
The LNG terminal requires the intake, disinfection, and discharge of between 100 and 200 million gallons of chlorinated seawater per day.  Chlorinated seawater is toxic to marine life, effecting the processes of reproduction, feeding, and respiration.  It can also cause mutagenic effects.
23  The cold temperatures at which the water is discharged, as 
much as 20 degrees colder than the ocean’s water, amplify the negative impacts of toxic, chlorinated seawater.
24   
 The immediate impacts of discharging chlorinated water into the ocean are significant.  Chlorine does not dissolve, but rather breaks down and forms complexes with other substances to create chlorinated organics.  Chlorinated organics remain toxic to marine life forms for extended period of time.  The Clean Water Act requires the use of “the best technology available for minimizing adverse environmental impact” of LNG terminals within the borders of the United States.  Submerged combustion vaporization (SCV) is the least environmentally damaging technology available for regasification.  It uses less than two percent of the natural gas to vaporize the LNG.  Although use of SCV results in a slight increase in terminal air emissions, these emissions can be substantially reduced by employing selective catalytic reduction (SCR) for nitrogen oxide control.  SCR is used to control nitrogen oxide emissions from the SCV system in use at the oldest LNG regasification terminal in the 

 
 23United States, Distrigas LNG in Boston.25 Mexico is not governed by the Clean Water 
Act, and the LNG sites in Baja California will use less sophisticated, and much more environmentally devastating, regasification technology.    
 
Pipeline construction by Sempra Energy has damaged ancient artifacts  
Costa Azul is the only remaining undisturbed stretch of coastline between Tijuana and 
Ensenada.  The site has a rich history of habitation by indigenous peoples, extending back over 10,000 years.  The Mexican government has zoned the Costa Azul area for low-impact tourism, and recognized that “this area, with its magnificent coastal landscapes, its rare and well-preserved biological and coastal resources, its strategic location along the most scenic part of the tourist corridor, should be preserved as a state park or preserve for all Baja Californians, generating sustainable employment through ecotourism and related services, long-term excavations, and park management.”
26 
 Unfortunately, the current plans for developing an energy market in Baja California do not consider the value of the undisturbed coastline or the archeological significance of Costa Azul in particular.  Instead, some of the environmental damage associated with the LNG terminals has already been done.  The proposed terminals at both sites will connect with the Bajanorte Gas Pipeline, which extends 130 miles from Tijuana to Mexicali and on to the U.S and was completed in 2002.  Sempra Energy’s subsidiary, Gasoducto Bajanorte, cleared an 80-foot wide right-of-way along the entire length of the pipeline route.
27   
 Although the path of the pipeline passed through a federally protected indigenous art site, Sempra made no attempt to get the necessary permits or take any steps to protect the invaluable artifacts.  They were finally stopped by the efforts of Mexico’s National Institute of Anthropology and History.  Although Sempra eventually changed the path of the pipeline, they left a disastrous trail of irreparable damage in their wake.  The clearing of the right-of-way led to the destruction of hundreds of oak and pinyon trees and their habitats.  Bedrock mortars, grinding slicks, ancient encampments and potential archaeological sites were also destroyed.  When the company agreed to alter their path to avoid the federally protected Vallecitos Archaelogical site, they did not repair, replant or make any attempt to mitigate the damages the clearing had caused.  This complete disregard for the value of the local culture and habitat to maintain the construction schedule bodes ill for the environment in the vicinity of the proposed LNG project.
28 
 
Construction by Sempra/Shell will destroy more artifacts 
 
The National Institute for History and Anthropology (INAH) was commissioned to carry out an investigation of the potential impacts of the Sempra/Shell LNG terminal on the archeological remains at the site. After one season in the field collecting and compiling information, the archeologists working for INAH produced a report on their findings. This report established the urgent need to take measures preventing irreversible loss, which can contribute to the historical understanding of the Baja California peninsula.   

 
 24Their findings indicate that construction of the proposed liquid natural gas plant, 
including the access road and a large portion of the plant, will destroy artifacts and evidence of people that lived in Baja California thousands of years ago.   The current plan is to excavate the artifacts and human remains at the site before construction begins. The work will be primarily one of archeological rescue and preservation.  The time frame of the work is currently dictated not by the needs of the project, but by the construction schedule set by Sempra/Shell.   Based on studies carried out in areas near the proposed gas processing facility, archeologists think there is a possibility that there are graves on the site.  The archeologists want to study those remains for clues to the nutrition and marine economy of the humans that lived here thousands of years ago, but they fear that most of the artifacts will be destroyed in a rush to construct the plant.  
                                                           
1 Banker and Associates, Energy Consultants, “New Actors in LNG politics in Baja California.” MEI 
report No. 660 , January 27, 2004. 
2 Ibid 
3 Barron, Jeffrey. “Evolving Impact of Environmental Laws on Cross-border Power Between Mexico and 
the United States”, Power in Latin America  August, 2003.   
4 Lindquist, Diane. “InterGen gives in, unplugs turbine.” San Diego Union Tribune  January 17, 2004.  
5 Young, Randel and Charles Meacham. “Pemex’s Multiple Services Poses Financial Issues.” International 
Oil and Gas Finance Review  2003, pg 73. 
6 Day, Paul. “Does MSC stand for Mexico Sold Cheap?” Business Mexico 2003. 
7 Alexander’s Gas and Oil Connections  volume 7,  issue #10 May 16, 2002.  
8 Lindquist, Diane. “Permits for Sempra’s LNG Plant Suspended.”  San Diego Union Tribune  December 19, 
2003. 
9 Phase 1 Comments of Sempra Energy LNG Corp., March 23, 2004.   
10 www.shell.com 
11 Maul, David. CEC Staff Update on Liquefied Natural Gas, February 24, 2004 (assumes 18.5 knots). 
12 Oman, 25 days; Australia, 18 days; Malaysia, 17 days; Indonesia, 16 days; Brunei, 16 days; Russia, 11 
days; Alaska, 5 days. 
13 “WorldTradeShow.com and Mexican Tourism Bureaus Partner.”  Business Wire  March 24, 2004.  
14 Luken, Carlos. “Mexico's hope in Baja California.” Contra Costa Times , August 24, 2003.   
15 “New Fox Studios Movie Park & Other Cultural Improvements Make Baja California An Exciting 
Summer Vacation Destination.” PR Newswire ,  May 10, 2001. 
16 Lindquist, Diane. “Mexican agency warns of potential for LNG disaster.” The San Diego Union-Tribune, 
January 23, 2004. 
17 “S.A. firm cashes in on Mexican connections in energy market.” San Antonio Business Journal , May 28, 
2004. 
18Fahd, George and Dale Nesbitt (President). “Impact of LNG Imports on North American Natural Gas 
Prices.” Energy Pulse  June 10, 2004.   
19 Aguirre, Alfonso and Bradford Keitt. “Potential effects of a liquefied natural gas offshore terminal on 
seabirds at Coronado Islands, Baja California, Mexico.” 
20 Ibid 
21 Ibid 
22 Ibid 
23 Patin, Stanislav Environmental Impact of the Offshore Gas and Oil Industry, Ecomonitor Pub, December 
1999.  
24 http://www.environmentalhealth.org/DeadlyPowerExecSumm.html 

 
 25                                                                                                                                                                             
25 Border Power Plant Working Group (and others) letter to U.S Coast Guard Docket Management Facility 
Revised Comments on Draft Environmental Impact Statement Prepared for Port Pelican LLC Deepwater 
Port License Application- LNG vaporizer system Global LNG Summit June 2004.   
26 Robertson, Miguel Wilken. “Costa Azul: A Threatened Cultural Landscape (notes for a talk)” September 
12, 2003. 
27 Ibid 
28 Ibid   

 
 26Chapter 4. Liquid Natural Gas: Derailing California’s Golden Dream 
 
California is currently engaged in a fight for its energy future.  The majority of California voters, along with Greenpeace, are demanding clean renewable resources.  On the other side, multinational corporations are arguing that the State should invest billions in new LNG facilities and polluting power plants, including plants that would be sited in Mexico but supply California’s market.   Shell, Sempra, Chevron-Texaco and BHP corporations are pressuring California to postpone its renewable energy goals, goals that are supported overwhelmingly by California voters. Instead, these energy giants propose the purchase of foreign supplies of natural gas in the form of LNG. In addition to the influence of the big corporations, all of California’s natural gas utilities either have or until recently had, a direct stake in the importation of LNG.
1 
 Greenpeace is part of a larger coalition of environmental groups and community activists in California that is advocating for increased investment in renewable energy and energy efficiency in California, instead of the creation of long-term dependence on liquid natural gas facilities.   California can meet its future energy demands without building any LNG terminals.  If the State pursues aggressive energy efficiency goals, retrofits the old inefficient coastal power plants, and expands the States renewable energy goals, the State can reduce natural gas demand by the equivalent of three LNG terminals.    
Conservation and renewable energy are California’s top priority 
 
In 2002 the California Assembly overwhelmingly voted to make California a national renewable energy leader.  California’s Renewable Portfolio Standard ensures that 20 percent of California's energy will be produced from clean energy like wind, solar and geothermal by 2017.  New legislation has been introduced, pushed by Governor Schwarzenegger, which would accelerate the target date to 2010.  In the same year, the California Power Authority (CPA) sent its Energy Resource Investment Plan to the state legislature. The Energy Resource Investment Plan details a strategy to prevent a future energy crisis by meeting California’s energy supply shortfalls through energy efficiency, conservation and renewable generation. In total, the CPA will generate $5 billion in revenue bond financing that will leverage over $12 billion in clean energy investment by 2007.  In addition, the State’s Energy Action Plan, adopted in 2003 by the California Public Utilities Commission, the California Energy Commission and the CPA, places energy efficiency and the acceleration of the State’s renewable energy goal as the first priority for the State.  

 
 27California can eliminate the need for three LNG facilities  
 
Natural gas demand in California can be cost-effectively reduced by one third, through conservation and renewable energy,
2 reducing CO 2 emissions by 101 billion pounds per 
year.  This reduction is equal to removing more than 10 million passenger cars per year from the road
3 and provides the same benefits as building three LNG terminals.   
  This transition to renewable energy is especially important as decisions made now impact the future of energy production.  If the LNG infrastructure is built on the West Coast, California and Baja California will become increasingly dependent on natural gas and a valuable opportunity to switch to a cleaner, safer, more sustainable method of energy production will be significantly delayed, or lost altogether.     
California already has a plan for reducing natural gas consumption by one-quarter 
 
Numerous studies on the potential for energy efficiency and renewable energy were conducted when the State was putting together its Energy Action Plan.  The fundamental result of these studies is a consensus that the state can significantly reduce its natural gas use through increased investments in energy efficiency and renewable power while saving money and improving the environment.    The studies by the California Energy Commission and others show that the State can reduce its natural gas use by nearly 1,500 mmcfd or roughly 25 percent through cost-effective energy efficiency measures and by accelerating investments in renewable energy.  Further increasing the State renewable energy goals to 30 percent of the State’s energy use by 2017 would reduce natural gas use by the equivalent of another LNG terminal (see Table 1).  
Table 1:  Extending California’s renewable energy goal to 30 percent by 2017 would 
allow the State to cut natural demand by one-third. 
 
Gas Demand, Projected Demand Increase by California Natural Gas 
Utilities, Supply/Demand Reduction Options 
 Gas Quantity,  
(mmcfd)  
Average daily natural gas use in California, 2001 
 6,600  
Projected increase in gas demand over 2002 baseline, 2006-2016 
 0-2004 
Average projected daily natural gas delivery from one LNG terminal 
 700-800  
Total Reduction in California gas demand from conservation measures a
accelerated renewable portfolio standard (20% by 2010) 
 1,100 – 1,5005 
Total Reductions assuming 30 percent renewable portfolio standard (a) 
 1,800 – 2,3006 
Source: Synapse Energy Economics, 2004 
(a) Estimated from CEC baseline.  
 

 
 28Figure 1. Most of the natural gas power plants 
in California  were built before 1980
02,0004,0006,0008,00010,00012,000
1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s
Year BuiltCapacity (MW)Increased Energy Efficiency Investments 
 The largest single consumer of natural gas in California is the electric power industry, accounting for roughly one-third of the natural gas use in the state.  Consequently, one of the best ways to reduce California’s natural gas demand is to reduce the need for electricity through accelerated energy efficiency programs.  Studies by the California Energy Commission and an Xenergy Inc. consultants report commissioned by the Energy Foundation and Hewlett Foundation
7 found that over the 
next decade there is a significant potential for energy-efficiency savings in California.  The CEC found that increased investments in energy efficiency could save 30,000 gigawatt hours (gwh) of electricity, which would reduce natural gas consumption in the state by 550 mmcfd over the CEC base case forecast.
8  Similarly, Xenergy found that 
even more cost-effective energy efficiency measures can be implemented – saving 40,000 gwh of electricity – that would equal 820 mmcfd of natural gas savings over the CEC base forecast.  The baseload throughput of one LNG terminal is approximately 700 mmcf/d.  Building Standards  More efficient technology is available at the consumer level.  Recently adopted 2005 building standards will provide a 10 percent improvement over the 2001 standard.  They are expected to produce annual electricity savings of nearly 5,000 gwh, which translates into 130 mmfcd of natural gas reductions by 2016.
9 Improved appliance standards also 
are expected to provide significant additional savings.  
 
Improving the efficiency of coastal natural gas power plants 
 
The State can take a giant step forward in energy efficiency by upgrading the old coastal 
utility boiler plants. Most of these units were built before 1975 and consume at least 50 percent more natural gas per unit of electricity produced than a new power plant.  There are approximately 16,600 MW of old generating capacity in California.
10 Upgrading just 
the older non-peaking plants in California with newer technology would save approximately 500 mmcf/d.
11  
 There are also significant health and economic benefits to replacing these aging power plants.  Newer plants have lower fuel and operating costs, and produce less smog-forming nitrogen oxide emissions. Water usage from inefficient cooling could also be dramatically reduced with more efficient processes, which can be critical in mitigating the harm to 

 
 29aquatic ecosystems.  According to the California Energy Commission, all of the natural 
gas power plants built in this decade, 8,000 MW of power plants, have a nitrogen oxide limit of 5 ppm or less.  However, over 10 percent of the older natural gas plants are permitted to emit over 50 ppm and another 12 percent can emit between 15 and 50 ppm (see Figure 1).
12 
 Renewable energy is the key to reducing natural gas use in the state.   An accelerated Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS)
13 is another key to significantly 
reducing natural gas use in the State.  The RPS, adopted by California voters in 2002, currently states that 20 percent of energy generation in California should be from renewable sources of electricity by 2017.  This represents a doubling of the renewable energy production from 2001.   
Table 2: Energy Efficiency and a 30 percent RPS will reduce the need for three 
LNG terminals in California  
 
Supply/Demand Reduction Options 
 Gas Savings  
(mmcfd) 
Increased Investments in Energy Efficiency Programs 
  
550 – 820 
Newly Implemented Building Standards 
  
80 – 130 
Improved Efficiency of Old Natural Gas Power Plants 
  
475 
Accelerated Renewable Portfolio Standard to 20 percent by 2010 
  
27 – 55 
Renewable Portfolio Standard 30 percent by 2017 (a) 
  
685 – 820 
Total Natural Gas Demand Savings  
1,800 – 2,300 
Source: Synapse Energy Economics, 2004 
(a) Estimated from CEC baseline. 
 
New legislation has been introduced, endorsed by the new Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, which would accelerate the target date to 2010.  This change would offset 220 mmcfd of natural gas use in 2010, falling to 55 mmcfd in 2013 as compared with the current RPS.
14 
 Policy makers and environmentalists are calling on the State to continue to pursue aggressive renewable energy targets.  An increase the RPS to 30 percent by 2017 would represent a significant increase in energy production and further reduces the demand for natural gas in the state.  A 30 percent renewable energy goal by 2017 would reduce natural gas demand by an additional 685 to 820 mmcfd, the equivalent of one LNG terminal.
 
                                                           
1 Southern California Gas and San Diego Gas and Electric are owned by Sempra.  Until recently PGE 
owned the U.S. extension of the North Baja Pipeline in partnership with Sempra.   
2 Synapse report and assuming renewable energy goal of 30 percent by 2017. 

 
 30                                                                                                                                                                             
3 Environmental Protection Agency (assumes auto emissions of 10,000 pounds of CO 2 per year). 
4 Derived from presentations by PGE, SoCalGas, and SDGE at CEC/CPUC Natural Gas Workshop, Dec. 9-
10, 2003.  
5 Derived from Synapse Energy Economics evaluation submitted in March 23, 2004 RACE coalition 
comments in CPUC Utility Long-Term Natural Gas Procurement Proceeding, Rulemaking  04-01-25 
6 Ibid 
7 Xenergy, 2002, California’s Secret Energy Surplus, the Potential for Energy Efficiency” 
8 The CEC assumed 10,000 gwh of energy efficiency savings. 
9 Energy Action Plan Legislative Report, dated January 5, 2004. 
10 “Aging Natural Gas Power Plants in California.” California Energy Commission Staff Paper , July 
2003. 
11 Synapse Energy Economics on the California Natural Gas Utilities’ Phase 1 Proposals, March 23, 2004.  
12 California Energy Commission, Aging Natural Gas Power Plants in California, July 2003. 
13 “Proposed Energy Savings Goals for Energy Efficiency Programs in California.” California Energy 
Commission Staff Report, dated October 27, 2003, pg 32. 
14 Renewable Resources Development Report , a Presentation by Ann Peterson, Project Manager, at 
the California Energy Commission Business Meeting, November 19, 2003, assuming 8,000 Ghw increase. 

 
 31Chapter 5.  LNG’s Global Blood Trail  
 
Liquid natural gas production results in environmental damage and human rights violations around the world.  The natural gas used to make LNG destined for Mexico will be mined for in some of the world’s most sensitive environments, such as the Peruvian jungle and Sakhalin Island in the Russian Far East.  The world’s banks are poised to 
finance these destructive practices around the globe.  
 
Government Overthrow in Bolivia  
 
Plans by Sempra Energy to export Bolivian gas to Chile for liquefaction and 
shipment to California  fueled a popular uprising that left 65 dead and forced President 
Sanchez de Lozada from power. The revolt began in September of 2003, when indigenous and workers’ groups began protests, strikes and roadblocks against the 
government’s plan to export natural gas to the United States and Mexico via Chile. The 
demonstrations against the natural gas project subsequently spiraled into widespread protests against the Bolivian government.  The opposition to the project has been particularly strong because many Bolivians are against exporting natural gas through a Chilean port. Bolivia lost access to the ocean in 1883 after being defeated by Chile in the War of the Pacific.  
 
Bringing Disease and Destruction: The Camisea Project in Peru 
 
The Camisea Gas Project in Peru is located in previously inaccessible Peruvian jungle in 
one of the most biologically diverse areas in the world. The project is also located in the Nahua Kugapakori State Reserve neighboring the Urubamba River, which was created over a decade ago to protect vulnerable native cultures.  These nomadic, indigenous 
communities have had little or no contact with the outside world.  In spite of the 
protected status of this land, Phase I of the Camisea Gas project will be completed in August 2004. This project is highly controversial due to the extensive environmental damage and the impact on indigenous peoples caused during the construction of the gas wells, gas plant, and 700-kilometer pipeline from the jungle to the coast.
 
 Companies involved in the Camisea project consortium include Hunt Oil, Halliburton, Argentina’s PlusPetrol and Techint, and Belgium's Tractebel. The consortium has been fined by the Peruvian government for violating erosion control and water quality standards. The pipeline right-of-way passes through many kilometers of steep jungle 
terrain with unstable soils and has been completely exposed for two consecutive rainy 
seasons. The failure of the consortium to promptly replant and close the pipeline right-of-way has resulted in tremendous erosion, landslides, and water quality impacts in the jungle portion of the project. This failure has also opened the region to “invasion” by outside colonists, further degrading this sensitive environment and threatening the health and way-of-life of the indigenous inhabitants.   

 
 32Hunt Oil will be responsible for Phase II of the project, the construction of a liquefied 
natural gas (LNG) liquefaction terminal on the Peruvian coast south of Lima. The target markets for this LNG are California and Mexico.  While Hunt Oil and the other companies involved stand to make a substantial profit from LNG, the cost to the Machiguenga indigenous communities in the Camisea region is a decline in health, attributed to pollution and the invasion of construction, and the potential loss of their 
culture.   
 The indigenous cultures living in the Nahua Kugapakori State Reserve are in the initial stages of contact with the outside world.  One of their early communications with the outside world was an expression of outrage at the invasion of the oil companies; “In the past, Shell worked here and almost all of us died from the diseases...We know that if another company comes here, our rivers and land will be destroyed. What will we eat when the rivers are dead and the animals have run away?"
1 
 
Endangering the Whales: Russia’s Sakhalin Island2 
 
Sakhalin is a Russian island that is located about 50 miles north of Japan. After the 
collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990’s, multi-national oil and gas companies wasted little time in exploring the waters around the island for oil and gas. It is now one of the leading oil and gas producing regions in Russia, and almost all of what is being produced is for the export market.   Natural gas is a by-product of the crude oil that is being extracted from Sakhalin. Despite industry claims to the contrary, getting natural gas from beneath the ocean floor has proven to be a dirty and dangerous process. Sakhalin’s oil and gas is being drilled from two huge off-shore oil platforms, one operated primarily by ExxonMobil (the Sakhalin I project), and the other primarily by Shell and Mitsubishi (the Sakhalin II project). 
Sakhalin II would be a potential supplier of the Shell/Sempra import terminal at Costa 
Azul in Baja California.  Both of these platforms are located in a pristine marine habitat, and can potentially impact the only feeding ground of the critically endangered Western Pacific Gray Whale. There are about only 100 of these magnificent creatures alive, and the health of the surviving whales is being seriously compromised. Scientists studying the whales have observed malnourished, or “skinny,” whales in the area. These scientists are concerned that continued oil and gas drilling adjacent to whale habitat, tanker traffic, and underwater pipeline construction could push the last of this dying breed into extinction.  
 
For the next phase of the Sakhalin II project, Shell wants to build massive infrastructure to get the oil and gas to markets abroad. This will involve laying underwater oil and gas pipelines that will run right through whale feeding habitat, as well as through the home of many other species of fish, and on to the shores of Sakhalin. Environmentalists and local fishermen are very concerned that the construction of these pipelines could seriously disrupt this habitat, and that the pipeline could leak and contaminate the waters.   

 
 33Once on the island, the oil and gas would be sent through parallel pipelines that will run 
the length of Sakhalin Island, over 800 kilometers, to its southern tip. Along its route, the pipeline will cross over 1,000 streams and rivers. Hundreds of these waterways provide spawning grounds for wild salmon, and together they contribute to one of the most robust salmon habitats in the world. The pipeline crossings will gouge right through the beds of these streams, with very little concern given to the well-being of the salmon, or the local 
economy and community that depends on the salmon for a substantial part of their diet.  
 The Sakhalin II project is dependent upon the public’s money for its construction. The U.S. Export-Import Bank, and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development are currently considering financing the further development of the Sakhalin II project, including the gas pipeline and the regasification terminal.   
Jepordizing Biodiversity: Australia’s Barrow Island
3 
ChevronTexaco, ExxonMobil and Shell are currently proposing to put over $6 billion 
worth of industrial gas processing facility and equipment on Barrow Island in a 
development known as the Gorgon Project.  This infrastructure, which includes an LNG 
liquefaction plant, could be located offshore, on the mainland or on less important islands nearby. 
Barrow Island is Western Australia’s second largest island and home to internationally 
significant biodiversity.  If no concerted effort to regulate human access and activities on 
the island is made, the unique biodiversity of the island will be jeopardized or lost forever.    
There are 24 known indigenous animal species or subspecies that exist only on Barrow 
Island. This exceptional assemblage includes five forms of mammals, two types of 
reptiles, one species of bird and sixteen species of invertebrates.  The island is also a refuge for the magnificent Perentie that, at lengths of over six feet, is the world's second largest lizard. 
Barrow Island is such an important habitat for unique species that it is referred to as 
“Australia’s Ark”.  A large construction workforce will soon invade this important 
habitat in order to build the proposed facilities. The estimated 52,037 personnel movements per year that will be required to build the new facilities is a manifold increase in the level of human industrial activity presently occurring on Barrow Island. This activity is one of the central threats posed to the 24 known types of animals that live nowhere else but Barrow Island. Increased human activities on the island increase the risk of the introduction of weeds and diseases that could wipe out the island’s biological diversity forever. 
Presently, only 150 barge movements occur per year and only 150 people live on Barrow 
Island at any one time. The number of visitors to the island is carefully controlled based on Barrow Islands status as a Permanent Class A Reserve. Yet, even this relatively low 
level of activity has led to the introduction of eight known species of environmental 
weeds, four of which have been impossible to eradicate. In recent years it has also been necessary to implement eradication programmes for black rats, house mice, and European bees.  

 
 34The Gorgon proposal estimates that 861 barge movements and 52,307 personnel 
movements per year will be required to build the new facilities.  The Australian Northwest Territory State Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) warns that temporary contractors will do the majority of this work.  This transitory work force will increase the risk of introducing foreign weeds, pests and diseases to the degree that the EPA considers “virtually certain”. 
A Traditional Way of Life at Risk: BP’s Tangguh Project in Indonesia 
 
BP has proposed an LNG exploitation site at the Berau and Bituni Bays, which are located in the Indonesian province, Papua.  The project, named the Tangguh (which translates to all-powerful in Indonesian) project by BP, requires the construction of two offshore gas platforms, a 2,000 meter long and 150 meter wide airfield and an LNG plant that will cover 600 hectares of what is now rainforest.
4  The massive construction 
required to operate BP’s plant is having a significant impact on the local populations.    Bituni Bay is a fishing community.  Fishing and shrimping account for US$13 
million/year.  Many fisher folk, both male and female, have taken jobs with BP.  
However, the effects of BP’s construction threaten those that are not fortunate enough to claim one of the limited available positions of employment.  The seismic testing performed in the waters south of Bituni Bay has impacted fishing and reduced revenues for the local fisher folk.  Additionally, large fields of Mangrove have been cut to clear the way for the construction, resulting in large stacks of logs that disrupt local fisheries.    As the mangroves are cut down to create space for the new LNG plant, the mangrove ecosystem is disrupted.  Mangroves are a major source of revenue, generating over US$10 million per year. The mangrove ecosystem is already under pressure from the 
wood chip exporting industry.  
 While many community members view the Tangguh project as an opportunity, citing BP estimates that 5,000 temporary construction jobs will be created with about 10 percent of those jobs being permanent, many citizens are angry about the lifestyle changes that the Tangguh project will force on them. The Economist reported that all information supplied to the villagers came from BP, NGO’s paid for by BP, or the Indonesian government, which stands to profit from the site.  If the villagers were informed of the potential safety and environmental harms associated with the site, they may be less captivated by the promise of a comparatively small number of jobs.   
 
The Papua province is in a state of extreme unrest as it seeks independence from Indonesia.  Local conflicts and investigations into human right’s abuses made the area too volatile for Exxon Mobil to operate in nearby Aceh, another province seeking independence from Indonesia.  Developing a natural gas exploitation site in this conflict stricken community may cause additional problems in the area. In addition, if BP is forced to close its LNG site due to safety concerns resulting from the conflict, the California market that it supplies will suffer a lack of supply
5.  The impacts of that drastic 
reduction in supply could be reminiscent of the previous energy crisis.    
 

 
 35                                                                                                                                                                             
1 Available from www.amazonwatch.org 
2 Available from www.pacificenvironment.org 
3 Availiable from www.rescuebarrowisland.org.au/ 
4 Mining Advocacy Network. Kerebok  Volume 3 Number 27 October 2002 
http://www.jatam.org/english/case/bt/uploaded/not_power.html 
5 JATAM- Mining Advocacy Network, "From Persia to Papua: Tracking the Perils of BP's  
Mining, Oil and Gas Operations Around the World" January 2003. 

702 H Street, NW, Suite 300
Washington, D.C. 20001