# Archivo original: little-story-monstrous-mess.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:25 -03 2025

2  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   3  
Executive  
SummaryContents
A new investigation by Greenpeace* 
has found a broad range of hazardous 
chemicals in children’s clothing and 
footwear across a number of major clothing brands, including fast fashion, 
sportswear and luxury brands. 
The study follows on from several previous investigations 
published by Greenpeace as part of its Detox campaign, 
which identified that hazardous chemicals are present in 
textile and leather products as a result of their use during 
manufacture1. It confirms that the use of hazardous 
chemicals is still widespread – even during the  manufacture of clothes for children and infants. 
A total of 82 children’s textile products
2 were purchased 
in May and June 2013 in 25 countries/regions worldwide 
from flagship stores, or from other authorised retailers3. 
They were manufactured in at least twelve different countries/regions. The brands included fast fashion 
brands, such as American Apparel, C&A, Disney, GAP , 
H&M, Primark, and Uniqlo; sportswear brands, such as 
adidas, LiNing, Nike, and Puma; and the luxury brand Burberry. The products were sent to the Greenpeace Research 
Laboratories at the University of Exeter in the UK, from 
where they were dispatched to independent accredited laboratories. All products were investigated for the 
presence of nonylphenol ethoxylates (NPEs); certain 
products were also analysed for phthalates, organotins, per/poly-fluorinated chemicals (PFCs), or antimony, where 
the analysis was relevant for the type of product
4. The 
analysis for antimony was carried out at the Greenpeace Research Laboratories
5.
All the hazardous chemicals mentioned above were 
detected in various products, above the technical limits of detection used in this study. Despite the fact that all the 
products purchased were for children and infants, there 
was no significant difference between the range and levels of hazardous chemicals found in this study compared to 
previous studies analysing those chemicals.
*Investigation carried out by Greenpeace International,brought to you by Greenpeace East Asia executive summary
Executive Summary 3 
Section 1: Results – A wide range of hazardous 
chemicals in a wide range of brands 13
Section 2: No more play – it’s time to Detox 25 
Endnotes 31
Appendix 36Acknowledgements: 
We would like to thank the following 
people who contributed to the creation 
of this report. If we have forgotten 
anyone, they know that our gratitude is 
also extended to them.
Kevin Brigden, Madeleine Cobbing, 
Tommy Crawford, Ilze Smit, Robin Perkins, Ieva Vilimaviciute, Yifang Li, Miao Zhang, Sha Du, Chih An Lee, Yan Huang, Yuan Yuan Guan, Caidan Cao, Kristin Casper
Design, Art Direction by:  
Toby Cotton @ Arc CommunicationsA Little Story about Monsters in Your 
Closet
Published January 2014
By Greenpeace East AsiaBeijing Office, 3/F, Julong Office 
Building, Block 7, Julong Garden, 68 
Xinzhong Street, Dongcheng District, 
Beijing, China. 100027
greenpeace.org 
my clothes are filled   
with little monsters!What's in it?


4  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   5  executive summary  executive summary
The role of corporations
Major textile companies with a global reach have the 
potential to implement impactful solutions towards the 
elimination of hazardous substances in the industry as 
a whole. Using their influence, they can drive change across their supply chains and are in a position to make 
real progress towards a toxic-free future for our children. 
Greenpeace is calling on these companies to recognise the urgency of the situation and act as Leaders, committing 
to zero discharge of hazardous chemicals by January 1st 
2020. This commitment should include ambitious but 
achievable timelines that will lead to the swift elimination 
of hazardous substances and be followed through with credible actions.
Since the launch of Greenpeace’s Detox campaign in July 
2011, 18 major clothing companies have made public commitments to Detox their supply chains. While most of 
these companies are acting as Leaders, making tangible 
progress towards their commitments, three – adidas, Nike and LiNing – are failing to follow through sufficiently on their 
promises. Meanwhile, other brands have still failed to make 
a clear commitment to Detox their clothes, despite their implication in the toxic scandal in numerous Greenpeace 
reports (Refer to footnote 1). The findings of this report, in 
which every brand had examples of one or more children’s products containing hazardous chemicals, highlight the 
urgency with which brands need to clean up their supply 
chains and ensure a toxic-free future for generations to come.The role of governments
Greenpeace is calling governments to adopt a political commitment to zero discharge of all hazardous 
chemicals within one generation. This is to be based on 
the precautionary principle, and include a preventative approach which avoids the production and use of 
hazardous chemicals and therefore releases of hazardous 
chemicals. This commitment must be matched with a comprehensive set of chemicals management policies 
and regulations that establish short-term targets to ban 
the production and use of priority hazardous chemicals, a 
dynamic list of hazardous substances requiring immediate 
action (based on the substitution principle), and a publicly available register of data on dischargers, emissions and 
losses of hazardous substances.
The role of “People Power”
Our children deserve to live in a world free of hazardous 
chemicals and adults around the world have the power 
to make this a reality. As parents, global citizens and 
consumers, by acting together now we can challenge major brands and governments to bring about the urgent 
change the world needs. Already the united calls for toxic-
free fashion have led to landmark Detox commitments from 18 major clothing companies, including well-known brands 
such as H&M, Zara, Valentino, and Puma. 
It doesn’t stop here.Acting together we can build the toxic-free future our 
children deserve.Key findings   
• Nonylphenol ethoxylates (NPEs) were found in 50 
of the 82 products analysed, at levels ranging from just 
above 1 mg/kg (the limit of detection) up to 17,000 mg/kg. 
This is equivalent to 61% of all products tested. All of the brands had at least one article where NPEs were 
detected. Brands with the highest levels of NPEs in their 
products (above 1,000 mg/kg) were C&A, Disney and American Apparel. Burberry was not far behind – with a 
level of 780 mg/kg in one product.
• Products from 10 of the 12 countries of manufacture 
contained NPEs. 
• Phthalates were detected in 33 out of 35 samples with 
plastisol prints on them, two of which contained far higher concentrations of phthalates compared to the 
other articles tested; a Primark t-shirt
6 sold in Germany 
contained 11%  phthalates  and a baby one-piece from 
American Apparel7 sold in the USA contained 0.6% 
phthalates. The levels of phthalates found in these two items would not be permitted in certain toys and 
childcare products under regulations for these products sold in the EU, which do not apply to clothing.• Organotins were found in three articles with plastisol 
prints (of 21 tested) and three footwear articles (of five tested). The highest concentrations of organotins were found in three footwear products by Puma and adidas
8, 
with the highest levels in a Puma sport shoe. For all of 
these, the concentrations of the organotin DOT were 
higher than the Oeko-tex standard9 – which is a voluntary 
eco-label – and the standards set by adidas and Puma 
for DOT in their own Restricted Substances Lists10.
• One or more PFC was detected in each of the 15 articles 
tested.
• Three adidas products11, a toddler’s coat from 
Nike12, and a jacket from Uniqlo13 had relatively high 
concentrations of PFCs (either for volatile or ionic).
• The analysis for ionic PFCs found PFOS in one adidas 
shoe14 and in Burberry swimwear15.
• The concentration of the ionic PFC PFOA by area in one 
adidas swimsuit16 was far higher than the limit of 1 µg/m² 
set by Norway from 201417 and even by adidas in its own 
Restricted Substances List18.  
• Antimony was detected in all 36 articles, all of which 
included fabrics composed of polyester, or a blend of 
polyester and other fibres.  
I don't want to  play  
with little monsters.Mom, Dad, I don't want 
monsters in my closet.

6  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   7  
executive summary
Per- and poly-fluorinated chemicals 
(PFCs)
Per- and poly-fluorinated chemicals (PFCs) are used in many industrial processes and consumer products, 
including textile and leather products, due to their 
chemical properties such as their ability to repel both water and oil. Ionic PFCs such as PFOS and PFOA 
can cause adverse impacts both during development 
and during adulthood, in part due to their hormone disrupting properties, with impacts on the reproductive system and the immune system, as well as being 
potentially carcinogenic in animal tests.
Nonylphenol ethoxylates/Nonylphenols 
(NPEs/NPs)
NPEs are man-made chemicals that are widely used as 
surfactants by textiles manufacturers. Once released to 
the environment, NPEs degrade to nonylphenols (NP), which are known to be toxic, and acting as hormone 
disrupters, persistent and bioaccumulative. NP is known 
to accumulate in many living organisms. The presence of NPEs in finished products shows that they have 
been used during their manufacture, which is likely to 
result in the release of NPEs and NP in wastewater from manufacturing facilities.
Meet the monsters   
in my closet
Phthalates
Phthalates are mainly used as plasticisers (or softeners) in plastics, especially PVC. They are commonly found in 
human tissues, with reports of significantly higher levels of 
intake in children. There are substantial concerns about the toxicity of phthalates to wildlife and humans and in 
particular their hormone-disrupting effects. For example, 
DEHP , one of the most widely used to date, is known to be toxic to reproductive development in mammals, capable 
of interfering with development of reproductive organs in 
males  and affecting reproductive success in females.
Antimony
Antimony shows many similarities in its chemistry and toxicity to arsenic . Trivalent antimony, such as is present 
in antimony trioxide, is a more toxic form of antimony 
compound, with effects including dermatitis, irritation of the 
respiratory tract, and interference with the immune system.
Organotins
Within the textile industry organotins are used as biocides 
or fungicides in products such as socks, shoes and sport 
clothes to prevent odour caused by the breakdown of 
sweat, and as stabilisers in plastisol prints. Organotins are known to be toxic at relatively low levels of exposure to a 
range of organisms, including mammals, with impacts on 
development, the immune system and the nervous system.

8  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   9  executive summary  executive summary
3/4 1/1 0/0 0/0 1/1
No. of  
samples 
11
4
975
11
749663NPEs Phthalates Organotins PFCs Antimony
Table 1. The number of samples 
in which NPEs, phthalates, 
organotins, PFCs, and antimony 
in polyester fibre were identified. The testing was process by various 
fabric and parts of the products. 
Results are shown by product brand.
5/11 6/6 2/4 3/3 10/10
6/9 1/1 0/0 2/2 1/1
3/7 4/4 0/2 1/1 1/1
4/5 3/3 0/3 1/1 2/2
4/11 5/7 0/7 0/0 2/2
6/7 4/4 1/2 2/2 3/3
3/4 2/2 0/2 0/0 2/2
5/9 3/3 0/4 2/2 5/5
5/6 2/2 0/2 2/2 3/3
5/6 1/1 3/4 1/1 3/3
1/3 1/1 0/2 1/1 3/3

Argentina
1
Greece
3
Turkey
5
Italy
1
Switzerland
2
Israel
3
Thailand
3
Indonesia
4
Chile
1
Colombia
2
Mexico
2
USA
3
ChinaMainland
10
Russia
1
Japan
4
Hong Kong
4
Taiwan
3
Philippines
3
Austria
4
Hungary
2
Sweden
4
Poland
2
Germany
6
UK
4
Spain
5
Italy1
Mainland 
China29
Turkey3
Unknown12
USA4
Mexico1
Tunisia2
India1
Bangladesh6
Thailand8
Phillipines2
Vietnam7
Indonesia6
The products were bought in 25 different countries/regions  
representing Asia, the Americas and Europe.Where the products were bought Where the products were made
The majority of products were not made in the country where they were sold. Most of the products were manufactured in China and 
other Asian countries, as well as the USA, Turkey, Tunisia, Italy 
and Mexico. For 12 products, the country of manufacture was not identified by the labelling, which is symptomatic of an industry that is 
not as transparent about its manufacturing practices as it should be. executive summary  executive summary
10  A little story about monsters in your closet A little story about monsters in your closet   11  

12  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   13  
This study has analysed for the presence of an 
even broader range of hazardous chemicals 
than previous studies published by Greenpeace: 
nonylphenol ethoxylates, certain types of amines, phthalates, organotins, per-/poly-fluorinated chemicals, and antimony. All these 
hazardous chemicals were found, except for 
carcinogenic amines released by certain azo dyes, which were found in previous studies
19.
However, The new findings are in line with what 
has been established by earlier investigations: 
Greenpeace has already identified the presence of a range of hazardous chemicals in textile and 
leather products and concluded that this was as 
a result of their use during manufacture, either within the processes used in textile factories or due to their presence in materials that are used 
to make the products
20. It is obvious that, despite the documented 
hazards associated with them, hazardous 
chemicals continue to be used for a variety 
of purposes in the textiles process or in the product itself: NPEs are widely used 
as surfactants and detergents in textiles 
processing; phthalates are used as additives in plastisol prints on clothing; organotins can also be an ingredient in plastisol prints as well as a 
fungicide; clothes are treated with per-/poly-
fluorinated chemicals to impart waterproofing or oil proofing properties, while a compound of antimony (antimony trioxide) is used as catalyst 
in the manufacture of polyester.
All this is the case even though in many 
instances more environmentally responsible 
alternatives are available for these substances.  
Results – A wide range  
of hazardous chemicals  in a wide range of brands#1
I want to grow up without the little 
monsters#1

14  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   15  Section #1 Section #1
Some of the branded products analysed for this report.
TX13094 - PRIMARK
TX13048 - GAP TX13056 - GAP TX13003 - adidasTX13004 - adidas
TX13006 - adidasTX13063 - H&MTX13014 - AMeRIcAn APPARel
TX13073 - lI nInG
TX13097 - PUMATX13091 - PRIMARKTX13031 - c&A
TX13088 - nIKe
TX13100 - PUMA
TX13017 - BURBeRRy
TX13015 - AMeRIcAn APPARelTX13074 - lI nInG TX13030 - c&A TX13082 - nIKe
TX13018 - BURBeRRy TX13040 - DIsneyTX13043 - DIsney
TX13101 - PUMATX13069 - H&MTX13023 - BURBeRRy TX13025 - BURBeRRy


16  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   17  1.1. Nonylphenol ethoxylates 
All 82 products were analysed for nonylphenol ethoxylates 
(NPEs). They were found in 50 of these products, at levels 
ranging from just above 1 mg/kg (the limit of detection) 
up to 17,000 mg/kg. This is equivalent to 61% of all the products and is consistent with the findings from 
Greenpeace’s two previous studies.
• The fact that NPEs were detected in products across all 
brands, in most of the countries/regions where they were 
sold and in almost all countries of manufacture, suggests that the use of NPEs by the textile industry remains 
widespread. This includes the supply chains used by the 
major international clothing brands in this study
20.
• The highest concentration of NPEs was detected in a 
C&A branded shoe21  manufactured and sold in Mexico 
at levels well above the limit that C&A sets in its own 
Restricted Substances List22.   
• Eight articles (10% of the samples) contained NPEs at 
concentrations above 100 mg/kg and, of these, three 
samples (4% of articles tested) had concentrations over 1,000 mg/kg (0.1% by mass). 
• All of the brands had at least one article where NPEs 
were detected. Brands with the highest levels of NPEs in their products (above 1,000 mg/kg)
23 were C&A, 
Disney24 and American Apparel25. Burberry26 was not 
far behind – with levels of 780 mg/kg in one product.
• Products from 10 of the 12 countries of manufacture 
contained NPEs. 
• The concentration for the single sample manufactured 
in Mexico (17,000 mg/kg) was considerably higher than any of the other samples (as only a single sample 
manufactured in Mexico was analysed, it is not possible 
to draw any conclusions from this about articles manufactured in Mexico in general).1.2. Phthalates in plastisol prints 
A sub-set of 35 samples were analysed for the presence of phthalates within plastisol printed fabric on the articles.
• Phthalates were detected in 33 out of the 35 samples.
• Two of these samples contained phthalates above 0.1%, 
indicating their deliberate use as a plasticiser. • One of these samples, a Primark
31 t-shirt32 sold in 
Germany, contained a particularly high concentration of 
the phthalate DEHP , at 110,000 mg/kg (11.0%).  
• The other sample, a baby one-piece33 from American 
Apparel34 purchased in the USA contained the phthalate 
DINP at 5,900 mg/kg (0.59% by weight) in addition to 2,000 mg/kg of NPE, as noted above.Nonylphenol ethoxylates/
nonylphenols (NPEs/NPs)
NPEs are man-made chemicals that are widely 
used as surfactants by textiles manufacturers. 
Once released to the environment, NPEs 
degrade to nonylphenols (NP), which are known to be toxic, and acting as hormone disrupters, 
persistent and bioaccumulative. NP is known 
to accumulate in many living organisms. The 
presence of NPEs in finished products shows that 
they have been used during their manufacture, which is likely to result in the release of NPEs and 
NP in wastewater from manufacturing facilities. In 
addition, NPE residues in these products will be washed out during laundering and released into 
the public wastewater systems of the countries 
where the products are sold.
There have been restrictions on certain uses of 
NPEs by industry since 2005 in the EU
27, with 
similar restrictions in place in the US and Canada28.  
Although there are currently no EU regulations that restrict the sale of textile products containing 
NPE residues, measures are currently under development within the EU, proposed by the 
Swedish Chemicals Agency
29. Elsewhere, NP and 
NPEs are included on the list of toxic chemicals severely restricted for import and export in China, 
which means that their import or export across China’s borders now requires prior permission, 
though their manufacture, use and release are not 
currently regulated in China
30; NP/NPEs are also 
included in China’s dangerous chemicals list and in 
the 12th 5-year plan for Prevention and Control of 
Environmental Risk of Chemicals.childcare articles put on the market within the EU (with a limit of 0.1% by weight, equivalent to 1,000 mg/kg), and the use of others, including DINP, is prohibited 
in such articles if they can be placed in the mouth 
by children (EU 2005). Such regulations have been replicated in other countries such as the US
38, and 
most recently in China, where a new standard on toy 
safety prohibiting the use of six phthalates in children’s 
toys was notified to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) in July 2013 and will come into force in  June 
2014
39.
The definition of “childcare articles” does not include items of clothing in these regulations
40. However, draft 
legislation has been proposed in China which would prohibit the presence of six phthalates, including 
DEHP and DINP, at concentrations above 0.1% by weight (1,000 mg/kg), in clothes sold for babies and 
young children (under 36 months old)
41. Another 
exception is South Korea, where the restriction on six phthalates in toys and childcare articles also applies to 
clothing for infants under 24 months
42.
Within the European Union, certain phthalates, 
including DEHP, DBP, DiBP and BBP, have been 
listed as Substances of Very High Concern (SVHC) under the EU REACH
43. Phthalates
Phthalates are mainly used as plasticisers (or softeners) in plastics, especially PVC. Because 
phthalates are not chemically bound to the plastics, 
they are released into the indoor and outdoor environment during the lifetime of the products 
and again following disposal. Phthalates are found 
widely in the indoor environment, including in air and dust
35. They are commonly found in human tissues, 
with reports of significantly higher levels of intake in 
children. There are substantial concerns about the 
toxicity of phthalates to wildlife and humans and in particular their hormone-disrupting effects. For 
example, DEHP, one of the most widely used to date, 
is known to be toxic to reproductive development in mammals, capable of interfering with development 
of reproductive organs in males  and affecting 
reproductive success in females
36. 
Legislation does not currently exist in any of the 
countries where the 35 tested articles were sold that 
prohibits the sale of clothing containing phthalates37.  
However, probably the best known legislation on 
phthalates is the EU-wide ban on the use of six 
phthalates in children’s toys and childcare articles, first agreed as an emergency measure in 1999 and 
finally made permanent in 2005. The use of certain 
phthalates, including DEHP, is prohibited in all toys or 
Section #1 Section #1

18  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   19  
Section #1  Section #1
1.3. Organotins
A total of 32 products were analysed for organotins, which 
consisted of 21 items of clothing with a large plastisol print, 
five footwear articles, and six sportswear tops.  
• One or more organotin compounds were detected in six 
articles. 
• Overall, far higher concentrations of organotins were detected in three of the footwear articles – one by adidas 
and two by Puma
44  – compared to the printed articles. 
The product with the highest concentrations45 was a 
Puma sportshoe. All three articles exceeded the Oeko-
tex labelling standard for the organotin DOT46, and the 
standards set by adidas and Puma for DOT47. However, 
the credibility of such standards can be questioned, as they do not publicly indicate that the best current testing 
technology is applied, which requires the lowest possible reporting levels for hazardous chemicals
48.
• Three of the five footwear articles contained organotins. 
Different individual organotins were detected in these 
articles compared to the printed articles: monooctyltin (MOT) in the range 0.26-34 mg/kg and dioctyltin (DOT) in 
the range 0.18-369 mg/kg. 
• Three of the 21 articles bearing a plastisol print contained 
organotins, all of them t-shirts, from adidas, Puma and 
H&M
49.1.4. Per- and poly-fluorinated chemicals (PFCs)
• A total of 15 articles were analysed for the presence of per- and poly-fluorinated chemicals (PFCs), consisting of 
seven waterproof clothing articles, three footwear articles 
and five swimwear articles. Textiles can be treated with PFCs (per-fluorinated chemicals) for their water and oil 
repellent properties. Two different types of PFCs were 
analysed – ionic PFCs (for example PFOS and PFOA) and volatile PFCs, which are used as precursors or generated 
during manufacturing processes, such as fluorotelomer 
alcohols (FTOHs) and fluorotelomer acrylates (FTAs), which can break down into ionic PFCs.
• One or more PFC was detected in each of the 15 articles tested. Ionic PFCs were found in all but one article. For 
the volatile PFCs, examples were detected in five of the 
15 articles (four of the seven waterproof clothing articles and one footwear article).
 Although only detected in five products, volatile 
PFCs were generally found in considerably higher 
concentrations than ionic PFCs.  
 Our investigations have shown concentrations of PFCs 
can vary widely not only between products but also within different parts of the same product.  The variation in results 
between different parts of the five articles tested in duplicate   reflects real variation in concentrations within the clothing 
and does not result from  the testing method.
• Two products with high concentrations of volatile PFCs (a waterproof coat at 2,420 µg/kg and shoes at 499 µg/kg) 
and one product with the second highest concentration of ionic PFCs (swimwear at 68.0 µg/kg) were from adidas
53.
• Similar levels of volatile PFCs were also found in jackets 
by C&A and Uniqlo54. These products were produced 
before their new PFC-ban come to effect.**
• The analysis for ionic PFCs found the restricted 
substance PFOS in one portion of an adidas shoe (at 
0.855 µg/m², though not in a second portion (<0.422 µg/
m²) ) and in Burberry swimwear (at 0.464 µg/m²)55. This 
is of some significance given that regulations in some 
countries set a maximum allowable concentration by 
area for PFOS in textiles of 1 µg/m², although this limit was not exceeded in either of these samples. 
 • PFOA is another PFC with similar properties to PFOS; 
the concentration of PFOA by area in the adidas  
swimwear56 was 15.3 µg/m² in one portion and 15.8 µg/
m² in a second portion, both far higher than the limit of 
1 µg/m² set by adidas in its own Restricted Substances 
Lis57. It These are also considerably higher than the 
regulatory limit for the related compound PFOS as well 
as the planned restriction in Norway on PFOA of 1 µg/m² 
from June 2014 (although not sold in Norway).
• A Nike waterproof coat58 had the highest total 
concentration of volatile PFCs at 6,970 µg/kg, as well as 
the fourth highest levels of ionic PFCs at 29.7 µg/kg which 
included PFOA (above Nike’s own reporting limit59) and 
PFDA, a chemical which is classified as a Substance of Very 
High Concern by the EU’s REACH and is one of two PFCs 
that are listed as priority substances in Norway60.
• The highest levels of ionic PFCs in footwear were found in a Puma shoe
61.
• High concentrations of ionic PFCs were detected in 
waterproof trousers sold by H&M (2,290 µg/kg62 in one 
portion and  26.4 µg/kg in a second portion)  and a H&M coat (at 314 µg/kg in one portion and 32.7 µg/kg
63 in a 
second portion) . These products were produced before the new PFC-ban of H&M came to effect*.
• Apart from PFOS, there are no restrictions on any other PFCs in textiles, despite concerns about their 
hazardous nature and the fact that they can commonly be found at far higher concentrations. For example, the 
concentration by area of PFHxS (which shares many 
properties with PFOS), in the H&M waterproof trousers
64, 
and H&M coat are higher than the regulatory limit for the 
related compound PFOS.
• The levels of volatile PFCs found in the waterproof 
jackets are broadly in the same range as those found in 
two recent Greenpeace reports which investigated PFCs 
in outdoor clothing65. The second of these reports found 
that volatile PFCs evaporated from the clothing samples 
into the air. Organotins
Within the textile industry organotins are used as 
biocides or fungicides in products such as socks, 
shoes and sport clothes to prevent odour caused 
by the breakdown of sweat, and as stabilisers in plastisol prints. A recent Greenpeace study 
detected organotins in outerwear
50 and other recent 
studies have also identified organotins in textiles products, specifically within plastisol prints
51.  
The organotin compound tributyltin (TBT) is best 
known for its use in antifouling paint for ships, which is now banned, due to evidence that it persists 
in the environment and builds up in the body; it is 
listed as a “priority hazardous substance” under EU regulations which require that measures be taken to 
eliminate its pollution of surface waters in Europe. 
However, TBT is also used in textiles and several other organotin compounds are in common use, 
most notably mono- and dibutyltin (MBT, DBT), 
mono- and dioctyltin (MOT, DOT), as found in this study, and triphenyltins (TPT).
Organotins are known to be toxic at relatively 
low levels of exposure to a range of organisms, 
including mammals, with impacts on development, 
the immune system and the nervous system.  While seafood is the predominant source of organotin 
exposure for the general population, exposure to 
consumer products that contain them or to dusts in the home may also be significant
52.
* H&M is the first brand to publicly report that as from January 2013 it has instructed its suppliers across their global supply-chain to eliminate 
all PFCs from the production of their products. H&M indicate that the products tested were from 2012 production before its PFC ban.
** C&A Updated C&A Individual Action Plan, 16 November 2012 http://www.candacr.com/en/2012/11/16/updated-ca-individual-
action-plan-in-the-frame-of-the-joint-roadmap-towards-zero-discharge-of-hazardous-chemicals-by-2020/ Uniqlo: FAST RETAILING Greenpeace Detox Solution Commitment,  9 January 2013, http://www.fastretailing.com/eng/csr/environment/zero.html

20  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   21   Section #1 Section #1
Per- and poly-fluorinated chemicals (PFCs) are used 
in many industrial processes and consumer products, 
including textile and leather products, due to their 
chemical properties such as  their ability to repel both water and oil. A well-known example is the polymer 
PTFE, marketed as Teflon and widely used for “non-
stick” cookware, but not for textiles. 
Many PFCs, especially ionic PFCs such as PFOS and 
PFOA, are highly persistent and do not readily break 
down once released to the environment, which has led to their presence throughout the environment, even 
in remote regions. Ionic PFCs have been reported in 
a wide range of both aquatic and terrestrial biota, due to their ability to bioaccumulate, as well as in human 
blood and milk in the general population in many 
countries around the world. Studies show that PFCs such as PFOS and PFOA can cause adverse impacts 
both during development and during adulthood, in 
part due to their hormone disrupting properties, with impacts on the reproductive system and the immune 
system, as well as being potentially carcinogenic in 
animal tests.
Volatile PFCs such as FTOHs, are generally used 
as precursors during manufacturing processes.  
However, FTOHs can be transformed into ionic PFCs 
(such as PFOA) in the body or in the atmosphere. The process of transformation can also form intermediate 
products in the body that may be more harmful than 
the end product. Studies indicate that some FTOHs show endocrine disrupting activity themselves, 
including disturbing fish reproduction, though far less 
information exists compared to the compounds that FTOHs can give rise to (eg PFOA). In addition to these 
direct hazards from FTOH, the potential for FTOHs to 
transform into other ionic PFCs, poses an additional hazard. Precursor PFCs, such as FTOHs, are volatile 
and have frequently been detected in air samples, 
even in remote areas. Recent Greenpeace tests have found evaporation of volatile PFCs from outdoor 
clothes
66.
The ionic PFC, PFOS, has been classified as Per- and poly-fluorinated chemicals (PFCs)1.5. Antimony in polyester
Polyester fibres are known to contain residues of antimony 
trioxide where it was used as a catalyst during their 
manufacture71 72. Factories that manufacture polyester 
fabrics or use polyester fibres can also discharge antimony in their wastewater, as found by a recent Greenpeace 
investigation into a textiles facility that processes polyester in Indonesia
73.  
• Antimony was detected in all of the 36 articles that included fabrics composed of polyester, or a blend of polyester and other fibres. 
• Concentrations in the polyester and the fabric blends were in the range 14-293 mg/kg of polyester. Antimony
Antimony shows many similarities in its chemistry and toxicity to arsenic
74. Trivalent antimony, such 
as is present in antimony trioxide, is a more toxic 
form of antimony compound, with effects including 
dermatitis, irritation of the respiratory tract, and interference with the immune system. In addition, 
antimony trioxide is listed as “possibly carcinogenic 
to humans” principally due to inhalation of dusts and vapours
75. Inhalation exposure to antimony is 
more common in occupational settings, whereas the general population is exposed to antimony mainly through ingestion of food and water.  
No regulations currently exist which prohibit 
the use of antimony in textile manufacture worldwide, despite the availability of alternative 
catalysts for polyester manufacture. Recently, 
Greenpeace found antimony being discharged from manufacturing facility processing polyester 
in Indonesia
76. Within the EU, the Ecolabel 
Regulation77  requires that the antimony content 
in polyester fibres does not exceed 260 mg/kg for articles bearing the Ecolabel
78. a persistent organic pollutant (POP) under the Stockholm Convention, a global treaty that requires 
contracting parties to take measures to restrict the production and use of PFOS
67. And the marketing 
and use of PFOS within the EU has been prohibited 
for certain uses since 2008, with a maximum limit 
of 1 µg/m² set for PFOS in textiles68. However, there 
are currently no limits set for any other PFCs, despite 
concerns about their hazardous nature and the 
fact that they can commonly be found at far higher concentrations in textiles.
Norway is the first country where the sale of textiles 
containing PFOA above 1 µg/m² will be prohibited from June 2014; certain PFCs have also recently been 
added to a list of priority chemicals, meaning that 
releases to the environment must be eliminated or substantially reduced by 2020
69.  Norway, and all other 
countries, should enforce the elimination of PFOA (and 
the PFC chemical group as a whole) at much lower 
levels, using the best current testing technology. In addition, PFOA and four other long chain PFCAs are 
also classified as substances of very high concern 
(SVHCs) within the EU under the REACH regulations (ECHA 2013)
70.
PFCs
(non polymor)
per + poly
ﬂourinated chemicals
short and long chained
trend to restrict certain long-chain
PFCs at the international or 
national level
(OECD 2013)Transformation of some 
volatile FTOHs to ionic PFCsIonic per -ﬂourinated 
chemicals eg PFOS – 
restricted PFOAVolatile 
poly-ﬂourinated chemicals
ﬂuorotelomer alcohols (FTOHs)
ﬂuorotelomer acrylates (FT As)

22  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   23  
 Section #1 Section #1
The effects on children 
Finding residues of hazardous chemicals in clothing 
is a case for concern – especially if the clothing is 
made for children: infants and children may be more 
sensitive to the effects of some hazardous chemicals compared to adults
79. 
This is already reflected in some voluntary standards80, 
as well as in the restrictions that some textiles companies 
set for themselves, with more protective limits for 
concentrations of certain chemicals in clothing items for children, compared to adult clothing
81. It is also recognised 
in the restrictions on the presence of certain phthalates 
in toys and articles for children under three in the EU and 
other countries82, which do not apply to clothing. 
A draft regulation in China sets restrictions on phthalates in clothes for children under three
83. In South Korea 
(which was not included in this report) the restriction on 
six phthalates in toys and childcare articles also applies to 
clothing for infants under 36 months84. These voluntary and 
regulatory restrictions do not go far enough and only cover 
a very limited part of hazardous chemicals.
The special vulnerability of children to certain chemicals 
has led regulators to enforce relatively more restrictive 
– but still insufficient – regulations on a small number 
of hazardous chemicals in certain products (such as phthalates in toys). Although necessary to protect children 
from direct exposure to hazardous chemicals in such 
cases, this approach is nowhere near enough: Where the limits are set they are not as low as could be achieved.  
The focus of some regulations on children under three 
also excludes older children and other vulnerable people, 
in particular the unborn baby – via its parents and in Hazardous chemicals have the potential to cause a range of adverse health effects.  Some may interfere 
with the hormone system.  
Hazardous chemicals have the potential to cause adverse 
health effects. Many hazardous chemicals are known to accumulate in our bodies; some of these have known 
hazardous properties and the potential to cause adverse 
health effects. The use of hazardous chemicals in children’s clothing leads to the release of such chemicals into the 
environment, either during manufacturing or from the 
products directly. In some instances, there may also be 
the potential risk of direct exposure to these hazardous 
chemicals for children.
Many of the chemicals found in this report are known 
endocrine disruptors, or (in the case of NPEs) able to 
give rise to chemicals which are endocrine disruptors – chemicals which can interfere with hormone systems in 
animals and humans. A recent UNEP & WHO report
85  
on endocrine disruptors concluded that some can act at very low doses and that the timing of some impacts 
on hormone systems can be critical. Many endocrine-related diseases and disorders are on the rise (though in 
many cases the extents to which exposure to endocrine 
disruptors are contributing is still unclear)
86. In particular, 
the report highlights that: 
“Effects shown in wildlife or experimental animals may 
also occur in humans if they are exposed to EDCs at a 
vulnerable time and at concentrations leading to alterations of endocrine regulation. Of special concern are effects on 
early development of both humans and wildlife, as these 
effects are often irreversible and may not become evident until later in life.”particular the mother. Most importantly, such an approach 
ignores the often much greater indirect exposure to 
hazardous industrial chemicals from the environment and in particular through diet. The use of hazardous chemicals  
by manufacturing facilities which are discharged into 
waterways and the release of chemical residues from clothes into the air and water, for example when they 
are washed, contributes to the presence of hazardous 
chemicals in our environment. Only eliminating the use of hazardous chemicals across the whole textiles supply 
chain will address the problem.gradually, resulting in potentially higher exposure 
of the foetal and infant brain to certain chemicals 
present in blood.
• There is greater storage and distribution of certain 
chemicals in children’s organs.
• Reduced metabolic capacity to break down or 
eliminate chemicals absorbed into the body risks 
more severe adverse effects than adults for the same equivalent level of exposure.
Behaviour and exposure
• During infancy and as toddlers, many children spend 
a lot of time on or near the floor, where they are more 
exposed to dense vapours, car exhausts, house 
dust and chemicals leaching from flooring products.
• Babies and children regularly place objects and 
fingers in their mouths, leading to relatively high 
ingestion of labile chemicals on their surfaces, in 
addition to dietary sources.A number of factors including size, 
metabolism and behaviour, can make infants, children and the developing 
foetus more vulnerable to some 
hazardous chemicals
87:
Absorption and metabolism, relative 
to body weight 
• Food, liquid and air intake is higher relative to their 
body weight and gastrointestinal absorption is 
increased in infants under six to eight months old 
which can increase absorption of some chemicals.
• The potential for more intensive contact with 
parts of home surroundings. Higher skin surface area relative to body weight, means potential for higher absorption relative to body weight of those 
chemicals which can be absorbed via the skin.
Physiological differences 
• The blood-brain barrier, which limits the penetration 
of chemicals from the blood to the brain, develops Box 1. What makes infants and children more 
vulnerable to some effects of certain hazardous chemicals?

24  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   25  
There is no “safe” level for hazardous 
chemicals – that is why the target of zero use is the only credible basis for taking effective action to eliminate these harmful substances. Both companies and governments need to clearly commit to this aim.
“Acceptable” levels of hazardous 
chemicals are not acceptable
This new Greenpeace study clearly confirms what previous 
investigations have found: in spite of decades of regulation 
and corporate responsibility programmes, hazardous 
chemicals – including the 11 priority groups identified for the textile sector by Greenpeace
88 – continue to be used 
by supply chain manufacturers of clothes for many well-
known brands. Residues of hazardous chemicals are 
present in a wide range of children’s clothing. So-called “acceptable” limits of these chemicals, set by regulations, 
have allowed releases from a multitude of sources, 
from the manufacturing processes through to the final products. For some of these chemicals this has resulted 
in their built-up in the environment and in some cases their 
accumulation in animal and humans over the years.  The findings of this study show that both companies and governments need thorough and comprehensive plans to 
achieve the elimination of hazardous chemicals, including 
those used in textiles manufacturing, and therefore prevent residues of these chemicals from contaminating consumer 
products, as well their release from manufacturing facilities. 
Some companies have taken on the challenge to be Detox Leaders and have begun this process.  Unfortunately, 
other companies – adidas, Nike and LiNing – promote 
themselves as Detox brands but do not have an effective plan to eliminate the use of hazardous chemicals within 
their supply chains or their products.  More companies 
have yet to make any commitment at all to Detox and need to do so urgently.
Credible actions taken by companies need to be matched 
with credible regulatory action from governments, to 
level the playing field and to send a strong message to the textile industry, as well as other sectors, that the use 
and release of hazardous chemicals is not acceptable. 
Although many of the Detox principles (see Box 2) are accepted by governmental bodies, this is not yet reflected 
by the thorough implementation of bans and restrictions 
on hazardous chemicals that will lead to their elimination by no later than 1 January 2020. Specific regulation needs 
to be targeted at each of the hazardous chemicals found 
in the children’s clothing in this, to address the particular problems posed by each chemical group.
No more play – 
it’s time to Detox#2
the grown ups need to stop these monsters!
#2


26  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   27  Section#2 Section#2
Companies: some progress has been 
made, but much more needs to be done
The Detox commitment – to eliminate the use of all 
hazardous chemicals by no later than 1 January 2020 
– is necessarily ambitious, to match the urgency of the 
problem. But it is achievable, so long as companies do not compromise on their commitments. 
As a result of actions taken by some of the companies that 
have committed to Detox, significant changes have taken 
place. For example, the public’s “Right to Know” about the chemical-by-chemical discharge from an individual supply 
chain facility used by a brand is becoming a reality. This 
has been continually rejected by the textile industry and considered almost impossible before the Detox campaign 
began. Today, several companies – Including Mango, 
Fast Retailing(Uniqlo), Inditex, H&M, Benetton, Valentino, G-Star, M&S, Limited Brands (Zara), C&A, Puma, Coop, 
Canepa and Esprit  – have ensured they begin the 
publication of data from their suppliers about discharges of hazardous chemicals, on the global online platform IPE
89.   
An effective, credible Detox commitment and action 
plan – aiming at zero discharges of hazardous chemicals by 2020 – consists of commitments and actions under 
three headings: 
- core principles, 
- transparency, and - elimination. An adequate approach needs to be hazard-based, 
comprehensive and have credible definitions for the 
“Precautionary Principle”
90, zero discharge of hazardous 
chemicals, individual corporate accountability91, and the 
public’s “Right to Know”92 about the use and discharge 
of hazardous chemicals from a company’s supply chain facilities, and their presence in the final product. Together, 
a commitment to these principles frames the practices that are necessary to progress towards zero hazardous 
chemical use.
To effectively eliminate the use of hazardous chemicals in 
the textile industry and resolve the problem of pollution of 
our waters with hazardous chemicals, companies should:
- Adopt a credible commitment to phase out the use, 
from their global supply chain and all products, of all 
hazardous chemicals by 1 January 2020. Credible means 
based on the unambiguous adoption of “Precautionary Principle”
93, zero discharge of hazardous chemicals, 
individual corporate accountability94, and the public’s 
“Right to Know”95.
- Start disclosing – in the months following a commitment 
and at regular (at least annually) and relevant intervals afterwards information on the releases of hazardous 
chemicals that are still used at their supplier’s facilities to the public, especially to local/national inhabitants (e.g. 
using credible public information platforms
96).
- Commit to the elimination of the 11 priority chemical 
groups within a reasonable timeline, and set clear and 
credible intermediate progress targets for the elimination 
of other hazardous chemicals beyond these groups. 
Introduce non-hazardous chemistry by the earliest specific date possible: responsible companies will act 
now and not wait until 31 December 2019 to eliminate 
their hazardous chemical use.
Detox Greenwashers and Laggards must 
act now
In the two years since the public launch of Greenpeace’s Detox campaign, companies that are Detox Leaders 
have ensured they begin the publication of hazardous 
chemical discharge data from many of their facilities – an achievement previously rejected by the textile industry as 
unrealistic. Communities local to textiles manufacturers 
and the wider public have now begun to gain their “Right to Know” about pollution from textile facilities. 
This, combined with information about current levels of 
hazardous chemicals in certain products, such as the findings presented in this report, is the starting point for 
the progressive reduction and elimination of hazardous 
chemicals pollutants into local waterways and in consumer products.
This report should remind the Detox Leaders of the urgency 
of eliminating hazardous chemical use in the supply chain 
and the need to apply their efforts comprehensively. 
Companies that continue to Greenwash and companies that are Laggards and have no Detox plan, need to act 
immediately to address the inadequacies in their policy 
and practice. The path to zero discharges requires every company to invest sufficient resources with urgency and 
there is no excuse to delay taking the first step.umbrella of collective inaction – the ZDHC Group98 
– which has so far done little more than set up tools, processes and conduct pilot studies. Instead of taking 
the urgent action necessary to make credible progress towards the elimination of hazardous chemicals, 
adidas and Nike are “spinning” their public promises 
into public relations exercises. 
Among the Greenwashers, three products from 
adidas had some of the highest concentrations of 
both volatile and ionic PFCs; a Nike coat also had the highest levels of volatile PFCs. For the Detox Leaders, 
this product testing shows that the implementation 
of some brand commitments has not yet impacted on the presence and levels of hazardous chemicals in 
some products. Some Detox Leaders brands were still 
tested high concentration of ionic PFCs and volatile PFCs for example waterproof trousers sold by H&M
99; 
As well as a high concentration sample of NPE in a 
C&A branded shoe100. One Puma sportshoe was 
found to have high concentration of organotins101, and 
a Uniqlo waterproof jacket was tested for a high level of volatile PFCs
102.
These Detox Leaders already have credible commitments and action plans in place and are in 
the process of implemented them. The presence of hazardous chemicals in their products should be 
used to inform and accelerate these plans, following a 
thorough investigation of the use of these hazardous chemicals by their suppliers. As there are no products 
from any one brand in this study that are free from 
hazardous chemicals at the detection limits used in this study, Greenpeace urges American Apparel, 
Burberry, Disney and Primark as well as GAP – already 
identified as a Laggard – to commit to Detox.This product testing is an independent investigation conducted by Greenpeace’s Detox Campaign and 
separate from the Detox Catwalk. Nevertheless, the 
industry should consider the results of this product testing as a wake up call to urgently eliminate 
hazardous chemicals from their supply chain.
The Detox Catwalk assessed the progress of 17 
Detox committed clothing brands towards their 
zero discharge goal
97  Greenpeace International 
identified 14 companies as Leaders undertaking concrete actions to address the problem of hazardous 
chemicals with the urgency that it requires. Three companies were found to be Greenwashers, failing to 
fully implement the credible on-the-ground outcomes 
they committed to. Meanwhile, seven companies that were yet to make a Detox commitment were classified 
as Laggards for their failure to commit.
Products from brands featured all three categories 
in the Detox Catwalk were included in this study: 
Leaders (C&A, H&M, Puma, Uniqlo), Greenwashers 
(adidas, Nike, LiNing) and Laggards (GAP). In this report, hazardous residues were detected in products 
across all of the brands. Despite committing to Detox 
two years ago, there is still insufficient evidence from the three Greenwashers to show they are delivering 
credible outcomes on the ground. Each of these 
companies has repeatedly rejected its corporate responsibility to take action towards the elimination 
of any of the identified hazardous chemicals. Neither 
have they been able to act with credible transparency towards the public, failing to actively support the 
public’s “Right-to-Know” about hazardous chemical 
pollution from their individual suppliers. These three companies prefer to shield themselves under the Box 2. How do the products testing results reflect on  
the Detox Leaders, Greenwashers and Laggards?

28  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   29  
Governments: a political commitment  
to zero discharge is vital
Detox Leaders have taken up the challenge, but the current 
nature of the textiles industry, which outsources much of 
its production, means that the continued use of hazardous 
chemicals by companies that ignore the need to Detox can undermine these efforts. Therefore, regulation to 
implement this change across the whole sector is vital. To 
be effective, this needs to be defined to the strictest testing standards possible, so that the truth of where and how 
hazardous chemicals are turning up in our clothing and in 
the effluent of manufacturers is fully revealed.
Many of the chemicals within the 11 groups of hazardous 
chemicals identified are already regulated in some places, in one form or another, including certain APEOs, 
PFCs
103, organo tins, carcinogenic amines and phthalates. 
However, the fact that these hazardous chemicals appear to be so widely present in clothing products, as well as 
found in examples of effluent from the manufacturing supply chain, means that there can be only one conclusion: 
existing regulations are failing to protect human health and 
the environment. Some shortcomings in the current regulatory approach are: 
• The use of NPEs/NPs in textile manufacturing within 
Europe has been effectively banned for many years, 
in order to protect surface waters, yet there are no restrictions on the import of clothes containing these 
chemicals, which are released into public wastewater 
systems on a wide scale as a result of laundering
104.
• Regulations are not consistent across different product groups. For example, the EU has restriction on phthalates in children’s toys, but not children’s clothes.
• In general, the permitted levels of hazardous chemicals for use in manufacturing and in the finished product, set 
both by regulators and by voluntary industry labels are far 
too high, and allow their continued use in manufacturing.  Therefore these ‘permitted’ chemical residues in clothing 
products, distributed across the globe via the numerous 
products that are traded, add up to significant quantities of hazardous and persistent chemicals which can lead to 
their continued build-up in the environment.  
• Restrictions on the use of hazardous chemicals in 
manufacturing, such as NPEs/NPs in Europe (above) 
are not yet in place in the countries where the majority of 
manufacturing takes place, such as China, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Thailand, Turkey and Mexico.Section#2
China is the biggest textile manufacturing country in the world, consuming 42% of the textile chemicals 
used globally every year
105. The country is the single 
largest manufacturer of the products analysed in this report at 35%, far ahead of the next largest which 
is Thailand at 9%. There are signs of increased awareness in China about the problem of hazardous 
chemical pollution from the textile industry, which is 
now beginning to be addressed; recently, there has been some progress towards greater restrictions on 
hazardous chemicals. A new Priority Chemicals List 
will be released by China’s Ministry of Environmental Protection to cover environmental and human health 
hazards, which goes beyond the previous concept of 
“dangerous” and which will include some endocrine disruptors. However, unlike the EU REACH list of 
Substances of Very High Concern
106, the priority 
list currently lacks a clear mechanism on how and when it is to be updated and it does not have a clear 
objective to eventually eliminate the most hazardous substances. Meanwhile draft regulation is proposed 
that will restrict six phthalates in textile products for 
infants and children under three (under 36 months) covering six kinds of phthalates, including DEHP , DBP 
and DiBP
107.  China

30  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   31  Governments need to re-enforce efforts by companies 
to Detox – by adopting a political commitment to zero discharge of all hazardous chemicals within one 
generation, incorporating the precautionary principle 
and including a preventative approach by avoiding the 
production and use, and therefore, exposure to hazardous chemicals.  Within this context, action is needed to tackle 
the hazardous chemicals that have been found in children’s 
clothing in this report, to ensure the progressive elimination of their use, leading to zero discharges into waterways and adequate protection for consumers. 
Some specific steps include:
•	Regulation that will lead to the elimination of APEs (which 
includes NPEs) needs to implement  a restriction that does 
not allow use, including within textiles production. There should also be an enforcement of no- allowable-residues 
in clothing articles, imported or otherwise. In order to offer 
adequate protection, both of these measures would need to set any limit for NPEs in products as low as possible, 
to the strictest possible testing limits, and cover as wide a 
range of NPEs as possible.   
•	The immediate extension of regulations that restrict phthalates in toys needs to include all articles for children, in particular clothing that bears plastisol prints. Ultimately, this 
needs to be extended to all products, including all textiles.
•	The regulatory limits for the presence of all organotins in 
clothing need to be reduced to the lowest levels possible.  
•	The restriction on PFOS needs to be implemented 
globally and expanded to all PFCs, both ionic and volatile, 
to recognize the intrinsic hazard posed by this group of chemicals and prevent the current trend of substituting 
regulated PFCs with other PFCs.
•	Regulations also need to restrict the use of antimony 
in polyester manufacture to encourage the use and 
development of alternative catalysts in polyester production.  
For all measures, limits should be set at the lowest 
technical detection limit with the potential for this to be 
reduced further in the future, as technology improves.
These measures need to be part of a comprehensive 
implementation plan containing intermediate short term targets, a dynamic list of priority hazardous substances 
requiring immediate action based on the substitution 
principle, and a publicly available register of data on 
discharge emissions and losses of hazardous substances, 
such as a Pollutant Release and Transfer Register (PRTR).  
Such a plan would prevent ongoing releases into the 
environment that may require future clean-up and have serious impacts on the environment and on people’s health 
and livelihoods, especially in the Global South. It would 
set a clear direction for the textiles industry by showing that hazardous chemicals have no place in a sustainable society, which will in turn drive innovation towards safer alternatives. Finally, it would level the playing field and 
make the actions of leading companies a reality throughout 
the entire sector and beyond, as many of the hazardous chemicals used in textiles are also in use in other sectors.
In the context of the global textiles industry, the greatest 
quantities of hazardous chemical emissions take place where clothes are manufactured, by the suppliers of major 
clothing companies, which mostly take place in the Global 
South. Inevitably, clothing products containing hazardous 
chemicals because they were manufactured using 
hazardous chemicals will release these substances when they are bought and washed by consumers – wherever they are in the world. 
People will naturally be concerned about their own 
exposure to hazardous chemicals in clothes, particularly when these clothes are for infants and young children.  After using second-hand clothes wherever possible, the 
best option currently available when buying new clothes 
for infants and children is to look for clothes certified with labels108,  and to avoid clothes with strong colours which might require more dyeing processes.
The role of people power
As global citizens we can also collectively:  
•	Choose to buy fewer new clothing products, and instead 
buy second-hand clothes where possible. This can also 
involve re-purposing and re-using older items to create “new” pieces for our wardrobes, or taking part in clothes 
swaps with friends.
•	Influence brands to act responsibly on behalf of the planet 
and its people. The need for companies to make the right choices and protect future generations has never been 
greater than it is today, and brands need to be challenged 
on whether they have set a date for the elimination of the use of hazardous chemicals in their supply chains.
•	Demand that governments act to restrict the sales and 
import of products containing hazardous chemicals.
Our children deserve to live in a world free of hazardous 
chemicals and adults have the power to make this a reality. By using our collective power, as adults, parents and global 
citizens, we can bring about the transformational change 
the textile industry desperately needs, ensuring companies and governments take real steps to Detox our clothes, 
Detox our water and Detox our future.
Creating a toxic-free future for our children is not only 
necessary, it is possible.
To find out how you can make your voice heard visit: www.greenpeace.org/detox Endnotes Section#2
1 Greenpeace International (2011b). Dirty Laundry 2: Hung Out 
to Dry: Unravelling the toxic trail from pipes to products. August 2011. 
http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/publications/reports/
Dirty-Laundry-2/
Greenpeace International (2012a). Dirty Laundry: Reloaded. How 
big brands are making consumers unwitting accomplices in the toxic water cycle. 20 March 2012. 
http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/publications/
Campaign-reports/Toxics-reports/Dirty-Laundry-Reloaded/
Greenpeace International (2012b). Toxic Threads: The Big Fashion 
Stitch-Up. November 2012.
http://www.greenpeace.org/international/big-fashion-stitch-up
Greenpeace e.V. (2012), Chemistry for any weather,  October 
2012. http://www.greenpeace.org/romania/Global/romania/detox/Chemistry%20for%20any%20weather.pdf
Greenpeace e.V. (2013), Chemistry for any weather II,  December 
2013, http://www.greenpeace.de/fileadmin/gpd/user_upload/themen/chemie/20131212-Greenpeace-Outdoor-Report-2013-Summary.pdf
Greenpeace e.V. (2013b) Greenpeace: Bademoden mit 
gefährlichen Chemikalien belastet (German).  http://www.greenpeace.de/fileadmin/gpd/user_upload/themen/chemie/Factsheet_Bademode.pdf
Greenpeace e.V. (2013c) Schadstoffe in G-Star Produkten 
(German) http://www.greenpeace.de/fileadmin/gpd/user_upload/themen/chemie/20130408_Factsheet_PFOS_in_G-Star-Produkten.pdf
2 All products were for children, while several were aimed at 
babies and children under three. Garments, including swimwear, 
made up the majority. Four items were footwear.
3 Based on public representations by the brand at the time of 
purchase (e.g. via their public website).4 Some were also tested for carcinogenic amines released under 
reducing conditions, which were not detected in this study.5 For full details of the samples, the methodology and results, see 
Greenpeace (2013), Technical Report6 Sample number TX13094
7 Sample number TX13015
8 Sample numbers adidas TX13004; Puma TX13097 and 
TX131009 2 mg/kg di-octyl tin. See Oeko-tex, Limit values and fastness, 
https://www.oeko-tex.com/en/manufacturers/test_criteria/limit_
values/limit_values.html
10 Puma website (2013), http://about.puma.com/wp-
content/themes/aboutPUMA_theme/media/pdf/2013/
PUMARSLMRSLV_01_13.pdf; adidas website (2013), http://www.adidas-group.com/media/filer_public/85/09/850915ac-f85f-4533-8e87-3c84c8093193/a01_sept_2013_en.pdf.   11 Sample numbers TX13003, 2420 µg/kg volatile PFCs, 
TX13004 499 µg/kg volatile PFCs, TX 13006 68 µg/kg ionic PFC
12 Sample number TX13082, contained 6967 µg/kg volatile 
PFCs
13 Sample number TX13108, contained 2346 µg/kg volatile 
PFCs
14 Sample number TX13004, 0.855 µg/m² sold in Hong Kong
15 Sample number TX13023, 0.464 µg/m²
16 Sample number TX 13006, 15.3 µg/m²
17 Norwegian Environment Agency (2013), The sale of textiles 
containing PFOA above 1 µg/m² in Norway will be prohibited 
from June 2014. Although this item was bought in Germany, comparison is made with this limits as Norway is the first, and so far only, country to regulate PFOA in textile products. NEA (2013) Flere stoffer på verstinglista (additional substances added to the priority list); http://www.miljodirektoratet.no/no/Nyheter/Nyheter/2013/November-2013/Flere-stoffer-pa-verstinglista/ (Norwegian).
18 adidas Group Policy for the Control and Monitoring of 
Hazardous Substances A-01 September 1st 2013, 1 µg/
m² (p.26)  http://www.adidas-group.com/media/filer_public/85/09/850915ac-f85f-4533-8e87-3c84c8093193/a01_sept_2013_en.pdf
19 Carcinogenic amines were not released under the test 
conditions at levels above the method detection limit (<5 mg/kg) 
in any of the 41 articles tested.
See footnote 1.  
20 Greenpeace Detox 1, Dirty Laundry
21 Sample number TX13030, 17,000 mg/kg NPE
22 Sample TX13030, 17,000 mg/kg. C&A’s Restricted 
Substances List (April 2013) sets a limit of 100 mg/kg.  http://
www.c-and-a.com/uk/en/corporate/fileadmin/templates/master/img/fashion_updates/International_Press_Releases/RSL_version_April_2013.pdf 
23 C&A: Sample number TX13030, 17,000 mg/kg NPE; Disney, 
TX13040, 3,900 mg/kg; American Apparel TX13015, 2000 mg/
kg; Burberry TX13025, 780 mg/kg.
24 Disney does not publish a Restricted Substances List but 
is  “developing a strong chemicals management framework, 
with the Restricted Substances List as an initial step.” http://www.sec.gov/divisions/corpfin/cf-noaction/14a-8/2013/bostoncommon110413-14a8-incoming.pdf  
25 American Apparel does not publish a Restricted Substances List 
http://www.americanapparel.net/aboutus/corpresp/environment/ 
26 Burberry does not publish a Restricted Substances List 
http://www.burberryplc.com/corporate_responsibility/great_
brand_great_company 
27 NP and NPEs were included on the first list of chemicals 
for priority action towards achieving the OSPAR Convention 
target of ending discharges, emissions and losses of all Endnotes

32  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   33  Endnotes Endnotes
hazardous substances to the marine environment of the north-
east Atlantic by 2020. NP has also been included as a “priority hazardous substance” under the EU Water Framework Directive. Furthermore, within the EU, since January 2005 products (formulations used by industry) containing greater than 0.1% of NP or NPEs may no longer be placed on the market, with some minor exceptions principally for closed loop industrial systems.  See Brigden et.al 2013, Technical Report, Box A.
28 CEPA (2004) Notice requiring the preparation and 
implementation of pollution prevention plans in respect of 
effluents from textile mills that use wet processing (TMEs) and nonylphenol (NP) and its ethoxylates (NPEs), under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act (CEPA), 1999. Canada Gazette Part I, Vol. 138, No. 49, 4th December 2004. http://www.ec.gc.ca/planp2-p2plan/B2D19B6D-325F-458A-88E1-F69291E58DE3/g1-13849.pdf
USPEA (2010) Nonylphenol (NP) and Nonylphenol Ethoxylates 
(NPEs) Action Plan. Unites States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), August 18, 2010. http://www.epa.gov/oppt/existingchemicals/pubs/actionplans/np-npe.html
29 KEMI (2012) Proposals for new restrictions under REACH. 
Swedish Chemicals Agency (KEMI). http://www.kemi.se/en/
Content/Rules-and-regulations/Reach/Begransningsregler-bilaga-XVII/Proposals-for-new-restrictions/
30 MEP (2011). List of Toxic Chemicals Severely Restricted for 
Import and Export in China Ministry of Environmental Protection 
(MEP), The People’s Republic of China, 2011. 
http://www.crc-mep.org.cn/news/NEWS_DP .aspx?TitID=267&T0
=10000&LanguageType=CH&Sub=125 
31 Primark does not publish a Restricted Substances List http://
www.abf.co.uk/responsibility/retail/environment 32 Sample number TX13094
33 Sample number TX13015
34 American Apparel does not publish a Restricted Substances 
List, op.cit.35 Howdeshell et al. 2008, Lin et al. 2008).  See Technical report 
36 Lovekamp-Swan & Davis 2003, Grande et al. 2006, Gray et al. 
2006.  See Technical report.37 American Apparel and Footwear Association (2013), 
Restricted Substances List, September 2013, 13th Edition, p.40, 
phthalates, https://www.wewear.org/assets/1/7/RSL13english-September2013.pdf 
38 American Apparel and Footwear Association (2013), op.cit. refers to the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act 
(PL 110-787), which restricts each of the six phthalates  DEHP , DNOP , BBP , DBP , DNIP , DIDP to 0.1%.
39 SAC (2013) a, National Standard of the PRC, “Safety of 
toys - Part 1 Basic Specifications”, notification to World Trade 
Organisation, Integrated Business Management Update :2013 -07-02 14:46 , http://www.sac.gov.cn/zwgk/wtotb/tbttb/201307/t20130702_138723.htm
40 http://www.cpsc.gov/phthalates
41 European Commission, Guideline on the interpretation of the 
concept “which can be placed in the mouth” as laid down in
the entry 52 of Annex XVII to REACH Regulation 1907/2006 
http://echa.europa.eu/documents/10162/13645/guideline_interpretation_concept_mouth_en.pdf 
Regulation on phthalates in toys and childcare articles in China 
and the US also do not apply to children’s clothing.
42 SAC (2012b) The safety technical code for infants and 
children textile products (edition for authorizing/approval).  
General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine of the People’s Republ ic of China & Standardization Administration of the People’s Republic of China (SAC). http://www.cttc.net.cn/Upload/fck/E85819E943C6D099FFB911B819472341C442E47D.pdf  
43 American Apparel and Footwear Association (2013), op.cit.
23 Regulation (ECHA 2013). See Technical report.
44 adidas TX13004 0.28-106 mg/kg, Puma TX13097 <0.1-401 
mg/kg, Puma TX13100 0.44-105 mg/kg
45 Sample TX13097 contained up to 401mg/kg total organotins 
in various materials.46 2 mg/kg di-octyl tin. See Oeko-tex, Limit values and fastness, 
https://www.oeko-tex.com/en/manufacturers/test_criteria/
limit_values/limit_values.html 
47 adidas Group Policy for the Control and Monitoring of 
Hazardous Substances A-01 September 1st 2013, DOT 
1ppm, footwear and apparel (p.22)  http://www.adidas-group.com/media/filer_public/85/09/850915ac-f85f-4533-8e87-3c84c8093193/a01_sept_2013_en.pdf
Puma Safe Handbook of Environmental Standards 2012, 
1ppm for all remaining organotins (other than MBT, DBT, TBT), in all materials, p.70, http://about.puma.com/
wp-content/themes/aboutPUMA_theme/media/pdf/
PUMASafeEnvironmentHandbook-Vol2_final.pdf 48 Mango website (2013), op.cit. Credible chemical scope and 
reporting limits are employed by Detox committed brands such as Mango .
49 adidas TX13009, 0.22 – 0.48 mg/kg,  Puma TX13102, <0.1 – 
0.48 mg/kg, H&M TX13063 0.16-0.32mg/kg50 Greenpeace e.V. 2012, Chemistry for any weather, Greenpeace 
tests outdoor clothes for perfluorinated toxins, October 2012, 
Greenpeace e.V. http://www.greenpeace.de/fileadmin/gpd/user_upload/themen/chemie/gp_outdoor_report_2012_engl_fol_fin_neu_02_es.pdf
51 Ökotest (2011), Kinder & Familie, Test: Kinderschlafanzüge, 
Druckfehler, November 2011.
52 Santillo, D., Johnston, P . & Brigden, K. (2001b) The presence 
of brominated flame retardants and organotin compounds in 
dusts collected from Parliament buildings from eight countries.  Greenpeace Research Laboratories Technical Note 03/2001, March 2001: 24 pp.
53 adidas TX13003 2420 µg/kg volatile PFCs, TX13004 499 µg/
kg volatile PFCs, TX13005, 68 µg/kg ionic PFCs.    54 C&A TX13026 380 µg/kg, Uniqlo TX13108 2346 µg/kg.  
55 adidas TX13004  PFOS, Burberry TX13023 PFOS
56 adidas TX13005, ionic PFCs
57 adidas Group Policy for the Control and Monitoring 
of Hazardous Substances A-01 September 1st 2013, 
1ppm (p.26)  http://www.adidas-group.com/media/filer_public/85/09/850915ac-f85f-4533-8e87-3c84c8093193/a01_sept_2013_en.pdf
58 Nike TX13082 6967 µg/kg  
59 Nike sets a reporting limit of 0.005mg/kg PFOA (not a 
maximum concentration limit).  Sample TX13082 contained 
7400 ng/kg PFOA, equivalent to 0.007 mg/kg.  Nike Abbreviated Restricted Substances List, August 2011, p.7, http://www.nikeincchemistry.com/wp-content/uploads/Abbreviated-RSL.pdf 
60 PFDoA and another long chained PFCA  have recently been 
added to a list of priority chemicals in Norway, meaning that 
releases to the environment must be eliminated or substantially reduced by 2020.  NEA (2013) Flere stoffer på verstinglista (additional substances added to the priority list); http://www.miljodirektoratet.no/no/Nyheter/Nyheter/2013/November-2013/Flere-stoffer-pa-verstinglista/ (Norwegian)
61 Puma TX13097 25.2 µg/kg ionic PFCs62 H&M TX13067 2290 μg/kg ionic PFCs, waterproof trousers for 
a child of 1.5 – 2 years63 H&M TX13065, 32.7 μg/kg ionic PFCs
64 H&M TX13067
65 Greenpeace e.V. (2012), Chemistry for any weather, http://
www.greenpeace.org/romania/Global/romania/detox/
Chemistry%20for%20any%20weather.pdf, and Greenpeace e.V. (2013) Chemistry for any weather II, http://www.greenpeace.org/switzerland/Global/switzerland/fr/publications/toxiques/2013_Toxiques_Resume_OutdoorClothing.pdf .
66 Greenpeace e.V. (2013), Chemistry for any weather II, add link.
67 Although a wide range of uses are currently exempted. UNEP 
(2009) Adoption of amendments to Annexes A, B and C of the 
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants under the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). http://chm.pops.int/Portals/0/download.aspx?d=UNEP-POPS-COP-NOTIF-DN-CN524-2009.English.pdf
68 EU (2006) 2006/122/EC of the European Parliament and 
of the Council of 12 December 2006 amending for the 30th 
time Council Directive 76/769/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the member states relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations (perfluorooctane sulfonates). Official Journal L 372/32, 27.12.2006
69 NEA (2013) Flere stoffer på verstinglista (additional substances 
added to the priority list), Norwegian Environment agency (NEA); 
http://www.miljodirektoratet.no/no/Nyheter/Nyheter/2013/November-2013/Flere-stoffer-pa-verstinglista/ (Norwegian)
70 ECHA (2013) Candidate List of Substances of Very High 
Concern for authorization. European Chemicals Agency. http://
echa.europa.eu/chem_data/authorisation_process/candidate_list_table_en.asp
71 Duh 2002, Lacasse & Baumann 2004.   See Technical Report 
72 Jaffe & East 2007, Thiele 2004, See Technical Report 
73 Greenpeace (2013a). Toxic Threads: Polluting Paradise. A story 
of big brands and water pollution in Indonesia, pp 44; including the 
accompanying Technical report, pp30. http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/publications/Campaign-reports/Toxics-reports/Polluting-Paradise/
74 Arsenic and many of its compounds are especially potent 
poisons. Acute arsenic poisoning is associated initially with 
nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and severe diarrhoea. Chronic arsenic toxicity results in multisystem disease. Arsenic is a well 

34  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   35  Endnotes Endnotes
documented human carcinogen affecting numerous organs. 
Ratnaike RN (2003), Acute and chronic arsenic toxicity. Postgrad Med J. 2003 Jul;79(933):391-6.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1289721775 Listed by the International Agency for Research on Cancer 
(IARC) as “possibly carcinogenic to humans” (group 2B), 
principally due to inhalation of dusts and vapours. IARC (1989). International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) Monographs programme on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans: Some Organic Solvents, Resin Monomers and Related Compounds, Pigments and Occupational Exposures in Paint Manufacture and Painting vol. 47, pp. 291–306
76 Greenpeace 2013, Toxic Threads: Polluting Paradise
77 Which aims to promote products with a reduced environmental 
impact compared with other products in the same product group.
78 EC (2009) op.cit.
79 Dorey, C.N. (2003), Chemical Legacy: Contamination of the 
Child, Greenpeace UK, October 2003, ISBN 1-903907-06-3, 
http://www.greenpeace.org/international/Global/international/planet-2/report/2003/10/chemical-legacy-contaminatio.pdf 
80 For example: Oeko-tex, which has separate product categories 
for infants and children as well as for products that have “direct 
skin contact” which provide specific guarantees to the consumer.
81 For example, M&S does not permit any biocidal finish on its 
childrenswear products but for all products only triclosan is not 
permitted.  M&S Restricted Substances List May 2013, p. 4: http://corporate.marksandspencer.com/documents/how_we_do_business/restrictedsubstancelist_may_2013.pdf
82 American Apparel and Footwear Association (2013), 
Restricted Substances List, September 2013, 13th Edition, p.40, 
phthalates, https://www.wewear.org/assets/1/7/RSL13english-September2013.pdf  lists countries which restrict phthalates in toys and childcare articles are listed asas the EU, the US, South Korea, Denmark, Egypt and Turkey  Similar restrictions are proposed in China: SAC (2013) Toys safety, Part 1: Basic Code, GB 6675.1—201. SAC (Standardization Administration of the People’s Republic of China http://www.sac.gov.cn/zwgk/wtotb/tbttb/201307/t20130702_138723.htm (Chinese)
83 SAC (2012b) The safety technical code for infants and children 
textile products (edition for authorizing/approval).  General 
Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine of the People’s Republic of China & Standardization Administration of the People’s Republic of China (SAC). http://www.cttc.net.cn/Upload/fck/E85819E943C6D099FFB911B819472341C442E47D.pdf84 American Apparel and Footwear Association (2013), 
op.cit. ;SAC (2012b) The safety technical code for infants and children textile products (edition for authorizing/approval).
85 WHO 2013b, op.cit. 
86 WHO 2013b, State of the science of endocrine disrupting 
chemicals - 2012.
An assessment of the state of the science of endocrine disruptors 
prepared by a group of experts for the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and WHO, 2013, http://www.who.int/ceh/publications/endocrine/en/index.html
87 Dorey, (2003), op.cit.
88 The 11 priority hazardous chemical groups are : 1. Alkylphenols 
and their ethoxylates (APEOs & APs)  2. Phthalates  3.Brominated 
and chlorinated flame retardants (BFRs, CFRs) 4. Azo dyes that can release carcinogenic amines 5. Organotin compounds 6. Per- and poly-fluorinated chemicals (PFCs) 7. Chlorobenzenes 8. Chlorinated solvents 9. Chlorophenols 10. Short chain chlorinated paraffins 11. Heavy metals such as cadmium, lead, mercury and chromium (VI).
89 IPE – Chinese Institute for Environmental Affairs, which is the 
only credible global chemical discharge disclosure platform.90 This means taking preventive action where there are legitimate 
reasons for concern regarding the intrinsic hazards of a chemical, 
even if information is insufficient to verify those hazards. It is based, in part, on the premise that some hazardous substances cannot be rendered harmless by the receiving environment (i.e. there are no ‘environmentally acceptable’/ ’safe’ use or discharge levels) and that prevention of potential damage is required, (NOTE – deleted as duplicate of above). The process of applying the Precautionary Principle must involve an examination of the full range of alternatives, including, where necessary, substitution through the development of sustainable alternatives where they do not already exist. 
91 All brands need to take corporate responsibility for a clear 
Individual Action Plan that identifies the steps it will take to follow 
through on its Detox commitment and continuously review and update these steps. 
92 “Right to Know” is defined (Is this our definition, of the 
universally accepted one?  I read this to say that it is that 
latter)  as practices that allow members of the public access to environmental information – in this case specifically about the uses and discharges of chemicals based on reported quantities of releases of hazardous chemicals to the environment, chemical-by-chemical, facility-by-facility, at least year-by-year.
93 This means taking preventive action where there are legitimate reasons for concern regarding the intrinsic hazards of a chemical, 
even if information is insufficient to verify those hazards. It is based, in part, on the premise that some hazardous substances cannot be rendered harmless by the receiving environment (i.e. there are no ‘environmentally acceptable’/ ’safe’ use or discharge levels) and that prevention of potential damage is required, (NOTE – deleted as duplicate of above). The process of applying the Precautionary Principle must involve an examination of the full range of alternatives, including, where necessary, substitution through the development of sustainable alternatives where they do not already exist. 
94 All brands need to take corporate responsibility for a clear 
Individual Action Plan that identifies the steps it will take to follow 
through on its Detox commitment and continuously review and update these steps. 
95 “Right to Know” is defined (Is this our definition, of the 
universally accepted one?  I read this to say that it is that 
latter)  as practices that allow members of the public access to environmental information – in this case specifically about the uses and discharges of chemicals based on reported quantities of releases of hazardous chemicals to the environment, chemical-by-chemical, facility-by-facility, at least year-by-year.
96 http://www.ipe.org.cn/En/
97 http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/campaigns/
toxics/water/detox/Detox-Catwalk/ 98 Zero Discharge of Hazardous Chemicals Group, Joint 
Roadmap, http://www.roadmaptozero.com 99 H&M reports that “From January 2013, PFCs were banned 
from all our products globally. This means that all orders placed from 1 January or later have been produced without PFCs”. H&M Conscious Actions Sustainability Report 2012, http://about.hm.com/AboutSection/en/About/Sustainability/Reporting-and-Resources/Reports.html#cm-menu email 12 Dec 2013 from H&M representative Mattias Bodin.
100 “By the end of 2013 …. Report to the public the results of the 
APEO investigation, including the detection levels and substitute 
chemistry used (and how/why it was chosen – non-hazardousness profile).”  C&A Updated Individual Action Plan, 16 November 2012 http://www.candacr.com/en/2012/11/16/updated-ca-individual-action-plan-in-the-frame-of-the-joint-roadmap-towards-zero-discharge-of-hazardous-chemicals-by-2020/  
101 Puma aims to integrate the phasing out of hazardous 
chemicals in the supply chain as an additional element of the 
existing PUMA sustainability scorecard, 2015 PUMA Individual Action Plan v.2.  http://about.puma.com/wp-content/themes/aboutPUMA_theme/media/pdf/2011/pumaroadmap.pdf 
102 Fast Retailing Detox Commitment, 2013, op.cit. “eliminate all C7 and C8 PFC use by no later than 31 Dec 2013; and eliminate 
all remaining PFC use by no later than 01 July 2016”
103 For example PFOS.  
104 Such a regulation has been proposed within the EU,  by 
the Swedish Chemical Inspectorate, KEMI, see: KEMI (2012) 
Proposals for new restrictions under REACH. Swedish Chemicals Agency (KEMI). http://www.kemi.se/en/Content/Rules-and-regulations/Reach/Begransningsregler-bilaga-XVII/Proposals-for-new-restrictions/ 
105 UNEP Global Chemicals Outlook (2012) Pillar I: Trends and 
Indicators, Chemicals Used in Textile Production, p. 14, the 42% 
is a fraction of all chemicals that used, including non-hazardous chemicals.
106 REACH list of Substances of Very High Concern (SVHC)
107 Draft textile product safety standard,  6 kinds of phthalates 
(DEHP , DBP , BBP , DiNP , DiDP , DnOP) are regulated not to exceed 
0.1% by mass in articles.
108 A selective list of some of the most comprehensive and 
stringent ecolabels currently available is provided in a recent report 
by Women in Europe for a Common Future. See WECF (2013), op.cit.

36  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   37  Appendix Appendix
adidas
adidasadidasadidasadidas
adidas
adidasadidasadidasadidasadidasAmerican ApparelAmerican Apparel
American Apparel
American ApparelBurberryBurberryBurberryBurberryBurberryBurberryBurberry
Burberry
no articleBurberryC&AC&AC&AC&AC&A
C&A
C&ADisneyDisneyDisneyDisneyDisneyGAPGAP
GAP
GAPGAPTX13001TX13002TX13003TX13004TX13005
TX13006
TX13007TX13008TX13009TX13010TX13011TX13012TX13013
TX13014
TX13015TX13016TX13017TX13018TX13019TX13020TX13021TX13022
TX13023
TX13024TX13025TX13026TX13027TX13028TX13029TX13030
TX13031
TX13032TX13040TX13041TX13042TX13043TX13044TX13048TX13049
TX13050
TX13051TX13052HungaryMainland ChinaTaiwanHong Kong Colombia
Germany
IndonesiaIsraelSwedenPhilippinesRussiaMainland ChinaJapan
UK
USAAustriaMainland ChinaTaiwanHong Kong TurkeySwedenSpain
UK
-UKHungaryPolandMainland ChinaTurkeyMexico
Spain
SwitzerlandMainland ChinaHong Kong Spain ThailandUSAHong Kong Colombia
Greece
IndonesiaJapanThailandMainland ChinaMainland ChinaIndonesiaMainland China
Mainland China
ThailandIndonesiaThailandThailandMainland ChinaUSAUSA
USA
USATunisiaMainland ChinaMainland ChinaThailandMainland ChinaThailandMainland China
Italy
-TunisiaunknownunknownIndiaunknownMexico
unknown
unknownMainland ChinaMainland ChinaMainland ChinaThailandMainland ChinaMainland ChinaIndonesia
Vietnam
PhillippinesIndonesiatrousers & pullover sett-shirtcoatshoesfootball shirt 
swimwear
t-shirttopt-shirtt-shirtswimsuitleggingsbaby body suit
sweatshirt
baby one-pieceswimsuitt-shirtcamisejackett- shirtbaby body suitt-shirt
swimsuit
-shirtjackett-shirtbaby onesiet-shirtshoes
t-shirt
baby t-shirtdressfleece jacketswimsuitt-shirtt-shirtt-shirtt-shirt
t-shirt
t-shirtshort pants70% cotton, 30% polyester70% cotton, 30% polyestershell 100% polyester; lining 65% polyester, 35% cotonupper coated leather; lining textile; outer sole rubber100% polyester
shell 80% nylon, 20% elastane; lining 100% polyester
100% polyester100% polyester60% cotton, 40% polyester60% cotton, 40% polyestershell 80% nylon, 20% elastane; lining 100% polyester80% nylon, 20% elastane100% cotton
50% cotton, 50% polyester
100% cotton80% polyamide (nylon), 20% elastane; lining 100% polyamide (nylon)100% cotton100% cottonShell 100% polyester; lining 100% cotton80% cotton, 15% nylon, 5% wool97% cotton, 3% elestane 100% cotton
80% polyamide, 20% elastane; lining 100% polyamide
-100% cotton96% polyester, 4% elastane100% cotton100% cotton100% cottonBovine leather, pig skin lining and synthetic outer soles
100% cotton
100% organic cotton94.4% cotton, 5.6% elastane100% polyester100% polyester100% cotton100% organic cotton100% cotton100% cotton
100% cotton
100% cottonnot specified
Brand Sample  
codePlace 
of salePlace of manufactureKind of  productFabric
8.7
<1.0
1.8
16
<1.0
<1.0<1.0<1.0
1938
<1.0<1.0
25
660
2000
<1.0
5427
390
62
<1.0
33
<1.0
-
780
46
<1.0<1.0<1.0
17 000
<1.0
2.9
3900
3070
<1.0
1.62.53.4
<1.0
9.2
34NPEs 
(mg/kg)
<5
-
<5
-
<5
-
<5
---
<5
--
<5
-
<5
--
<5
-
<5
-----
<5<5<5<5
---
<5
---
<5<5
---amines 
(mg/kg)
-
44
--
501254
-
2145
----
6100
-
11
----------
1515
-
130
7263
--
6.0
2714
-
<3.0
42
-phthalate 
total 
(mg/kg)
-
<0.1
-
0.28 - 106
<0.1
---
0.22 - 0.48
-------------------
<0.1<0.1
--
<0.1
--
<0.1<0.1<0.1
-
<0.1<0.1
-Organotin 
total  
(mg/kg)
--
2.18 - 10.2
ND - 2.55
-
68.0 - 68.0
---------
1.39
------
2.76
--
7.40
--------
4.26
-------Ionic 
PFCs (µg/
kg)
--
2420
499
-
ND
---------
ND
------
ND
--
380
--------
ND
-------volatile 
PFCs (µg/
kg)
6255
105
-
49
100197
469754
293
--
99
----
47
------
91
-------
107167
-------Antimony 
in fabric 
(mg/kg)
208184105
-
49
100197
46
242135293
--
197
----
47
------
94
-------
107167
-------Antimony 
polyester 
(mg/kg)*Appendix.
Concentrations of NPEs, carcinogenic amines, phthalates, organo 
tins, ionic PFCs, volatile PFCs and antimony in all articles tested

38  A little story about the monsters in your closet A little story about the monsters in your closet   39  Appendix Appendix
GAP
GAPGAPGAPGAP
GAP
H&MH&MH&MH&MH&MH&MH&M
Li Ning
Li-NingLi-NingLi-NingNikeNikeNikeNikeNike
Nike
NikeNikeNikePrimarkPrimarkPrimarkPrimark
Primark
PrimarkPumaPumaPumaPumaPumaPumaUniqlo
Uniqlo
UniqloTX13053TX13054TX13055TX13056TX13057
TX13058
TX13063TX13064TX13065TX13066TX13067TX13068TX13069
TX13072
TX13073TX13074TX13075TX13082TX13083TX13084TX13085TX13086
TX13087
TX13088TX13089TX13090TX13091TX13092TX13093TX13094
TX13095
TX13096TX13097TX13098TX13099TX13100TX13101TX13102TX13106
TX13107
TX13108IsraelTurkeyMexicoPhilippinesThailand
USA
PolandMainland ChinaGermanyGreeceSwedenSpainThailand
Germany
Mainland ChinaMainland ChinaMainland ChinaArgentinaChileTaiwanGermanyIndonesia
Israel
TurkeySwedenSwitzerlandAustriaAustriaAustriaGermany
Spain
UKMainland ChinaGermanyGreeceIndonesiaItalyTurkeyJapan
Japan
PhilippinesTurkeyMainland ChinaVietnamVietnamPhilippines
unknown
BangladeshBangladeshMainland ChinaMainland ChinaMainland ChinaMainland ChinaMainland China
Mainland China
Mainland ChinaMainland ChinaMainland ChinaBangladeshMainland ChinaMainland ChinaVietnamIndonesia
Vietnam
TurkeyThailandVietnamunknownunknownunknownunknown
unknown
unknownIndonesiaTurkeyBangladeshMainland ChinaBangladeshBangladeshMainland China
Mainland China
Vietnamt-shirtswimsuitt-shirtt-shirtt-shirt
t-shirt
t-shirtdresscoatt-shirtplastic pantsbodysuitsweater
sports shirt
sports top & shortst-shirtdresscoatt-shirtt-shirtshoest-shirt
running top
t-shirtt-shirtwind jacketswimming trunkssweatshirtcoatt-shirt
shorts
sweatpantsshoesfootball shirt t-shirtshoest-shirtt-shirtpolo shirt
t-shirt
Jacket
Brand Sample  
codePlace 
of salePlace of manufactureKind of  productFabric
<1.0
<1.0<1.0<1.0<1.0<1.0<1.0
12
7.8
3889
7.91.72.13.3
<1.0
5.12.4
<1.0<1.0
6.3
<1.0
2.55.6
<1.0
22
480
12
<1.0
1.2
4858
7.3
25
5.5
340
<1.0
17
<1.0
26
<1.0NPEs 
(mg/kg)
-
<5
-
<5
--
<5
-
<5<5<5
-
<5<5<5<5
--
<5<5<5<5<5<5
-
<5
-
<5
-
<5
-
<5<5
--
<5<5<5
--
<5amines 
(mg/kg)
26
-
5.55.6
<3.0
-
7.6
45
-
19
--
27
-
7.39.5
-
1531
----
65
---
11
-
110 000
-------
120
-
96
-phthalate 
total 
(mg/kg)
<0.1
-
<0.1<0.1<0.1
-
0.16-0.32
-----
<0.1<0.1<0.1
---
<0.1<0.1<0.1
-
<0.1
----
<0.1
-
<0.1
--
<0.1 - 401
<0.1
-
0.44 - 105
-
<0.1 - 0.48
<0.1<0.1
-Organotin 
total  
(mg/kg)
--------
 32.7 - 314
-
26.4 - 2290
------
29.7
--
2.83
-----
2.01
-
2.43
---
25.2
-------
NDIonic 
PFCs (µg/
kg)
--------
ND
-
ND
------
6967
--
ND
-----
ND
-
ND
---
ND
-------
2346volatile 
PFCs (µg/
kg)
-
128
--
59
---
42
149
71
--
70
121
--
14
---
119
64
-
73
104134121
---
77
-
126
95
--
100
86
141
73Antimony 
in fabric 
(mg/kg)
-
128
--
147
---
42
149
71
--
80
121
--
14
---
119
64
-
73
104134186
---
77
-
126147
--
154
86
217
73Antimony 
polyester 
(mg/kg)*
100% cotton
shell 80% nylon, 20% elastane; lining 100% polyester100% cotton100% cotton60% cotton, 40% polyester
100% cotton
100% cotton100% cottonShell 100% polyester; coating 100% polyurethane100% polyester100% polyester100% cotton100% acrylic
88% polyester, 12% elastane
100% polyester100% cottonbody lining 100% cotton; outershell 60% polyester, 40% nylonbody 100% polyester; lining 65% polyester, 35% cotton100% cotton100% cottonSuede, leather and nubuck100% polyester
100% polyester
100% cotton100% polyesterbody 100% nylon; lining: 100% polyesterOuter hhell 80% nylon, 20% elastane; lining 100% polyesterShell  80% cotton, 20% polyester; lining 65% polyester, 35% cotton100% nylon; lining 100% nylon100% cotton
100% cotton
100% polysterleather and other materials; lining textile and other materials100% polyester 65% polyester, 35% cottonUpper leather and other materials; lining textile; sole rubber100% cotton65% polyester, 35% cotton100% polyester
65% polyster, 35% cotton
100% polyesterTable A1.  Details of all articles, including the concentrations of NPEs, carcinogenic amines, phthalates, organotins, PFCs and antimony.  
For carcinogenic amines ‘<5 mg/kg’ indicates that all quantified amines were below the detection limit (<5 mg/kg);  For phthalates, organotins and 
PFCs, the total concentration of the quantified individual compounds in each group is given, with data for individual phthalates, organotins and PFCs 
provided in Appendices 2, 3 and 4 respectively;  For organotins, a range of values is given for some articles where more than one type of fabric was 
analysed; ND – not detected;  ‘-’ indicates not tested. * Where fabric was composed of mixed fibres, the concentration of antimony in polyester was calculated from fabric composition information, on the basis that all antimony arose from the polyester fibre within the fabric blend

40  A little story about the monsters in your closet 
By Greenpeace East Asia  Beijing Office
3/F, Julong Office Building, Block 7, Julong 
Garden, 68 Xinzhong Street, 
Dongcheng District, Beijing, China. 100027
Greenpeace is an independent global 
campaigning organisation that acts to change attitudes and behaviour, to protect and conserve 
the environment and to promote peace.
greenpeace.org