# Archivo original: now-or-never-endangered-salmo.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:31 -03 2025

Now orNeverN o w
N e v e rN o wo r N o w
N e v e r
Endangered Salmon 
of the Great Bear 
R a i n f o r e s t


C o n t e n t s
1 Executive Summary
3 I n t r o d u c t i o n
4 Forests and Salmon
Status of Endangered Salmon in Threatened 
Rainforest V a l l e y s
2 2 Watershed Map
2 4 O v e rv i e w
2 5 Aaltanhash River
2 6 Allard Creek
2 7 Amback Creek
2 8 Canoe Creek
2 9 Canoona Creek
3 0 Carter River / Carter Lake
3 1 D a l l e r y Creek
3 2 Khutze River
3 3 Kiltuish 
3 4 Klenane 
3 5 Koeye River
3 6 Namu Lakes
3 7 Quaal River
3 8 Roscoe Inlet & Roscoe Creek
3 9 Skowquiltz River
4 0 S o u r c e s
4 1 BC Salmon Stocks at High Risk of ExtinctionFront Cover  (l–r)
Sockeye salmon migration on the
Lowe River. Gifford Creek clear c u t
streamside “riparian” zone. 
Grizzly bears depend on salmon as
a mainstay of their diet
( M c A l l i s t e r )
Written by:
Te r ry Glavin
Additional writing, research & 
editing by: 
Ben Parfitt & Catherine Stewart

1 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
E X E C U T I V E  S U M M A R Y :
E v e r y year in British Columbia, the provincial government
sanctions the logging of more than 71 million cubic 
metres of trees, the vast majority of which come down in
industrial clearcutting operations. This volume of wood 
is staggeringly large, almost beyond our ability to 
comprehend. But think of this: an average telephone 
pole is equivalent to just one cubic metre. No matter how
you choose to visualize it, 71 million cubic metres is 
a lot of wood.
A substantial percentage of this wood comes from the
coastal temperate rainforest, one of the world’s most
unique and most threatened ecosystems. This complex 
forest of ancient and large trees spills across some of the
steepest and wettest ground found anywhere on earth. 
In some coastal watersheds as much as 440 millimetres 
of rain has fallen in a single day. That volume of 
water is capable of doing a great deal of damage if the 
circumstances are right. 
Over the course of the past several decades, much of 
the primeval temperate rainforest on Vancouver Island, the
southern mainland coast, and Haida Gwaii (the Queen
Charlotte Islands) has disappeared. As clearcuts have
stripped centuries-old spruce, fir, hemlock and cedar
forests away, something else of incalculable value has
been lost too. In the hundreds of streams and rivers 
cutting into the rainforest, genetically distinct runs of
salmon have steadily declined. In some cases, they have
disappeared all together. These losses have hit coastal 
villages and towns hard, particularly First Nations 
communities who relied for centuries on abundant 
salmon stocks for a variety of food, social, ceremonial 
and economic purposes.The remaining intact old-growth forests and salmon
streams on BC’s Mid and North coasts, in the region that
has come to be known as the Great Bear Rainforest, 
represent perhaps the best opportunity to stem the tide of
losses that have occurred with depressing frequency 
elsewhere. If the clearcutting that devastates salmon
stocks is stopped here, there is a chance that indigenous
fish species may rebound to the benefit of all communi-
ties, both human and wild.
The major forest companies operating in this region 
are Western Forest Products (WFP or Doman Lumber),
International Forest Products (Interfor), West Fraser 
and, to a lesser extent, MacMillan Bloedel Ltd. These
companies are part of a larger group with a less than 
enviable track record in protecting the rainforest’s fish. 
As we will see in the coming pages, attempts to protect
salmon through voluntary compliance with industr y -
developed fish-forestry guidelines have failed abysmally.
So too have new and allegedly tough laws such as 
B C ’s Forest Practices Code.
If we are to protect our remaining coastal salmon stocks,
we must end the destructive practices of clearcutting
ancient forests, particularly in those valleys where little or
no industrial deforestation has yet taken place. As this
report documents, BC’s current logging practices cause
substantial damage to salmon habitat. The urgency of the
current situation cannot be overstated.“I have seen change upon change, 
development upon development, clear c u t
upon clearcut strip the life away from
streams and rivers that are home to
salmon...” 
—The Honourable David Anderson, Federal Minister of Fisheries and Oceans, 
Times Colonist, June 20, 1998

N O W  O R  N E V E R 2
Salmon stocks in many of the coast’s pristine valleys are
already at drastically low levels. An appendix accompany-
ing this report outlines the state of endangered salmon
populations in some of the undeveloped watersheds on the
Mid and North coasts. Genetically distinct coho, chinook,
sockeye, chum and pink salmon stocks are depleted almost
across the board. In many cases, they are perilously low
and at high risk of imminent extinction. In others they are
gone all together.
In 1996, an American Fisheries Society study painted a
grim picture of salmon declines in BC and the Y u k o n
Territories. Using data from the Department of Fisheries
and Oceans, the study noted that 142 salmon populations
had been driven to extinction, 624 were at “high risk” 
of extinction, and another 308 were either at “moderate
risk” or classified as “of serious concern. ” Tim Slaney, 
a co-author of the report also noted that the status of more
than 4,000 salmon runs in BC and the Yukon was unknown
to Department staff. Of those 4,000, 920 stocks had 
mean escapements (the average number of spawning
salmon) of zero for the previous decade. These stocks
were not classified as extinct, although, as Slaney 
notes, they may well be.
Many of these runs of salmon were small in numbers 
to begin with. Unlike some of the major, commercially 
targeted runs of pink and sockeye salmon that can number
in the hundreds of thousands, a healthy run of coho 
salmon in a small stream in the Great Bear Rainforest
could be only 1,500 fish at best. What really counts is that
the fish are there at all. Their presence is a vital link 
in the chain of life in these magnificent forests. Their loss
will unleash consequences we can only imagine.Allard Creek, the Aaltanhash River, Dallary Creek, the
Koeye River, the Klekane watershed — to most of us these
are just names on a map. In reality, they are rich rain-
forest valleys, home to grizzly and black bears, wolves,
eagles, migratory birds, ancient cedar and spruce trees
and endangered runs of salmon. For centuries the salmon
have nourished all other life in these forests and provided
sustenance to the First Nations people who harvested 
the bounty of the streams and rivers. Now most of these
valleys are names on Forest Development plans and the
logging companies are preparing to move in. 
For reasons relating to over-fishing in mixed-stock 
commercial fisheries and poor survival rates due to 
changing oceanic and climatic conditions, salmon numbers
have dropped throughout the Great Bear Rainforest region.
We cannot afford to let these numbers decline any further
by allowing clearcutting and road-building to proceed 
in remaining intact coastal rainforests. If we do, we run
the risk of losing indigenous wild salmon stocks for 
good. And if the salmon are gone, gone too are one of the
most vital sources of nutrients needed to sustain the
bears, the eagles and the forests themselves.

3 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
I N T R O D U C T I O N
The salmon of the Great Bear Rainforest on the central
coast of British Columbia are following the path carved by
the herds of bison that once roamed the wide open prairies
of Canada's heartland. Like the Bison, the salmon are not
about to vanish as a species. But in the hundreds of small
streams of the temperate rainforests, where salmon are
the ocean's gift to the bears, eagles and trees, the salmon
are disappearing.
The reasons for their decline are numerous and complex.
Climate change is affecting ocean survival and the web 
of life in the North Pacific ocean. Industrial and municipal
pollution, urban development and habitat loss, fish 
farming, cattle ranching and agribusiness are all impacting
salmon and their habitat. Years of overfishing and 
indiscriminate harvesting of the small runs of salmon that
swim with the big commercial stocks have taken their 
toll. And decades of clearcut logging have devastated
countless salmon spawning streams.
The deep-sea impacts of climate change, ozone depletion
and pollution on salmon are difficult both to assess and 
to repair. And addressing the global effects of climate
change will only begin if the political will exists to even
seriously tackle the problem. But some of the threats 
to salmon survival are more straightforward. We can
implement changes to the fishing industry to protect weak
stocks and increase selective harvesting. And we can
change the way we log, protect the streams that nurture
the salmon and protect some of the last intact rainforests
where salmon are teetering on the edge of extinction.In the heart of the Great Bear Rainforest, in the traditional
t e r r i t o r y of the Kitasoo and Hartley Bay people, is a beauti-
ful pristine forest valley known as the Khutze. The cr y s t a l
clear waters of the Khutze River have long supported runs
of chinook, pink, chum, sockeye and coho salmon. The
salmon, in turn, support a large population of grizzly
bears. The valley is home to wolves, mountain goats, deer
and wolverine. It is a migratory staging area for trumpeter
swans and the ancient forests provide shelter to the 
endangered seabird, the Marbled Murrelet.
In this lush, interdependent web of life the salmon play 
an absolutely critical role. And the salmon are vanishing.
In 1965, the Department of Fisheries counted 1,500 
chinook salmon on the spawning beds. In 1994, the count
was 20 fish.
In 1985, the Khutze River pink salmon count numbered
100,000 fish reproducing in the river. By 1997, that number
had plummeted to 14,000.
Khutze coho have declined from a high of 7,500 in 1964 to
a mere 400 by 1997.
The factors driving the decline of salmon in this valley 
do not yet include the destruction caused by industrial 
logging. But in light of the already perilous state of many
of the salmon stocks, if International Forests Products 
is allowed to log this pristine rainforest, the clearcuts will
likely sound the death knell of the last remaining salmon
runs in the Khutze River. 

Forests and Salmon
The relationship between salmon and trees on North
A m e r i c a ’ s west coast is unique on the planet. Nowhere
else on earth does a marine species contribute so much to 
the functioning of forest ecosystems, and nowhere else do
forests play so crucial a role in the survival of a creature 
of the sea. The relationship between the salmon of the
west coast, and the west coast’s temperate forest, is so
ancient, complex and significant, that one could not exist
without the other.
In The Beginning: The Evolution 
of the Salmon Forests 
It all began 12,000 years ago, at the close the
Pleistocene epoch.
Geologists and paleobotanists have sketched a 
rough picture of this coast at the close of the ice age,
before salmon returned: It was a barren, empty 
place of glacier-scarred mountains, sparsely-forested
valley bottoms, vast coastal plains and tidal flats, 
all newly exposed by a rising continent, relieved of the
weight of kilometres-thick ice sheets. On British
ColumbiaÕs south coast, the emerging forest was a
mix of  lodgepole pines and conifers. On the north
coast, the landscape was a tundra of dwarf shrubs and
groves of spruce, pine and alder.
In the cultural memory of the Katzie people, whose
descendants still live in the Pitt River country of the
Lower Fraser, there exists a remarkably similar pic -
ture of the time before salmon.
By the 1860s, the responsibility of maintaining 
the historical records encoded in the Katzie oral 
tradition had been passed down to Peter Pierre, who
was still alive, in 1936, when he described the time
before salmon to anthropologist Diamond Jenness:
ÒThe land was strangely different than what it is now ,Ó
he explained.ÒThere were no leafy trees to cast deep shadows. 
The dark-green firs stood as they stand today, but they
were grim and silent; no winds rocked their summits,
no birds nested in their branches, no animals roamed
by day or night past their motionless trunks. In the
waters of the sea and the rivers there were clams and
mussels, but no salmon, eulachon or sturgeon, no
seals, and no sea lions...Ó
It was into this grim landscape that the first
salmon, during a period of rapid evolutionary change,
began recolonizing coastal valleys from far-off ice-age
refugia. From the spawned-out bodies of these first
salmon, trees took root. From barren valleys and river
bottoms, strewn with the carcasses of millions of
salmon, the elaborate arboreal web of the rainforest
arose.
Within the forest arose distinct populations of six
separate salmon species: Sockeye, pink, chinook,
chum, coho, and steelhead. The forest stabilized the
landscape, provided salmon spawners with necessary
stream-cover, and regulated the flow of cool, clean
water across the salmonÕs spawning beds; By about
5,000 years ago, cedar had bloomed from the
Columbia River to the Nass River, and down through
the ages, salmon continued to elaborate upon them -
selves, adapting to widely-varying local conditions,
establishing distinct, genetic dialects in a conversation
between trees, canyons, eagles, waterfalls, bears, 
and people. Nothing quite like it had ever occurred 
in the planetÕs history.
The Salmon People 
Salmon once returned to the coast every year in the
hundreds of millions. The predictable, abundant runs
of salmon that characterized this coast down through
the millennia gave rise to the most populous complex
of indigenous societies on the continent north of 
the Valley of Mexico. The most conservative estimates
put the pre-smallpox population of what is now
British Columbia at about 200,000 people. In each ofN O W  O R  N E V E R 4

these cultures, salmon was at the heart of an intricate
tapestry of economies, languages, belief systems 
and ways of life. Estimates of the pre-smallpox harvest
of salmon by aboriginal peoples put the annual 
consumption as high as 240 million pound s Ñmore
than twice the average annual production of the
industrial salmon fisheries from California to Prince
Rupert since the 1960s.
Linking the Forest and the Sea
The aboriginal civilization of this coast was made 
possible because it arose at the intersection of a 
high-volume energy exchange between the earthÕs
hydrographic sphere and the earthÕs terrestrial sphere,
an exchange between land and sea, in the form 
of protein, carbon, nitrogen and other life-giving
nutrient s Ñhundreds of thousands of tonnes of
marine biomass, every year for thousands of year sÑ
in the bodies of salmon. All this energy was carried
back and forth across the northern hemisphere 
of the planet, between the depths of the ocean and the
continentÕs interior, in predictable, ancient cycles. 
By the time of the first European explorers, what had
evolved from all of this was a huge arc of temperate
rainforest from Northern California to Southeast
Alaska, and a complex of rich marine ecosystems at
the rainforestÕs edge. 5 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
“All the watershed is gone to logging,
c l e a r cut logging around the lake. There
used to be 200,000 to 300,000 spawn-
ers. Now there’s only 6,000 to 8,000
spawners. Since they started clear c u t
logging, there’s been something wrong. ” 
—Ernest David, Elder of the Tla-O-Qui-Aht First Nation. Fisheries for the Future, 
A Nuu-Chah-Nulth Perspective. Published by the Nuu-Chah-Nulth First Nation, 1997.
Used with permission.
Salmon struggle homeward 
through the white water rapids of
Verney Falls. ( M c A l l i s t e r )
Grizzly bear in the beautiful Koeye
River estuary. The Koeye supports
grizzly and black bears, wolves,
d e e r, cougar, mountain goats and
river otter and an endangered 
run of Chum salmon. ( M c A l l i s t e r )

Seals, sea lions, killer whales and a variety of fish
and bird species indirectly rely on the forest for the
salmon the forest produces. The forest contributes
significantly to the productivity of estuaries and other
habitat types in the terrestrial/marine ecotone, which
in turn support a staggering diversity of seabirds and
non-migratory fish species. Marbled murrelets forage
at sea, but require old-growth forests for their nests.
Without autumn-spawning chum salmon, the coastÕs
eagle populations would wither away.
While salmon contribute to tree growth and 
plant life through the nutrients they bring from the
sea, salmon also provide a key food source to 22 forest
animal species. Analyses of the bones of grizzly 
bears from the Upper Columbia watershed, more
than 1,000 kilometres from the sea, show that 90%
of the carbon and nitrogen in the bearsÕ diets came
from salmon. 
On the Edge of Extinction
It is difficult to describe in words how much has 
been lost as a result of the disruption to these ancient
processes over the past 150 years. The salmon runs
that remain are remnants. Salmon are gone from
almost half their former range. South of the 49th 
parallel, almost all the Pacific watersheds contain
remnant salmon populations that have been declared
either ÒthreatenedÓ or ÒvulnerableÓ under the 
U.S. Endangered Species Act, or are considered 
ÒcandidatesÓ for ESA listing.In 1996, an American Fisheries Society study
painted a grim picture of salmon declines in BC and
the Yukon Territories. Using data from the
Department of Fisheries and Oceans, the study noted
that 142 salmon populations had been driven to
extinction, 624 were at Òhigh riskÓ of extinction, and
another 308 were either at Òmoderate riskÓ or classi -
fied as Òof serious concern .Ó Tim Slaney, a co-author
of the report has also noted that the status of more
than 4,000 salmon runs in BC and the Yukon is
unknown to Department staff. Of those 4,000, 920
stocks had mean escapements (the average number of
spawning salmon) of zero for the previous decade.
These stocks were not classified as extinct, although,
as Slaney notes, they may well be.
Cuts to Department of Fisheries staff and budgets
over the years have decreased the ability of staff and
contractors to get out into the field. This, combined
with changes to how data has been calculated over the
years, means the enumerations that the American
Fisheries Society used are not as reliable as they
should be. The situation could be somewhat better
than what was reported. It could also be a lot worse.
Overall, the west coast temperate rainforest once
covered about 25 million hectares. By the 1990s,
almost half of this primeval forest had been lost to
clearcutting and urban development.
In spite of these declines, salmon remain at the
heart of the temperate rainforestÕs biological diversity,
from grizzly bears and wolves to raccoons and
shrews, and from the tallest trees to the smallest
thimbleberry, stream bed algae and lake-bottom 
phytoplankton. In the same way, the forest, in all its
complexity, is necessary for the remaining salmon
runs to survive.N O W  O R  N E V E R 6
“Since coastal bears depend upon 
salmon for 95% of their food in late fall,
their ability to survive winter hibernation
is at stake. ” 
—D r. James C. Bergdahl, Northwest Biodiversity Centre in Wild Pacific Salmon as
Biological Indicators, Valhalla Wilderness Society, 1997

The Failure of the T e c h n o - F i x
In the early years of colonization and settlement, little
thought was given to such things; salmon, like the
forests, were considered an inexhaustible resource.
When declines in salmon abundance were observed
in the earliest years of the industrial fisheries, govern -
ments responded with artificial propagation, such as
hatcheries. Hatcheries were seen as the solution to
the problem of habitat destruction, and forests were
cleared without regard to the impacts upon salmon
runs. It is only in recent years that fisheries scientists
have shown that hatcheries cannot replace wild
salmon, and in many cases, hatcheries have hastened
declines in the biological diversity and abundance 
of wild salmon. Similarly, it is only in recent years
that science has provided conclusive evidence that
industrial forestry practices routinely and unavoidably
disrupt ecosystem functions that are vital to the 
protection of salmon.Forests and Salmon Habitat
An Infinte V a r i e t y
All salmon require stable and productive spawning
habitat, but that is just a small part of the picture.
Different salmon species rely on freshwater environ -
ments in different ways, for different purposes.
Similarly, runs within each species have evolved in
different directions, and spend varying amounts 
of time within watersheds, and at different zones
within those watersheds, from the estuaries to the
headwaters.
Sockeye almost always spawn in streams that feed
lakes, and will spend from a year to three years in a
lake before heading to sea. Pink salmon spawn almost
exclusively at two years of age, and, like chum
salmon, their fry head to sea almost immediately after
hatching. Chum salmon spawn almost exclusively 
in coastal streams and in the lower reaches of rivers,
only a few kilometres from the sea; coho are more 
or less the same. Coho, however, spend up to a year
in their natal streams, and in nearby rivers, before
heading to sea.
Chinook salmon defy generalization. They have
been known to reach 45 kilograms in size, although
theyÕre usually much smaller. Some precocious males
have been known to attempt spawning after spending
their entire lives without leaving their home rivers.
Chinook usually spend a few months in freshwater
before heading to sea.
For every salmon run that fits the textbook descrip -
tion for its species, there is another, from the same
species, that does things a little differently. All that
can be said of these fish is that they are
Òanadramous ,Ó which means theyÕre sea-run fish, and
theyÕre Òsemelparous ,Ó which means they die shortly
after spawnin g Ñexcept for steelhead.
Once thought to be of the genus Salmo, steelhead
are now generally held to be among the
Oncorhynchus species, with the rest of the coastÕs
salmon. Steelhead, unlike the rest, can spawn more
than once.7 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
“Each salmon is a large package of 
calories and nutrients from the sea. It’s
the way the sea communicates with 
the land. So we have these tons and tons
and tons of fish coming from the ocean,
through these fjords and up into the
rivers, bringing with them valuable nutri-
ents that permit very large populations
of eagles and bears to survive here. 
It is unlike any other part of the world. ” 
—D r. Michael Soule, Department of Environmental Studies, 
University of California at Santa Cruz, Greenpeace video, August, 1998.

Salmon are often believed to spawn only in the
autumn. In fact, there isnÕt a month of the year when
salmon are not spawning somewhere on the coast.
There isnÕt a forest on this coast that has not been
home to salmon. Salmon are there, always, in the 
forest. The Òforest ,Ó however, is a term that requires
some definition. It not only includes trees, but 
also plants, animals, birds and fish. The west coast
temperate rainforest, particularly, is a complex 
of inter-related systems and processes, all of which
contribute to healthy salmon habitat. It is about 
geology, hydrology and ecology.
Water for Life
The geological and hydrological components of
healthy salmon habitat include high-elevation gulleys
and rivulets, natural springs, ground water seepage
and discharge sites, porous soils, and sources of 
substrates and sediments that release cobbles and
allow the steady recruitment of gravel supplies 
for salmon spawning beds. The Pacific coast is an
assemblage of watersheds, and the shape and form of
the land itself is related to the watershedsÕ biological
components, such as root systems, which prevent 
erosion and regulate waterflow, and forest canopies,
which trap moisture and provide cool, wet micro -
climates. The movement of water through forest
ecosystems determines where skunk cabbage grows,
how dense the devilÕs club is, and how productive 
and healthy the ÒriparianÓ zone is.
A watershedÕs riparian zone is more than just a
riverbank. It is the intersection between the terrestrial
ecosystem and the aquatic ecosystem, the critical, 
narrow corridor of nutrient flow between the moun -
tains and the sea.
In the coastal temperate rainforest, the riparian
zone is often characterized by plant communities that
have become adapted to high soil moisture, and the
vegetation is more diverse than anywhere in the
watershed. The riparian forest is composed of cedar,
hemlock, fir, alder, maple, spruce and cottonwood.
The understorey is dense with salmonberry, Indian
plum, ferns and vine maple. It is the busiest place onN O W  O R  N E V E R 8
Coastal temperate rainforests, 
with their thin layers of soil on rock,
have been compared to a hydro-
ponic garden where life revolves
around the regulated flow of water.
( M c A l l i s t e r )

the coast. No habitat type supports more birds and
wildlife. It is rich in food, water and shelter, and it is
where the relationship between trees and salmon is
most intimate.
Thick riverbank vegetation and dense, mixed-
species forest provide the final controls over the
hydrology of the entire watershed, and provide stable,
clean, cold water for spawning salmon.
No Salmon Without Forests
Organic debris from the forest itself provides a rich
and fecund environment for salmon alevin sÑthose
first, tiny eruptions from salmon nest sÑhalf-egg,
half-salmon. Fallen trees, exposed root wads and
snags create riffles and back eddies, and act as a kind
of hydraulic control valve that slows stream velocity,
forming stable and oxygen-rich water for salmon fry,
as well as cover against predators.
Leaf litter and detritus form micro-ecosystems 
of benthic or bottom-dwelling invertebrates, algae and
bugs that provide a food source for salmon fry and 
for juvenile salmon in those final weeks before they
swim downstream to the sea. Regardless of the complexities involved in 
the relationship between salmon and trees, what is
clear is something quite simple: Healthy salmon 
populations require healthy forests, healthy rivers and
healthy streams. And, in turn, the health of the 
temperate rainforests is linked to the salmon.
The Impact of Industrial 
Forest Practices
A History of Sustainable Har v e s t s
For thousands of years, aboriginal societies harvested
timber. The native people of the coast lived in 
cavernous, cedar-plank longhouses, and went to sea in
huge, ocean-going canoes. Smokehouses, community
buildings, mortuary poles and heraldic poles were 
all built from the wood of the west coast temperate
rainforest, as were intricately carved chests, storage
boxes and cooking vessels. Just as important was 
the processing of cedar bark for basketry, clothing,
and a variety of household goods. 
Apart from minor operation s Ñmainly those
undertaken by the HudsonÕs Bay Company and the
Royal Engineer s Ñcommercial logging in British
Columbia did not begin until after the Fraser River
goldrush of 1858. In the early years of the industry,
deforestation and salmon-habitat damage tended 
to be localized and fairly small-scale by todayÕs 
standards. Logging was dangerous and labour inten -
sive, and relied on simple technologies, donkeys,
horses and oxen.
Steam-powered log-hauling equipment radically
altered the industry, as did the use of railroads to
carry logs to tidewater. It was not until after World
War II that large-scale logging began to cut deep into
the landscape, aided by gas-powered saws, logging
trucks, and networks of roadways that cut deeper into
the forest every year. As the easily-accessible timber
dwindled, roads were punched further up the moun -
tainsides and deeper into the coastal inlets. 9 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
“Even the trees depend on the salmon.
I t ’s been estimated that as much as 30%
or more of the nitrogen that used to
come to these forests came from the
salmon and that’s a lot. If you think
about taking away 30% of the fertilizer
from a corn field or a soybean crop,
t h a t ’s a very significant amount of
growth foreclosed and opportunity lost. ” 
—D r. Michael Soule, Department of Environmental Studies, 
University of California at Santa Cruz, Greenpeace video, August, 1998

Industrial Destruction Escalates 
By 1960, about three billion board feet of timber 
was being removed from British ColumbiaÕs forests,
almost all of it from the coast. By the late 1980s, 
the cut had more than doubled. Almost half the
provincial forest has been logged. Most of that 
logging has occurred in valley bottoms, in and around
the riparian zone that is such a critical corridor in 
the ancient exchange of nutrients between the land
and the sea.
Throughout its history on this coast, industrial
forestry has consisted almost exclusively of clearcut -
ting, a practice in which all the timber from a forest is
removed, in large blocks, on the theory that planta -
tions can replace, and even improve, the ÒproductiveÓ
capacity of the forest. Even if this were true, it is
based on the assumption that one economic valu e Ñ
merchantable timbe rÑmust take precedence over all
others. This is a perfectly ÒrationalÓ viewpoint, from 
a forest-company perspective, and it was quickly
adopted by the BC government, which owns about
94% of all the land in British Columbia.
Skewed V a l u e s
From the earliest days of BC forest policy, timber 
has been seen as the only forest component of any
worth, or at least the component that must be 
afforded the highest priority of resource allocation. 
It is a viewpoint that is bolstered by an unbridled faith
that science, engineering and Òresource managementÓ
will provide remedies for the acknowledged impacts
of industrial forest practices, either by plantations,
fish hatcheries, spawning channels, or other rehabili -
tative measures.The problem with industrial forest practices 
is that in their execution, the ancient relationship
between fish and trees is disrupted beyond recogni -
tion, and ecological and hydrological processes 
that took thousands of years to evolve are broken.
Decades of studies, commissions, investigations 
and research have proven that conventional 
logging practices unavoidably alter the necessary
requirements of healthy salmon habitat. 
Clearcutting Kills Salmon
When forest cover and streamside vegetation 
is removed, water temperature increases, and the 
egg-to-alevin ratio declines. When upland forests are
clearcut, streambanks become destabilized and 
soil stability is undermined, reducing once-clear
streams and rivers to muddy waterways. Under these
conditions, fry-to-smolt survival ratios diminish.
Surges in water volume and velocity tear out large
organic woody debris, eliminating rearing habitat,
shelter and nutrients. The very structure of a stream
is radically altered. The density of suspended solids
increases, smothering salmon egg nests in silt and
mud. Nutrient supplies dry up. Salmon disappear.N O W  O R  N E V E R 1 0
“......salmonid populations may decline
after logging because of detrimental
changes in physical habitat. These
changes include excessive sedimenta-
tion, less dissolved oxygen and elevated
temperature, loss of large woody debris,
collapsed stream banks and decreased
channel stability. ” 
—M u r p h y , Heifetz, Johnson et. al. National Marine Fisheries Service in the Canadian
Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Science, Vol. 43

Decades of Mounting Destruction 
Damage of this kind is not limited to the brief 
duration of logging activity, but can continue to cause
cumulative and persistent damage over several
decades.
The proximity of logging to a salmon-bearing
stream is a factor that determines only the time it will
take for impacts to become evident. When an ancient
forest is removed from a mountainside, it may take
years for the root systems of the former forest to 
finally give way in landslides that expose steep slopes
to barren rock that had been covered since the last ice
age. ÒTorrentingÓ in high-elevation gulleys disrupts
the hydrology of watersheds that had been stable for
thousands of years.
The size of a clearcut is also often irrelevant to
impacts clearcutting produces. Studies in Oregon
watersheds, conducted over a 34-year-period, demon -
strate that there is little difference between the health
of watersheds that have been completely clearcut and
watersheds that have been subjected to only 25%
clearcutting. In both cases, water volume and velocity
during peak discharges were 50% higher than they
were prior to clearcutting, and abnormal surges 
in volume and velocity persisted for 25 years after 
logging had been completed.
Road Construction: Building a Path to Crisis
It is not just the cutting of trees that disrupts soil 
stability and watershed hydrology. Logging roads
often do just as much damage. Logging and road
building, even in side valleys, produce downstream
impacts in salmon habitat that are not confined to the
tributaries. Mud and sediments choke the tributaries,
and bedload sediments are carried into the main -
stream river. Creeks and rivers suffer ÒblowoutÓ Ñ
persistent flash-floods caused by the simple fact that
there is little left to hold back the rai nÑand main -
stem rivers become widened and shallow. Winter
freshets, by their very ferocity, destroy egg nests, and
kill salmon fry and over-wintering juvenile salmon.1 1 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
Scotia River clearcut. Inter f o r, 
1996-97. Streamside protection
zone requirements in B.C. are 
woefully inadequate under the Forest Practices Code. The thin lines
of trees left to shelter the streams
often fall victim to blow-down.
( M c A l l i s t e r )
Feeder creeks and salmon streams
less than 1.5 metres in width
receive no protection at all under
B . C . ’s forestry regulations. ( P a w l i e ? ? ? ? ? )

On the San Juan River on Vancouver Island, 
during a period of long-term and precipitous declines
in coho and steelhead populations, 428 landslides
were recorded in the San Juan watershed. Also on
Vancouver Island, salmon populations on the Gordon
River underwent similar declines during a period 
in which 495 landslides occurred throughout the
watershed, mainly a result of collapsing logging roads.
Up the Fraser Valley, at Jones Creek, after several
decades of public investment in artificial spawning
channels for pink and chum salmon, a series of 
20-year-old logging roads collapsed in 1993, causing
the spawning channels to fill with mud. Since 1993,
efforts at staunching the losses have been hampered
because the spawning channels keep filling with 
sediment.
A Perilous Future
Just as conventional logging causes long-term, 
persistent damage to salmon habitat, salmon 
populations often take decades to recover, if at all. 
Not only does the forest itself rely on nutrients 
from salmon carcasses, but salmon fry rely on these
nutrients as well. As the number of spawners
declines, the nutrients available to salmon fry also
diminishes, causing a downward spiral in the 
spawning population, exacerbated by persistent 
disruptions to spawning and rearing habitat. When
riparian vegetation and forest canopy re-emerges, 
it is not the same as it was before logging. It is not unlike the bleak forest that salmon first encountered
when they recolonized this coast after the ice age. 
It can take a century or more for such badly-damaged
riparian zones to recover.
British Columbians have been told that loggingÕs
Òbad old daysÓ are gone. Most British Columbians
believe that the days of large-scale clearcuts, and log -
ging down to streambanks, are over. Unfortunately,
these things are not true, and the remaining,
unlogged watersheds of the coast are in peril.
The Consequences 
of Clearcutting
Abdicating Responsibility 
Until the late 1980s, it was common practice in
British Columbia to clearcut forests without regard to
the presence of salmon-bearing streams. Logging
damage to salmon streams occurred as a rul e Ñrather
than the exception to the rul eÑeven though CanadaÕs
Fisheries Act contained provisions that clearly out -
lawed damage to salmon habitat, and provided severe
penalties for violating the law. The law was rarely
enforced. Hillsides were clearcut from summit to
streambank, and the damage these practices inflicted
on salmo nÑdamage that was obvious to aboriginalN O W  O R  N E V E R 1 2
“Throughout the North Coast of B.C. 
forest harvesting and related road 
development has been and continues to
be the most widespread land use 
activity adversely affecting fish habitat. ” 
— Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Coho Response Team Final Report, 1998“Because recovery of fish habitat from 
the effects of extensive logging in 
a watershed may take a century or more,
r e c o v e r y may never be complete 
if forests are clearcut harvested and
watersheds are disturbed extensively on
rotation cycles of about 100 years. ” 
— United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 
Report to Congress, Anadramous Fish Habitat Assessment. January, 1995.

1 3 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
people, fishermen, and environmentalist sÑwas 
routinely justified on a variety of grounds. Lack of
enforcement was routinely explained as a conse -
quence of conflicting jurisdiction s ÑBC owned 
the land, forest-tenure holders were ostensibly 
responsible for their conduct, the federal government
maintained jurisdiction over fish habita tÑand on 
it went. 
The consequences of conventional logging were
said to be easily remedied by engineering, resource-
management techniques, salmon hatcheries and 
artificial spawning channels. It wasnÕt until 1988 that
decades of contrary evidence, and significant public
pressure, resulted in amendments to government 
policy. That year, federal fisheries officials, forest
companies and provincial agencies adopted the
ÒCoastal Fisheries Forestry Guidelines ,Ó which were
intended to reconcile the conflicting purposes of
industrial forestry and healthy salmon habitat.
Vo l u n t a r y Guidelines Don’t W o r k
The guidelines were based on the 1987 federal habitat
policy described as Òno net loss ,Ó which presumes that
natural salmon habitat should be protected, but losses
can nonetheless be made up by the creation of artifi -
cial habitat. Similarly, the provincial government had
embarked on a policy of integrating the management
of various forest resources.
The Coastal Fisheries Forestry Guidelines failed to
meet even their own modest objectives.Unveiled to a skeptical public, the guidelines were
accompanied by government promises to review their
effectiveness. Four years after the guidelines were
adopted by the forest industry, the BC environment
ministry conducted a study to evaluate whether the
guidelines were working.
In March, 1992, an independent environmental
consulting firm, D. Tripp Biological Consultants, 
was retained to conduct an audit of coastal forest
operations to determine what the guidelines had
achieved. The audit included a review of 21 cut blocks,
randomly selected on Vancouver Island.
The Tripp report found that in the four years 
that followed the adoption of the Coastal Fisheries
Forestry Guidelines, half the waterways in the 
surveyed cut blocks had been rendered unstable as a
result of logging. ÒComplete habitat lossÓ occurred 
on 12 streams in the surveyed cut blocks, while 
another 21 waterways sustained either partial or
minor habitat loss.
After years of public protests, the glare of inter -
national scrutiny, and the obvious failure of both 
federal and provincial governments to protect salmon
habitat, the BC government, in 1993, unveiled 
its intention to introduce a new regulatory regime in
forestry, known as the Forest Practices Code.Minimum Legal Widths of Reserve Zones & Management Zones
Riparian Class Avg Channel Width (m) R e s e r ve Zone Width (m) Management Zone Width (m)
S 1– large rivers 1 0 0 0 1 0 0
S 1– not large rivers > 2 0 5 0 2 0
S 2 > 5 ≤2 0 3 0 2 0
S 3 1 .5≤5 2 0 2 0
S 4 < 1 . 5 0 3 0
S 5(no fish) > 3 0 3 0
S 6(no fish) 3 0 2 0
S o u r ce: Forest Practices Code Riparian Management Area Guidebook , December 1995

A New Era in Forestr y ?
The Forest Practices Code was presented as the 
foundation for a Ònew eraÓ in forest practices in the
province. The BC government spent hundreds of
thousands of dollars on television, radio and news -
paper advertisements, pledging that the Forest
Practices Code would significantly restrict the way
logging would be allowed. One such advertisement, in
a December, 1993 edition of The Vancouver Province
newspaper, boasted: ÒThe massive clearcutting of the
past will no longer be acceptable. And in sensitive
areas Ñsuch as wildlife habitat areas and near fish-
bearing stream sÑclearcuts will be outlawed .Ó
When the Forest Practices Code was unveiled, BCÕs
premier was Mike Harcourt. He repeatedly assured
weary voters, and skeptical observers in the United
States and Europe, that the loggingÕs bad old days
were gone. At the Globe 94 Conference in Vancouver,
Mr. Harcourt said: ÒWe are reducing the size of
clearcuts, and we are banning clearcuts where neces -
sary to protect critical wildlife habitat, fish-bearing
streams and other sensitive forest values .Ó In July,
1994, the Washington Times reported: ÒWide chunks
of forest the size of football fields are no longer cut . Ó
The Forest Practices Code of British Columbia Act
was finally adopted in 1995. Mindful that CanadaÕs
international reputation had been badly tarnished by
television images of denuded coastal mountains and
frequent protests by environmentalists, Canadian
embassies praised the new regime. California consul-
general Robert Richard, in a March, 1996 letter to
Santa Monica city council, hailed BCÕs new forest
regime as Òreplacing conventional logging methods
with new leading edge approaches .Ó
The British Columbia public believed that the
Forest Practices Code would severely curtail clearcut -
ting. In a November, 1996 poll conducted for the
Sierra Legal Defence Fund, 71.6 of respondents said
they believed clearcutting had either been brought to
an end in the province, or was being phased out, or
was otherwise rarely employed as a logging practice.N O W  O R  N E V E R 1 4
Salmon stream in Green Inlet. 
B . C . ’s Forest Practices Code does
not apply to private land logging
and streams rich in salmon can be
c l e a r cut right to the banks if 
located on privately owned land. 
(Ian Hunter/Greenpeace)

Unfortunately, nothing of the kind had happened.
Clearcutting continued much as it had before, with
one noteworthy exception. As Premier Harcourt and
other high-profile salesmen of the Code repeatedly
said, the size of individual clearcuts was coming
down. What they didnÕt say was that this was arguably
worse for the environment than what was previously
the case.
Because the province continued to allow companies
to log the same volume of trees as before, all that
smaller clearcuts accomplished was to fragment a
wider area of land. More roads and more cut blocks
were required to get the same amount of wood out.
That means that until the government reduces the
Annual Allowable Cut, fragmentation of the rainforest
and threats to salmon and other forest-dependent
wildlife will continue.
The Forest Practices Code: Another Failure
In a review of harvest plans for 10,000 cut blocks
approved by the BC government over an 18-month
period after the Forest Practices Code became law, the
Sierra Legal Defence Fund (SLDF) conducted an 
audit which found that clearcutting continued as the
only type of logging practice underway in 92% 
of the cut blocks. In the forest ministryÕs sprawling
Vancouver region, 97.8% of the cut blocks were 
being clearcut.
The Forest Practices Code did not require clearcuts
to be smaller than football fields (which are less than
a hectare). The Forest Practices Code allows clearcuts
up to 60 hectares in size. Even so, the SLDF audit
found cut blocks in excess of 100 hectares in size. 
As for salmon-habitat protection, most small forest
streams were being clearcut to the streambank. 
SLDF field biologist John Werring concluded: 
ÒIn virtually every area being harvested there are
rivers and streams that support salmon and/or 
trout and other important fish species. These streams
are being systematically destroyed by clearcut 
logging practices .ÓIn February, 1997, SLDF published a second, 
more in-depth audit of forestry in British Columbia
under the Forest Practices Code. In a review of 
logging ÒprescriptionsÓ that had been applied in the
vicinity of 1,086 streams, the BC forests ministry 
had approved plans that resulted in the complete
elimination of riparian areas by clearcutting. In field
investigations, SLDF staff found that 10% of the
streams within cut blocks were not identified in
clearcutting plans submitted to the forests ministry
for approval, and one-third of the streams that were
identified were improperly classified. Of the streams
that were identified in forest company cutting plans,
forest ministry officials permitted yarding timber
across half of them.1 5 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
“The real concern is the extent to which
our forest streams continue to be
c l e a r cut up to both banks, while the 
logging companies claim to be in full
compliance with the Forest Practices
Code. Of the 1,086 streams reviewed,
the Ministry of Forests had approved 
897 for the complete elimination of the
riparian area by clear c u t t i n g . ”
— Stream Protection Under the Code: The Destruction Continues. 
Sierra Legal Defence Fund. February, 1997

N O W  O R  N E V E R 1 6
In 1998, the B.C. Provincial government under-
took its own assessment of stream protection and 
compliance with the Code. The Ministry of Forests
selected a sample of 96 cutblocks within six coastal
forest districts. The field investigation studied 355
streams within the selected logging blocks. In fish-
bearing streams between 1.5 and 5 metres in width,
where a riparian protection zone of 20 metres is
mandatory, the Ministry study found a compliance
rate of only 65% by the forest companies. 22 of the 
43 streams in the category were Òmisclassified .Ó
Ultimately, 15 of these streams were not protected and
the riparian zones were logged.
In addition, the government study determined that
18 out of 42 streams that should have been identified
by the forest companies as supporting fish were
underclassified as Ònon-fish-bearing .Ó This led to the
dumping of wood debris in the streams, an activity
strictly prohibited if the companies had correctly 
classified the streams as fish-bearing.
In spite of mounting evidence that the Code needed
to be strengthened and more vigorously enforced, 
the B.C. governmentÕs response to continued stream
destruction by the logging industry was to weaken 
the Code even further. In April of 1998, reacting to
industry pressure, the government announced roll -
backs to ÒstreamlineÓ the Code. Claiming the changes
would only reduce paperwork and bureaucracy while not affecting environmental protection, the B.C. 
government implemented over 500 Òcost-cuttingÓ
slashes to the Code requirements. These included the
elimination of key planning measures and infor -
mation submissions which forest district managers
relied on to evaluate impacts related to logging and
road building. For instance, fish stream inventories
and terrain stability assessment reports no longer
require review by government staff. Nor will these
reports be made available to the public. Logging may
proceed even before fish streams have been properly
identified. In effect, the Ministry of Forests has
turned over almost all planning to company-paid
foresters and will allow the corporations to ÒapproveÓ
their own logging plans. The governmentÕs own
announcement of procedural changes included 
allowing the maximum soil disturbance requirements
to be exceeded during road construction, providing
the logging company includes plans for rehabilitation
to be undertaken after harvesting is completed. By
then, it may be too late to prevent stream damage.
And, in a dismal failure of government respon -
sibility to protect biodiversity, the Forest Practices
Code still does not apply to logging conducted on 
private lands. Endangered salmon stocks dependent
on streams running through private land receive 
no riparian protection at all, and all the worst and
most destructive logging practices can be undertaken
with impunity.Accuracy of Stream Classification
Number of Number of Number of Number of Total Number of
Stream Reaches Stream Reaches Stream Reaches Stream Reaches Stream Reaches
Stream Class A s s e s s e d Correctly Classified O v e rc l a s s i f i e d U n d e rc l a s s i f i e d Incorrectly Classified
S 1 1 8 1 8 0 0 0
S 2 2 9 2 3 0 6 6
S 3 4 3 2 1 0 2 2 2 2
S 4 4 2 2 0 4 1 8 2 2
S 5 3 3 2 1 0 1 2 1 2
S 6 1 9 0 1 6 3 8 1 9 * 2 7
A l l 3 5 5 2 6 6 1 2 * * 7 7 8 9
*Stream classified as S6 by the field teams, though operators had not previously classed them as streams.
**In addition to these were 25 watercourses classed as streams but subsequently determined by the field teams not to be streams.
S o u r ce: Forest Planning and Practices in Coastal Areas with Streams, Technical Report, Forest Practices Board. June 1998.

1 7 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
Another glaring deficiency of the Code relates 
to its provisions for leaving buffers of trees along fish
streams. The Code calls for 50-metre leave-strips 
of trees along fish rivers greater than 20 metres in
width. The buffers decline to 30 metres on streams 
5- to 20-metres in width, and to 20 metres on 
streams between 5 metres wide and 1.5 metres wide.
For streams less than 1.5 metres in width, the very
streams that often nurture runs of endangered coho
and steelhead salmon, the Code affords no protection
at all. Clearcutting these small streams right to the
banks is still allowed. Furthermore, even if there are
no fish present, these small creeks flow directly into
the larger streams where buffer zones are required.
This is a major flaw in the Forest Practices Code. 
It makes little or no provision for the protection of
forests alongside feeder streams and tributaries. This
leaves the door open for widespread logging-related
damage to smaller streams, which in turn carry 
sediments and debris into the allegedly ÒprotectedÓ
water bodies they empty into.
On national forest lands in the US Pacific
Northwest, far more protection is afforded fish 
habitat. Any fish-bearing river or stream regardless of
its width is required to have a 92-metre buffer 
strip of trees. All tributaries and creeks receive a
buffer zone at least half the size (46 metres) of the
zone along fish-bearing streams, and even seasonal
streams receive a 30-metre riparian protection zone. The bottom line is that Washington State offers 
more protection to non fish-bearing feeder creeks
than B.C. gives to our top salmon streams.
Even in the State of Alaska, which in recent years
has been denounced by the BC government for 
its alleged over-fishing of BC-bound salmon stocks,
30-metre buffer strips along all Class 1 fish streams
are required in all coastal state forests. And all 
Class 2 streams flowing into Class 1 streams, even
those where no fish are present, are afforded the
same protection. And while B.C.Õs Forest Practices
Code affords no protection at all to salmon streams
on private lands, Alaska will soon require 20-metre
buffer zones around Class A and Class B streams,
with some logging allowed on a single tree approval
basis.
With its neighbours making it a legal requirement to
do more to protect threatened and endangered fish
stocks, BC is hardly in a position to claim that it leads
the world with its forest practices.“ We need 100 metre buffer zones.
Salmon streams, and the forests around
them, should be sacrosanct. ” 
—Dennis Brown, former United Fishermen and Allied Workers Union President, 
currently Premier Glen Clark’s Special Advisor on Fisheries, in Forest Practices in British
C o l u m b i a —Not a World Class Act. B.C. Wild, 1994


N O W  O R  N E V E R 1 8
No Help From the Federal Government 
Meanwhile, the federal government was faring 
no better in meeting its objective of Òno net lossÓ of
fish habitat. The policy had undergone some refining
over the years, adding a further Ònet gainÓ objective 
to the Department of Fisheries and OceansÕ salmon-
habitat mandate. But a 1997 review of how successful
its policy had been in the decade since its adoption
resulted in a litany of complaints. There was lack of
consistency in DFOÕs approach to its Òno net lossÓ
mandate, and Òno net lossÓ was simply not being
achieved in the provinceÕs rural areas. The cumulative
effects of natural habitat loss were not being
addressed, no comprehensive mapping and inventory
system existed, and fisheries staff were labouring
under Òunmanageable workloads .Ó Internal DFO
assessments included these: ÒWe do not have enough
people, especially field staff,Ó and ÒProponents are 
not required to be responsible for repair and mainte -
nance of compensatory works for as long as their
impact exists .Ó
In December, 1997, a report by the Auditor-General
of Canada reached the same conclusions, describing
the federal governmentÕs ability to protect salmon
habitat as Òquestionable ,Ó given the BC governmentÕs
jurisdictional authority over land use and logging, 
and change Òdepends especially on BC being 
held accountable for its own habitat responsibilities .Ó
Meanwhile, Òno overall status report on salmon 
habitat is available to assess the impact of habitat loss
on the resource .Ó
I t ’s Now or Never
In 1998, a far more sweeping rejection of the status
quo was issued by an independent panel of advisors
to the Department of Fisheries and Oceans, which
concluded that DFOÕs policy Òhas not prevented 
habitat loss and degradation .Ó
Assigned to review the effectiveness of habitat-
protection measures in BC, the panellists were not
naive idealists. They included a former DFO Pacific
Regional Director-General, a former chairman of the
Pacific Salmon CommissionÕs Fraser Panel, the BCEnvironment MinistryÕs former Fisheries Branch
Director, and a former director of the Salmonid
Enhancement Program. The panel bluntly concluded
that ÒitÕs now or neverÓ for the salmon and issued the
following warning:
ÒThe salmonÕs lifeline is becoming more frayed
every day, and unless immediate and meaningful
action is taken, the wild salmon resource could suffer
a collapse from which it may never recover .Ó
The panelÕs report, titled ÒA Living Blueprint for 
BC Salmon Habitat ,Ó noted that at least 40% of BCÕs
forests have been logged without due attention to
salmon habitat, and the threats posed by conventional
logging practices continue.
ÒEven when mitigation or compensation for 
habitat loss is prescribed by regulators, rarely are the
results properly monitored and evaluated. Further -
more, we do not know how to mitigate or compensate
for all losses under all conditions (this shortcoming
heightens the importance of protecting the remaining
productive salmon habitat) . Ó
The panelists have identified a remedy critical to
the future of salmon. ÒProtecting the remaining pro -
ductive salmon habitatÓ is precisely what is required
to save the endangered salmon stocks of the Great
Bear Rainforest and salmon throughout B.C..
Taxpayers Fund the Wreck-It-Then-Fix-It Approach
Elaborate and costly habitat-loss remediation 
measures are an outgrowth of the same ideology that
has justified clearcut logging throughout this century.
It is an ideology that produced fish hatcheries, 
tree plantations, the Coastal Fisheries and Forestry
Guidelines, the Forest Practices Code, and most
recently, Forest Renewal BC (FRBC).
FRBC is based on the notion that clearcutting 
is justifiable, on the grounds that the ecosystems that
clearcutting destroys can be fixed, patched up, 
or simply replaced with tree plantations, artificial
spawning channels and a variety of public works. 
The folly of this approac hÑwrecking nature, and
then relying on publicly-funded engineering and 
ÒscienceÓ to fix i tÑis matched only by the irony of it.

1 9 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
Not only has the approach failed repeatedly through
the years, but it has become a function of the very
damage it is ostensibly designed to fix: FRBC is a
reinvestment of stumpage fees in habitat restoration
projects.
In order to fund those projects, the forests ministry
allows clearcut logging, which destroys more habitat,
which requires massive expenditures of public funds,
which come from stumpage rates applied to forest
firms engaged in clearcut logging. And on it goes.
Budget approvals for the 1997/98 fiscal year 
illustrate the cost to the taxpayers of this approach.
FRBC budgeted $32,300,000. for instream and 
riparian restoration programmes and a further
$69,500,000 for upland restoration activities includ -
ing road rehabilitation and slope stabilization.
Related to Forest Renewal BC is a sister initiative
known as the Watershed Restoration Program. 
In 1997, BC environment ministry biologists working
for the Watershed Restoration Program completed 
an in-depth examination of the consequences 
of industrial forestry on the coast, and the public
resources that will be required to restore logging-
related damage to coastal watersheds.
ÒThe scale of past streambank logging in the
province will likely result in costs to rehabilitate
stream s Ñat about $50,000 to $60,000 per kilome -
tre, where feasibl eÑthat are equivalent in magnitude
to the costs required for the province-wide stabiliza -
tion of hillslopes ,Ó the study concluded. ÒThe backlog
of logging-impacted watersheds with significant 
road failures and erosion is immense. Preliminary
estimates indicate that it would cost several hundred
million dollars to manage all impacted hillslopes
because there are an estimated 130,000 km of non-
status and abandoned roads .Ó
The study concluded that restoration of damaged
coastal riparian areas will end up costing the public
about $15,000 per hectare. Based on an estimate 
of 2,000 streams that have been logged to the 
streambanks for an average distance of 10 kilometres,
Ò20,000 kilometres may require stream and/or 
riparian rehabilitation, or equivalent in cost to hillslope restoration (there are 2,576 known salmon
streams alone in British Columbia). This equates 
to a potential need of 20 to 40 years of hillslope and
stream rehabilitation in British Columbia at
$50Ð$100 million per annum . Ó
The Choice is Ours
The long-term public costs of conventional 
logging practice s Ñclearcut loggin gÑare staggering.
The cost that clearcut logging has imposed upon 
the coastÕs salmon populations, to environmental
integrity, and to ancient, fully-functioning ecosystems,
has been immense.
As the 1990s draw to a close in British Columbia,
the forest industry is now moving in on the last, 
pristine watersheds of the west coast temperate 
rainforest. The 69 remaining large, intact rainforest
valleys of the Great Bear Rainforest are slated for 
road building and logging in the next 5 to 10 years.
The forests that shelter the salmon and the salmon
that are vital to the survival of grizzly bears, eagles
and ancient trees are under siege. In the words of the
Living Blueprint for BC Salmon Habitat, ÒitÕs now or
never .Ó Will we act to protect this global treasure? Or
will we be the generation that allows it to slip through
our fingers and vanish forever?
“No other place in the world has such 
a fantastic group of species that links the
land with the ocean the way salmon do.
I t ’s such a tragedy to see these species
decline to such a point. ” 
—D r. Michael Soule, Centre for Conservation Biology, Greenpeace video, August 1998.

N O W  O R  N E V E R 2 0
Ellerslie Lake estuary in the Great
Bear Rainforest near Bella Bella.
One of a complex of 4 lakes includ-
ing the Mooto, Ingram and Pollalie,
slated for clearcutting by W e s t e r n
Forest Products. ( G r e e n p e a c e / L e n z )
Salmon are an absolutely essential
component in the diets of coastal
bear populations. Clearcut logging
that threatens salmon populations
threatens, in turn, the very sur v i v a l
of bears, eagles and other wildlife
dependent on the rich salmon runs.
( K o z a k )S o l u t i o n s :
¥ According to a report by internationally renowned 
conservation biologist Dr. Michael Soule, up to 45% of the
temperate rainforest should be deferred from logging until
we can determine exactly how much is needed to protect
rare and threatened species from extinction. Otherwise,
Dr. Soule maintains, if B.C. continues with the policy of
protecting only 12% of the land base, up to 50% of the
rainforestÕs species could be threatened with extinction.
¥ Greenpeace is calling for protection of the remaining
large, intact coastal temperate rainforest valleys and an
end to industrial clearcutting and the construction of new
roads in B.C .Õs ancient temperate rainforests.
¥ Greenpeace is calling for immediate improvements in
both the standards and enforcement of the Forest Practices
Code throughout B.C. To ensure the survival of salmon
runs at risk, it is imperative that riparian protection
zones in B.C. be immediately upgraded to standards
equivalent to those in place in Washington State.
Riparian protection zones of 100 metres are essential for
all fish bearing rivers and protection zones of 50 metres
minimum are required for all feeder creeks and streams.

2 1 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
S O U R C E S
1 .Richard Hebda and Cathy Whitlock, Environmental History,
in The Rainforests of Home: Profile of a North American Bioregion,
Island Press, Washington, D.C., 1997.
2 .Wayne Suttles and Diamond Jenness, Katzie Ethnographic Notes
and The Faith of a Coast Salish Indian , Anthropology in BC Memoirs
Nos. 2 and 3, British Columbia Provincial Museum, 1955.
3 .Sharon Levy, Ultimate Sacrifice, New Scientist, September 6, 1997.
4 .The Wilderness Society, Pacific Salmon and Federal Lands: A
Regional Analysis, Wilderness Society Bolle Center for Forest
Ecosystem Management, Washington, D.C., 1993.
5 .Ecotrust, Pacific GIS, and Conservation International, An Atlas of
Peoples and Place, Portland, Ore.,1995.
6 .Cornelius Groot and Leo Margolis, Pacific Salmon Life Histories,
University of British Columbia Press, 1991.
7 .John Millar, Nick Page, Melody Farrell, Barry Chilibeck, and
Matthew Child, Establishing Fisheries Management and Reser v e
Zones in Settlement Areas of Coastal British Columbia, C a n a d i a n
Manuscript Report, of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, No. 2351,
1 9 9 7 .
8 .D. Tripp, A. Nixon, R. Dunlop, The Application and Effectiveness 
of the Coastal Fisheries Forestry Guidelines in Selected Cut Blocks on
Vancouver Island. M i n i s t r y of Environment, Lands and Parks, 1992.
9 .P.A. Slaney and A.D. Martin, The Watershed Restoration Program
of British Columbia: Accelerating Natural Recovery Processes. Wa t e r
Quality Res. J. Canada, Volume 32, No. 2, 1997.
10. Sierra Legal Defence Fund, British Columbia’s Clear Cut Code: An
SLDF Report, N o v e m b e r , 1996.
11. Sierra Legal Defence Fund, Stream Protection Under the Code:
The Destruction Continues. F e b r u a r y, 1997.
12. Quadra Planning Consultants, No Net Loss of Habitat: Assessing
A c h i e v e m e n t —Workshop Proceedings. Fraser River Action Plan/
Department of Fisheries and Oceans, February, 1997.
13. Auditor-General of Canada, Report of the Auditor-General of
Canada to the House of Commons, Chapter 28, Fisheries and Oceans
C a n a d a —Pacific Salmon: Sustainability of the Resource Base.
D e c e m b e r , 1997.
14. Independent Panel report, Living Blueprint for BC Salmon Habitat,
Pacific Salmon Foundation, 1010– 409 Granville Street, V a n c o u v e r ,
BC, 1998.15. Forest Planning and Practices in Coastal Areas with Streams,
Technical Report, Forest Practices Board. June 1998.
16. Report to Congress, Anadramous Fish Habitat Assessment,
J a n u a r y, 1995. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific
Northwest Research Station, Alaska Region.
17. House of Commons, Issue No. 16, January 25, 1993. Minutes of
Proceedings, Standing Committee on Forestry and Fisheries.
18. Clayoquot Biosphere Project, Upper Clayoquot River, Salmon
Habitat Reconnaissance. 1993.
19. Watershed Talk, Fraser River Aboriginal Fisheries Secretariat.
20. Escapement Data 1987–1997, Department of Fisheries and
Oceans, Pacific Biological Station.
21. Pacific Region Salmon Stock Management Plan, Discussion
Document, 1986. Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Volumes: D-
Butedale, E-Bella Bella, F-Bella Coola, G-Rivers Inlet and Smiths Inlet.
22. Salmon Expectations 1998, North Coast Areas 1-6, Central Coast
Areas 7-10, Department of Fisheries and Oceans.
23. 1998 Forest Development Tracking List for the Midcoast, 
North Coast and Kalum Forest Districts, July 1998. John Nelson,
David Suzuki Foundation.
24. Conservation Areas of Interest on the Mainland Coast of BC,
Sierra Club and Raincoast Conservation Society, April 1996.
25. Canadian Technical Report of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 
No. 1967.
26. Speaking for the Salmon, Workshop Proceedings, Simon Fraser
U n i v e r s i t y , Edited by Dr. Patricia Gallaugher and Laurie W o o d .
J a n u a r y, 1998.
27. Geographic Distribution of Salmon Spawning Streams of British
Columbia, I.V. Williams and T.J. Brown, Department of Fisheries and
Oceans, Pacific Biological Station. March, 1994.
28. Escapement Estimates, North Coast Management Areas 1-10,
Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Prince Rupert. January, 1997.
29. BC Investments in Fisheries Conservation, Restoration and
Enhancement, Budget Approvals for Fiscal Year 1997/98. B.C.
Fisheries Secretariat, October, 1997.
30. Ministry of Forests, News Release/Backgrounder, April 2, 1998.
Forest Practices Code Amendments .

The Canadian Raincoast
Undeveloped rainforest watersheds over 5,000 hectares 
(12,500 acres) and ecologically important islands 
and watersheds under 5,000 hectares in Coastal British
Columbia. N O W  O R  N E V E R 2 2
Note: This is a preliminary map.
Some watersheds or other 
significant areas may have been
omitted. Cartography by Baden
Cross, Raincoast Conser v a t i o n
F o u n d a t i o n .Haida GwaiiA l a s k a
Pacific Ocean
Vancouver Island
Washington, 
U S A

2 3 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
1 Lower W a l b r a n
2 Clayoquot V a l l e y
3 Upper Bolson
4 S y d n e y
5 E a s t
6 K l a s k i s h
7 S h u s h a r t i e
8 D o u g l a s
9 Sims V a l l e y
1 0Upper Elaho
1 1 N o r t h
1 2B o u l d e r
1 3S a l a l
1 4Upper Stafford
1 5 K w a l a t e
1 6A h n u h a t i
1 7Upper Kakweikan
1 8 A h t a
1 9Wa u m p
2 0C a n o e
2 1 Ta k u s h
2 2 S m o k e h o u s e
2 3 N e k i t e
2 4P i e r- R h i n d
2 5L o c k h a r t - G o r d o n
2 6A l l a r d
2 7J o h n s t o n
2 8 S a n d e l l
2 9D a l l e r y
3 0D o o s
3 1P h i n n e y - R e e v e
3 2A s h l u l m
3 3 A m b a c k
3 4 Elizabeth Lake
3 5K o e y e
3 6Cold Lake
3 7Namu Lakes
3 8 I c k n a
3 9 Ta l h e o / H o t s p r i n g s
4 0 K ’ i s k w a t s t a
4 1N u s a s h
4 2Jump Across
4 3 S w a l l o p
4 4 H u m p b a c k
4 5 S u t s l e m
4 6 S k o w q u i l t z
4 7N a s c a l l
4 8G r e e n
4 9 I s t a
5 0 P a r a d i s e
5 1 Four Lakes
5 2Shack Bay/Ripley Bay
5 3R o s c o e
5 4 Q u a r t c h a5 5N e e k a s
5 6E l l e r s l i e
5 7Ingram Mooto/ 
P o l l a l i e / We s t e r n
5 8 Pooley Island
5 9Bloomfield Lake
6 0Carter Lake
6 1N i a s
6 2A r n o u p
6 3Green Inlet
6 4Yule Lake
6 5 C a n o o n a
6 6 K h u t z e
6 7 A a l t a n h a s h
6 8 K l e k a n e
6 9K i l t u i s h
7 0K o w e s a s
7 1B a r r i e
7 2 Wa h o o
7 3B r i m / O w y a c u m i s h
7 4Bish, Emsley, Jesse
7 5 G i l t o y e e s
7 6F o c h e
7 7Q u a a l
7 8 L o w e - G a m b l e
7 9E c s t a l l
8 0 Khtada Lake
8 1K h y e x
8 2E x c h a m s i c k s
8 3C h a m b e r s
8 4J o h n s t o n
8 5B u r t o n
8 6I k n o u k
8 7S t a g o o
8 8O l h
8 9 K s h w a n
9 0S e c u r i t y
9 1G o v e r n m e n t
9 2T l e l l
9 3H a n c o c k
9 4O t u n
9 5J a l u n
9 6B e r e s f o r d
9 7O t a r d
9 8 C a v e
9 9C o a t e s
1 0 0 Ursus V a l l e y
Verney Falls in the northern Great
Bear Rainforest. (Ian Hunter/Greenpeace)
First Nations people have depended
on the salmon for millenia.
H a rvesting at Moricetown on the
Bulkley River. ( K o z a k )

N O W  O R  N E V E R 2 4
E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N
S o c k e y e
Alias: R e d
Small (avg. 7kg) but valued mainstay 
of the commercial fishing industry in B.C.
C h u m
Alias: D o g
Abundant and widely distributed; 
often preferred smoked.
S t e e l h e a d
Actually a sea-going rainbow trout. 
Highly prized sport fish. Many runs at risk.C h i n o o k
Alias: Spring, Tyee, King
Largest Pacific salmon, 
prized sport fish, (up to 57kg), 
increasingly rare
C o h o
Alias: S i l v e r
Up to 14kg; valued sports fish, 
spawns in small streams, 
many runs at high risk.
P i n k
Alias: H u m p b a c k
Smallest Pacific salmon but most abundant.
Status of Endangered Salmon 
in Threatened Rainforest V a l l e y s
The following provides an overview of pristine 
or largely undeveloped valleys on the Mid-coast and
North coast of British Columbia which are slated 
for roading and logging. Salmon species present in
each valley are listed. Historic abundance is 
compared with the most up-to-date information on
salmon counts. 
The figures given are for escapement count s Ñthe
total number of salmon that have ÒescapedÓ capture
in the commercial, sport and aboriginal fisheries 
and have returned to their stream of origin to spawn
(reproduce). The next generation of salmon is 
dependent on healthy escapements. Runs below 100
fish are generally considered to be at high risk of
extinction. However, even counts of ÒzeroÓ salmon
spawners do not mean the run is extinct. Counting
methods used by the Department of Fisheries vary
widely from field staff walking the streams to aerial
surveys so the numbers are not necessarily accurate.
Extinctions can be prevented, but only if government
and industry are prepared to act now to prevent 
further loss.
It is important to remember that many of these
runs of salmon were small in numbers to begin with.
While some of the large, commercially targeted 
runs of pink and sockeye salmon can number in the  hundreds of thousands, a good run of salmon in a
coho stream could be as small as 1,500. What matters
is that the fish are ther eÑin numbers that the
ecosystem needs. Their presence is a vital link in the
chain of life. Their loss could unleash consequences
we can only imagine.
These unique runs of salmon cannot be easily
replaced with hatcheries or artificial propagation
methods. Every salmon returns to spawn in the
stream where it was born, and in every stream each
species is genetically unique, adapted over millenia to
the conditions of that particular stream. As the
Department of Fisheries notes, eggs from southern
sockeye stocks donÕt incubate successfully in colder
northern streams. According to DFO, ÒMan-made 
or natural disasters which wipe out a particular 
stocks are devastating, since it takes tens of thousands 
of years for evolution to create the proper genetic 
program for a stock . Ó
Dramatic declines in salmon abundance have
occurred in all valleys and across almost all species in
these forested rivers and streams. The damage 
caused to stream habitat by industrial logging in the
last remaining pristine valleys of the Great Bear
Rainforest could seal the fate of these threatened
salmon runs. 

2 5 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
Historical Data 1950s A v g 1960s A v g 1970s A v g 1 9 8 0 1 9 8 1 1 9 8 2 1 9 8 3
C h u m 1 3 , 0 3 0 2 1 , 6 9 4 6 , 4 2 8 1 , 4 2 7 1 , 8 9 0 3 , 5 2 8 1 , 8 0 0
Note: The above historical run-size figures are for the combined escapement of chum from 11 streams including the Aaltanhash
Target escapement: 20,100
Species Summary Avg. 1983 – 1 9 9 2 H i gh / Ye a r 1 9 9 3 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C h u m 3 7 3,500 / 1967 3 5 2 5 5 5 2 5 2 0
C o h o 8 5 3 3,500 / 1967 3 8 5 2 7 5 2 2 0 1 2 5 1 0 0
C h i n o o k 0 400 / 1963 n . o . n . o .
P i n k 2 , 0 5 5 15,000 / 1964 2 , 5 0 0 3 , 1 0 0
S o c k e y e 2 0 0 600 / 1989 n . o . 9
Department of Fisheries Abbreviations 
for all stream data:
Non Observed = n.o. Blank spaces indicate no data provided by DFO
Not Inspected = n.i.
Unknown = unk.
Present = pstThe Aaltanhash estuary on the north coast is an important
tidal holding area for migrating fish. A  beautiful river, it has
great potential for sportsfishing use. The river is navigable
by canoe or kayak. It has hotsprings and high tourism 
potential. The remnants of an old native fish trap are visible.
Resident wildlife species of note include grizzly bears, 
wolves and deer.
Status of Logging
The forest tenure in the Aaltanhash is Tree Farm Licence 
25, which is held by Western Forest Products (WFP).
We s t e r n ’ s original FDP was submitted with a 60 day public
review period. The FDP was rejected due to the omission 
of assessments under the Operational Planning Regulations.
WFP is submitting a new Forest Development Plan (FDP) 
for the area.Status of Salmon
Chinook: The Department of Fisheries reported a high of 400
fish in 1963. No chinook were observed in the river in 1996
or 1997.
Pink: In 1964, a DFO count of pinks set the number on the
A a l t a n h a s h ’ s spawning grounds at 15,000 fish. In 1996 pink
salmon numbered only 2,500. 
Sockeye: Resident sockeye spawners numbered 600 in 1989.
In 1997, DFO found 9 fish.
Coho: Between 1983 and 1992, there an average of 853 coho
spawners were in the Aaltanhash, down from a maximum of
3,500 in 1964. By 1997, there were only 100 coho spawning
in the river.
Chum: In 1967 there were 3,500 spawning chum. By 1997,
the count rested at 20.
Steelhead: The Aaltanhash is home to winter-run steelhead,
but no stock assessments were made available.Aaltanhash River 
Endangered: Chum salmon

N O W  O R  N E V E R 2 6
Recent Counts 1 9 8 7 1 9 8 8 1 9 8 9 1 9 9 0 – 1 9 9 2 1 9 9 3 – 1 9 9 7
C o h o n . o . 7 n . o . u n k . n . i .
Species Summary Avg. 1983 – 1 9 9 2 H i gh / Ye a r 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C h u m 4 1 2 1,500 / 1980 1 2 0 2 3 0 1 0 0 n . i
P i n k 2 3 1 2,400 / 1985 1 0 0 n . i . n . i .This creek on the Mid-coast is in the traditional territory 
of the Oweekeno First Nation. The beautiful lagoon at the
entrance to the valley provides sheltered anchorage to 
recreational boaters and excellent crab fishing. Mudflats in
the estuary are used by waterfowl, the creek has a plentiful
run of cutthroat trout and the upper valley is used by grizzly
bears. The creek is home to endangered coho salmon.
Status of Logging
The forest tenure in this area is held under a forest license
by International Forest Products (Interfor). There is no 
Forest Development Plan at time of writing, but one could be
submitted quickly, depending on whether Interfor agrees to
logging moratoria in other valleys.Status of Salmon
Coho: In 1963, 750 resident coho were counted. In 1987 and
again in 1989 no coho were observed. No coho assessments
were made between 1993 and 1997.
Chum: A high of 1,500 chum spawned in the Allard in 1980.
By 1994, DFO’s count was down to only 120 spawners. The
1996 count was 100 chum salmon and the river was not
inspected for chum in 1997.
Pink: The average number of pink spawners in the creek
between 1983 and 1992 was 231 salmon. The maximum
recorded was 2,400 fish in 1985. By 1991 there were only 7
spawners recorded. The creek was last inspected in 1994,
when the pink count totaled 100.
Chinook and Sockeye: Not present.
Steelhead: Resident, but no counts.Allard Creek
Endangered: Coho salmon

2 7 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
Recent Counts 1 9 8 7 1 9 88– 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 93– 1 9 9 7
C h u m 2 n . o . u n k . n . i .
Species Summary Avg. 1983 – 1 9 9 2 H i gh / Ye a r 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C h u m 0 400 / 1980
C h i n o o k 0 50 / 1985
P i n k 7 5 7,500 / 1974
S o c k e y e 3 4 , 2 5 0 180,000 / 1981This creek on the Mid-coast supports an endangered run 
of chum salmon. The creek is home to resident grizzly bears
who depend on healthy salmon returns for their sur v i v a l .
Amback Creek supports steelhead, cutthroat trout and 
Dolly V a r d e n .
Status of Logging
The status of logging in this watershed is uncertain. 
The area is uncharted. In other words, no tenure has yet
been awarded that would result in a Forest Development 
Plan being submitted.Status of Salmon
Chum: Only 2 chum were observed in 1987, down from a
modern-day estimated maximum of 400 spawners in 1980.
None were observed between 1989 and 1991, and no 
inspections were done by DFO between 1993 and 1997.
Chinook: A high of 50 chinook was reported in 1980.
Between 1983 and 1992, no chinook were reported.
Pink: From a high of 7500 in 1974, pink returns averaged 
75 between the years 1983 and 1992.
Sockeye: Sockeye salmon are by far the creek’s healthiest
salmon species. But they too are on the decline. From a high
of 180,000 in 1991, numbers dropped to an average of
34,250 fish between 1983 and 1992. By 1997, they were
down to 15,000.Amback Creek
Endangered: Chum salmon

N O W  O R  N E V E R 2 8
Species Summary Avg. 1983 – 1 9 9 2 H i gh / Ye a r 1 9 9 7
C h u m 0 0 / 1983–92
C h i n o o k 0 0 
P i n k 0 0 / 1983–92
S o c k e y e 4 8 , 5 5 0 60,000 / 1987
C o h o 0 3,500 / 1962This watershed on the Mid-coast has high grizzly bear values
because of its declining, but still productive sockeye salmon
runs. It is an important corridor linking the Smokehouse,
D r a n e y , Oweekeno and Rivers Inlet system. Other resident
wildlife species include black bears, wolves and a small 
run of big chinook salmon. Dolly Varden and Cutthroat trout
are also considered plentiful.
Status of Logging
MacMillan Bloedel Ltd. holds the tenure in this area. The area
comprises a small part of TFL 39.Status of Salmon
Sockeye: While still significant, sockeye numbers appear 
to be on the decline. In 1993, the DFO counted 66,000 
sockeye salmon spawning in the creek. The average number
of sockeye reported between 1983 and 1992 was 48,550
fish. By 1997, the count was only 9,600 sockeye.
Pink: Virtually no data. DFO has not inspected the creek for
pink salmon in recent years.
Chum: Virtually no data. Not inspected.
Chinook: Virtually no data, although sportsfishers say there
are a small number of big chinook.
Coho: From a high of 3500 coho in 1962, coho returns 
averaged zero between 1983 and 1992.Canoe Creek
Endangered: Pink and Chum salmon 

2 9 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
Recent Counts 1 9 8 7 1 9 88 1 9 8 9 – 9 0 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 93 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C h u m n . o . 1 n . o . 3 n . o . 1 2 n . o . 5 n . o . u n k . *
*reported elsewhere by DFO as zero (0)According to DFO reports, this North coast creek is 
considered one of the most important in the region for 
coho salmon. Fisheries Department reports note that 
the Canoona is consistently a large coho producer, but 
current escapements are estimated to be only 10% of 
D F O ’ s target.
Status of Logging
This drainage is within WFP’s TFL 25. A Forest Development
Plan is in deferral.Status of Salmon
Pink: The pink count in 1993 was 21,000. In 1997 it was
6,000. DFO’s target escapement (escapement meaning the
number of fish they aim to put on the spawning beds in
Canoona Creek) is 25,000 fish. The 1997 escapement of
6,000 fish represents only 24% of the target.
Chum: From 1987 to 1997 the number of chum ranged from
zero to no higher than 12 fish.
Chinook: In 1996, only 1 chinook was counted. The next
y e a r, zero.
Coho: As recently as 1993, the coho count was 1,200 fish.
By 1995 the count had dropped to 300, and stayed static in
1996 and 1997. Current coho escapements are estimated to
be 10% of the DFO target of 12,900 fish.
Steelhead: W i n t e r -run steelhead are reported. Numbers
u n a v a i l a b l e .Canoona Creek
Endangered: Chum salmon

N O W  O R  N E V E R 3 0
Recent Counts 1 9 88 1 9 8 9 1 9 9 0 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 93 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C o h o 1 1 2 n . o . n . o . n . o . n . i . n . i .
C h u m 2 0 0 2 0 0 3 6 0 2 0 0 1 5 0 1 , 5 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 5 0
Species Summary Avg. 1983 – 1 9 9 2 H i gh / Ye a r 1 9 9 7
C o h o 3 1,500 / 1966 n . i .
C h i n o o k 0 25 / 1960
C h u m 2 0 0 10,000 / 1971 5 0
P i n k 1 2 , 5 8 7 26,000 / 1990 2 0 , 0 0 0
S o c k e y e 3 6 / 1988This Mid-coast watershed is home to grizzly bears, wolves
and mountain goats. Resident trout live in the lake, old First
Nations fish weirs are present and a beautiful waterfall flows
into the estuary.
Status of Logging
The forest tenure in this area is held by WFP . There is no
Forest Development Plan at present.Status of Salmon
Coho: From a recorded count of 1,500 in 1966, coho 
numbers have steadily declined. Between 1983 and 1992,
there were an average of only 3 coho counted each year. No
inspections and counts were carried out in 1996 or 1997.
Chum: In 1971, 10,000 chum were counted by DFO on the
Carter River spawning grounds. From 1988-1992 the average
chum count was 200 fish. In 1993 the count climbed to
1,500 chum, but then began to plummet, reaching a low of
10 fish in 1994. The 1997 count stood at 50 chum.
Chinook: Only 25 were counted in 1960. Between 1983 and
1992, zero were sighted. From 1990–1993, DFO inspectors
reported the chinook totals as “unknown. ”
Pink: In 1990, there were some 26,000 pink salmon counted.
In 1997, the number stood at 20,000. The average count
between 1983 and 1992 was 12,587 fish.
Sockeye: The average escapement between 1983 and 1992
was 3 fish.Carter River / Carter Lake
Endangered: Coho salmon

3 1 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
Species Summary Avg. 1983 – 1 9 9 2 H i gh / Ye a r 1 9 8 9 1 9 9 7
C o h o 3 750 / 1965 1 0
S o c k e y e 9 . 7 5 0 125,000 / 1963 4 , 4 0 0
C h i n o o k 6 200 / 1969 1 2 n . o .
C h u m 3 3 100 / 1990 n . o .
P i n k 4 , 4 0 0 12,000 / 1986 1 , 5 0 0This Mid-coast watershed is considered an important 
corridor to the southern portion of the remaining wilderness
area and the fishery values are of critical importance to the
Oweekeno people. Grizzly bears frequent the area, feeding on
fall sockeye runs and steelhead are present in the creek.
Status of Logging
At this time, the forest is uncharted, meaning it has not been
dedicated to any one industrial logging interest.
Status of Salmon
Coho: From a maximum recorded coho count of 750 in 1965,
numbers have steadily declined. There were an average of
only 3 coho per year between 1983–1992. The stream was
not inspected in 1993, 1994, 1995 or 1997.
Sockeye: H i s t o r i c a l l y , Dallery Creek supported a strong 
sockeye run. But from a high of 125,000 fish in 1963, there
has been a steady decline. Average escapement between
1983 and 1992 was 9,750 fish. In 1987 sockeye escapement
was 21,500 fish. By 1991 the count was 10,000 sockeye 
on the spawning beds. In 1995 DFO counted only 1,000
spawners, in 1996 it had dropped to 250. Sockeye salmon do
run in cycles, with low years and high years, but overall 
the Dallary Creek escapement numbers continue to decline. Chinook: Between 1983 and 1992 an average of 6 chinook
per year were counted. The maximum count was 200 fish in
1969. There were no chinook found from 1992–94 and when
the creek was inspected again in 1997, no chinook were
found. 
Chum: Between 1983 and 1992 there were an average of 
33 chum counted each year, with a high of 100 fish counted
in 1990. There were no chum observed in the system in
1997. The last inspection that recorded chum salmon was a
count of 20 fish in 1993.
Pink: Pinks averaged 4,400 spawners between 1983 and
1992. The highest escapement of pinks was in 1986 when
there were 12,000 fish recorded. In 1994 inspectors counted
300 pink salmon. The 1997 count was 1,500 pinks spawning
in Dallery Creek.D a l l e r y Creek 
Endangered: Coho salmon

N O W  O R  N E V E R 3 2
Recent Counts 1 9 8 7 1 9 88 1 9 8 9 1 9 9 0 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 93 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 7
C h i n o o k 7 1 2 0 2 5 6 0 6 2 3 0 4 2 2 0 2 9 5 5
1996: unknown
Species Summar y Avg. 1983 – 1 9 9 2 H i gh / Ye a r 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C o h o 4 5 0 7,500 / 1964 8 0 0 2 0 0 4 0 0
C h u m 5 , 5 2 5 40,000 /1973 2 , 0 0 0 3 , 5 0 0
P i n k 3 0 , 5 0 0 100,000 / 1985 6 0 , 0 0 0 1 4 , 0 0 0
S o c k e y e 0 10 / 1985 n . o . 0This North coast watershed’s meandering salmon river 
provides perfect habitat for grizzly bears. The Khutze also
supports wolves, mountain goats, deer and wolverine. It is a
staging area for trumpeter swans, grebes and other birds.
Rare marbled murrelets are also present. In addition to
salmon, Dolly Varden and winter-run steelhead are also
found in the river. An ancient fish trap and old village site are
at the mouth of the river. The valley also contains hot
s p r i n g s .
Status of Logging
The forest tenure in this area is WFP’s Tree Farm License 25.
A Forest Development Plan for the area has been deferred.
Status of Salmon
Chinook: From a maximum recorded escapement of 1,500
fish in 1965, chinook numbers have steadily declined. In the
years 1983 through 1992, the average annual escapement
was 44 fish. In 1994 the chinook count was 20 fish. By 1997,
the count was slightly higher at 55. The DFO manages the
Khutze chinook along with 2 other streams and acknowl-
edges that the combined escapement is recently only 3% of
the Fisheries Department’s goal.Coho: The average annual escapement between 1983 and
1992 for coho was 450, down considerably from a recorded
high of 7,500 fish in 1964. In 1997, there were still 400 
coho in the Khutze river.
Chum: The average chum count between 1983 and 1992 
was 5,525 fish. A high of 40,000 fish was recorded in 1973.
In 1996, DFO counted only 2,000 chum.
Pink: An average of 30,500 pink salmon spawned in the
Khutze between 1983 and 1992. The high for this period was
100,000 fish. In 1996, the recorded number was 60,000 
fish. The 1997 count was 14,000. DFO information indicates
even-year escapement in recent years have been less than
5% of the Department’s target.
Sockeye: No spawning sockeye were observed in 1996 or
1997. Ten were recorded in 1985.Khutze River
Endangered: Chinook salmon

3 3 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
Recent Counts 1 9 8 7 1 9 88 1 9 8 9 1 9 9 0 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 93 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C o h o 1 0 0 2 0 0 n . o . u n k . n . o . — u n k . 8 1 6 0 n . i . 5 0
C h u m 3 5 0 0 7 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 6 0 0 7 0 0 1 2 0 0 8 0 0 9 0 0 1 2 0
Species Summary Avg. 1983 – 1 9 9 2 H i gh / Ye a r 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C o h o 1 5 0 3,500 / 1968
C h i n o o k 0 400 /1959
C h u m 5 , 6 2 5 35,000 / 1968
P i n k 1 , 5 5 0 50,000 / 1966 8 0 0 2 5
Historical Data 1950s A v g 1960s A v g 1970s A v g 1 9 8 0 1 9 8 1 1 9 8 2 1 9 8 3
C h u m 3 1 , 4 0 0 6 6 , 7 0 0 7 , 5 0 0 3 , 8 0 0 3 , 3 0 0 4 , 3 0 0 1 , 1 9 5 *
P i n k 2 2 , 2 0 0 1 0 9 , 5 0 0 1 8 , 4 0 0 4 , 7 0 0 2 , 9 0 0**
Kiltuish plus 8 other streams (managed as a group)
* D F O ’ s target escapement for the 9 streams is 36,000 chum
* * D F O ’ s target escapement for the 9 streams is 50,000 pinksThis North coast watershed has seen some logging in the
Kiltuish Inlet but the river valley remains intact. The river 
valley and estuary are frequented by grizzly bears who feed
on the spawning chum salmon. The salmon spawn primarily
in small feeder creeks near the mouth of the river. A water f a l l
upstream from the river mouth makes it impassable to
salmon. The river’s estuary is considered highly productive.
Status of Logging
This area is within Western Forest Products’ TFL 25. There is
no Forest Development Plan at present. However, WFP would
likely accelerate developing a plan if a logging moratoria was
agreed to in other areas such as the Mooto/Ingram.
Status of Salmon
Coho: Between 1983 and 1992, the average annual coho
escapement was 150 fish. The recorded high in 1968 
was 3,500 fish. In 1997, only 50 coho spawned in the river
s y s t e m .Chinook: From a recorded high of 400 chinook spawners 
in 1959, counts have steadily dropped. Between 1983 and
1992, no chinook were counted. Over a ten-year period 
ending in 1997 there were no chinook observed during the
annual counts. The river was not inspected for chinook 
in 1995.
Chum: There are still runs of chum salmon in the Kiltuish
R i v e r , but they appear to be in decline as well. Between 1983
and 1992 the average escapement was 5,625 fish. From 
1993 to 1997, the average escapement dropped to 744 fish.
In 1968 the Kiltuish chum run was 35,000 fish. 
Pink: In 1966, DFO recorded a pink salmon escapement
count of 50,000 fish in the Kiltuish. Between 1983 and 1992,
the pink salmon escapement was averaging only 1,550 fish.
In 1996 the pink count was 800 fish, in 1997 it was 25.
Sockeye: N o n e .
Steelhead: Present, but not counted.Kiltuish 
Endangered: Coho & Chinook

N O W  O R  N E V E R 3 4
Recent Counts 1 9 8 7 1 9 88 1 9 8 9 1 9 9 0 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 93 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C o h o 2 1 5 n . o . n . o . n . o . n . o . 1 5 1 3 2 n . o . u n k .
C h u m 1 2 0 4 0 1 4 0 2 5 5 0 0 7 0 1 8 5 0 3 5 2 0This northern-mid coast watershed is home to Grizzly bears
and lovely hot springs. Sportsfishing potential is considered
to be high.
Status of Logging
The forest tenure in this area is held by Western Forest
Products through TFL 25. There is no Forest Development
Plan at present. WFP is submitting a new FDP which will
cover this area.
Status of Salmon
Coho: From a recorded high of 7,500 spawning coho in
1963, escapement plummeted to an annual average of four
fish between 1983 and 1992. In four of those years no coho
were spotted, an event repeated as recently as 1996.Chum: Between 1983 and 1992, the average escapement 
of chum was 50 fish. In 1962, there were a healthy 7,500
spawners recorded in the system. In 1997 only 20 chum
were counted.
Pink: Pink salmon had an average annual escapement 
of 3,943 fish between 1983 and 1992. This is down from a
recorded high of 15,000 fish in 1964. In 1997, there were
950 pink spawners counted.
Sockeye: In recent decades sockeye numbers have been
extremely low, with recorded counts averaging one fish
between 1983 and 1992. The 1996 count was 2 sockeye.
Chinook: Not present.
Steelhead: Present, but no numbers.K l e k a n e
Endangered: Coho & Chum

3 5 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
Recent Counts 1 9 8 7 1 9 88 1 9 8 9 1 9 9 0 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 93 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C h u m 4 1 5 4 0 4 3 5 3 0 8 0 0 1 0 n . i . 1 , 0 0 0 u n k .
Historical Data 1950s A v g 1960s A v g 1970s A v g 1 9 8 0 1 9 8 1 1 9 8 2 1 9 8 3
S o c k e y e 2 , 6 9 5 9 3 8 4 , 3 8 0 2 , 5 0 0 5 , 0 0 0 2 , 0 0 0 n . i .
Species Summary Avg. 1983 – 1 9 9 2 H i gh / Ye a r 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 9 3 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C o h o 0 7,500 / 1979 n . i . n . i . n . i . n . i . n . i .
C h i n o o k 0 10 / 1983 n . i .
C h u m 1 5 15,000 / 1970 3 5 3 0 8 0 0 1 0 n . i . 1 , 0 0 0 u n k .
P i n k 4 7 , 3 7 5 200,000 / 1976 1 1 0 , 0 0 0 2 5 , 0 0 0 2 0 , 0 0 0 1 2 , 0 0 0 7 5 , 0 0 0 2 0 0 , 0 0 0 2 5 , 0 0 0
S o c k e y e 2 , 0 6 6 14,000 / 1979 5 2 5 6 0 0 2 5 0 1 , 0 0 0 n . i . 3 0 0 u n k .This Mid-coast river valley has seen some previous logging
and road-building on the northern edge of the watershed.
The construction of a sports fishing lodge has caused some
damage to the estuary and fish habitat. The valley is felt 
to have some of the highest grizzly bear values on the central
coast. It is a key area for traditional food and commer c i a l
fisheries. Wildlife includes grizzly and black bear, wolves,
d e e r, cougar, mountain goat, wolverine, river otter and other
fur bearers. Non-resident Grizzly travel from Rivers Inlet to
the Koeye in fall to feed on salmon. Other fish stocks include
rainbow trout, cutthroat trout, steelhead. There are four
ancient village sites as well as fish traps in the Koeye.
Status of Logging
The forest tenure in this valley is held by MacMillan 
Bloedel Ltd. through TFL 39. A Forest Development Plan for
the valley has been deferred. Two cutblocks are planned 
for 1998.
Status of Salmon
Chum: In 1970, a high of 15,000 chum spawners were
recorded in the Koeye. By 1983 through 1992, the average
annual escapement had fallen to 15 fish. The numbers 
have crept back up in some recent years, reaching 800 in
1993 and 1,000 in 1996.Sockeye: The average escapement of sockeye from 1983 to
1992 was 2,066 fish, less than half the average number
recorded in the 1970s. While sockeye are still present, they
appear to be on the decline. DFO records indicate 2,500
spawners in 1988, 600 in 1992, and 300 in 1996. The
Fisheries Department goal for Koeye river sockeye is 20,000
s p a w n e r s .
Chinook: In recent years, the highest recorded escapement
has been 10 fish.
Coho: From a high of 7,500 fish recorded in 1979, local coho
numbers have all but disappeared and may be extinct.
Between 1983 and 1992, zero coho were counted. No count
was conducted in 1997.
Pink: Pink numbers remain fairly healthy. The average 
annual escapement between 1983 and 1992 was 47,375 fish.
1996 saw a huge run of pinks, with spawning totals hitting
200,000 fish, the highest since the 1970s. On the other 
hand, the odd-year runs of pink appear less healthy. The
1995 escapement was 75,000. Two years later, the 1997
escapement figure had dropped to 25,000 fish.Koeye River
Endangered: Chum salmon

N O W  O R  N E V E R 3 6
Recent Counts 1 9 8 7 1 9 88 1 9 8 9 1 9 9 0 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 93 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C h u m n . o . 2 5 0 1 0 n . o n . o n . o n . o u n k . n . i .
S o c k e y e 1 6 0 1 , 7 0 0 7 5 0 2 0 4 5 0 5 0 0 1 , 0 0 0 4 0 0 n . i . 5 5 0 n . i .
P i n k n . o . 6 0 n . o . 1 , 0 0 0 n . o . n . o . n . o . n . o . u n k n . i .
Historical Data 1950s A v g 1960s A v g 1970s A v g 1 9 8 0 1 9 8 1 1 9 8 2 1 9 8 3
C h u m 1 6 , 7 0 0 9 , 0 0 0 1 0 , 4 0 0 1 , 7 0 0 1 3 , 0 1 0 8 , 5 0 0 3 , 5 4 5
(Namu and 7 other streams)This Mid-coast watershed has long been a major salmon 
h a rvesting site for First Nations. Generations of Heiltsuk 
people have set up summer fish camps at Namu to har v e s t
the once bountiful runs of salmon. An ancient fish trap exists
at the mouth of the creek leading up to the lake. An extensive
boardwalk system connects many buildings at an abandoned
c o m m e r cial cannery at Namu. The boardwalk also connects
the cannery with Namu Lake.
Status of Logging
MacMillan Bloedel Ltd.’s Tree Farm Licence 39 covers this
area. A current Forest Development Plan calls for road 
building to Draney Lake, a tributary of Namu. Cutblocks are
planned for Draney in 1999, with cutblocks planned for 
the Namu Lake area in 2000 and 2001.Status of Salmon
Coho: Unknown. Not inspected since 1989.
Chum: Chum runs are “passively managed” for the Namu
R i v e r , meaning there is no direct management of the stock
and fishing plans will not be altered to protect the stock. 
The Namu chum run is grouped with 7 other streams in
Fisher/Fitzhugh Sound region, including  Evans Inlet, Hook
Nose, Kiltik Cove, Kisamet, Koeye, Namu and Sagar. In 
the 1950s, chum returns averaged 16,700 fish. By the 1980s,
the number had fallen to 3,545. In 1990, the actual count 
for the Namu River chum was 10 spawning fish. Since 1991
there have been no chum observed in the river. 
Sockeye: There are still sockeye left in Namu River, although
the numbers are dropping. For example, there were 1,700
sockeye spawners in 1988, 1,000 in 1993 and 550 in 1996.
The river was not inspected in 1997.
Pink: The current status of pink salmon is unknown. 
DFO recorded 60 spawning pinks in 1988, none the next
y e a r, 1,000 in 1990 and none since. The river was not
inspected in 1997.Namu Lakes
Endangered: Chum & Coho salmon

3 7 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
Recent Counts 1 9 88 1 9 8 9 1 9 9 0 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 93 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
S o c k e y e 1 0 3 0 u n k . u n k . 2 5 2 5 n . o . 1 6 1 0 1 5
C h i n o o k n . o . 2 n . d . 1 n . o . n . o . p s t 7 2 u n k .
P i n k 2 5 0 , 0 0 0 1 2 5 , 0 0 0 5 0 , 0 0 0 1 2 5 , 0 0 0 4 5 , 0 0 0 6 0 , 0 0 0 3 2 , 0 0 0 1 9 2 , 0 0 0 1 2 0 , 0 0 0 8 0 , 0 0 0
C o h o 2 , 0 0 0 u n k . 2 , 5 0 0 u n k . 1 , 1 0 0 1 , 8 0 0 6 2 0 5 1 8 5 5 0 n . i .
C h u m 6 5 , 0 0 0 1 2 , 0 0 0 6 , 0 0 0 5 , 5 0 0 5 , 0 0 0 7 , 0 0 0 4 , 1 0 0 6 , 2 0 0 4 , 6 0 0 8 0 0
Historical Data 1950s A v g 1960s A v g 1970s A v g 1 9 8 0 1 9 8 1 1 9 8 2 1 9 8 3
S o c k e y e 7 , 3 0 0 9 , 5 0 0 3 , 5 0 0 1 , 5 5 6 2 , 4 5 0 2 , 4 0 0 1 , 6 0 0
Quaal plus 4 other streams
Target escapement: 13,000This watershed on the North coast is frequented by grizzly
and black bear, mountain goats, moose and large numbers of
w a t e r fowl. Along with the Kitkiata, the Quaal River is believed
to be home to the region’s healthiest steelhead populations.
The valley provides a significant wildlife corridor to the
Ecstall River and is the site of both an old village and a
“grease” trail to the Skeena River. Grease trails are named
for the ancient First Nations trade in oil from the harvest 
of Eulachon — a small, smelt-like fish rich in oil. The river
valley is largely pristine, with one small clearcut near the
river mouth.
Status of Logging
At this point, the Quaal is uncharted, meaning no one 
company is slated to log the area. There is currently no
Forest Development Plan for the area.
Status of Salmon
Sockeye: From a highest recorded escapement of 7,500
sockeye in 1961, numbers steadily declined. Between 1983
and 1992, average escapement was 16 fish. Much the same
pattern was recorded between 1988 and 1997. The 1997
sockeye escapement was 15 fish.Chinook: Chinook: Between 1983 and 1992 no chinook
spawners were counted in the Quaal River. The highest
recorded escapement for the species was in 1962, when 400
chinook spawners were counted. Its present status is 
critically low, with 2 chinook counted in the river in 1996.
Pink: In 1962 an estimated 1.5 million pinks spawned in the
Quaal. Between 1983 and 1992 pink escapement stood at
118,750, about a tenth of its previous high. In 1997, the pink
escapement was 80,000 fish or 40% of DFO’s escapement
goal of 200,000 spawners.
Coho: Resident coho spawners numbered 25,000 in 1966. 
In the ten years ending in 1992, coho escapement averaged
3,333 fish. By 1996 there were 550 coho spawners counted.
In 1997 no inspection was carried out. In 1996 DFO noted
that the Quaal River is thought to be the major coho 
producer in the (sub)area and that stocks are at 20% of 
the target escapement of 45,000 fish.
Chum: Between 1983 and 1992, chum escapement averaged
22,000 fish, with a high of 65,000 recorded in 1988. A chum
return of 800 fish was recorded in 1997, only 3% of DFO’s 
target escapement of 25,000 fish.Quaal River 
Endangered: Sockeye & Chinook

N O W  O R  N E V E R 3 8
Recent Counts 1 9 8 7 1 9 88 1 9 8 9 1 9 9 0 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 93 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C o h o 3 9 1 7 5 1 2 5 n . o . 5 6 0 5 0 0 3 0 0 n . d . n . i . n . i . 2 0 0
S o c k e y e 1 3 6 1 0 0 n . d . 2 1 0 8 n . d . n . d . n . d . 6
P i n k 4 , 6 0 0 1 , 0 0 0 5 5 , 0 0 0 2 , 5 0 0 2 , 1 7 0 2 5 2 , 3 0 0 7 5 0 1 , 8 0 0 6 , 0 0 0 1 , 0 0 0
Historical Data 1950s A v g 1960s A v g 1970s A v g 1 9 8 0 1 9 8 1 1 9 8 2 1 9 8 3
S o c k e y e 1 4 0 3 0 0 0 6 1 6
(Roscoe Creek and Clatse Creek combined)This Mid-coast watershed is in the traditional territory 
of the Heiltsuk First Nation and ancient petraglyphs can be
viewed. Roscoe Inlet and Roscoe Creek are part of a group 
of intact watersheds supporting grizzly bear, black bear,
c o u g a r , deer and wolves. Despite its relatively small size, it is
considered a prime area for salmon. A DFO Fish Habitat
I n v e n t o r y from 1991 notes that logging is proposed for the
Roscoe Creek valley, and due to the “extreme topography”
and “high productive” values of the salmon stream the
Department of Fisheries recommends “no logging be carried
out in this system. ” 
Status of Logging
This area falls under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of
Forests’ Small Business Program. A Forest Development Plan
for the area is under consideration by the District Manager 
of the Forests Ministr y ’s Mid-coast offices.
Status of Salmon
Sockeye: The highest recorded escapement for sockeye in
Roscoe Creek was 100 fish in 1989. The average return
between 1983 and 1992 was 39 fish. In 1997, only six fish
were counted.Coho: In 1964, 7,000 coho spawners were counted in the
system. From that recorded high, escapement dwindled to an
average of 84 fish in the years 1983 to 1992. In 1997, 200
spawners were counted.
Chinook: None recorded as present in recent decades.
Chum: In 1966 DFO recorded 75,000 chum spawning in
Roscoe Creek. Chum numbers then dropped to an average of
15,050 fish between 1983 and 1992. Then in 1996 the
spawning count reached 81,000 fish, confirming Fisheries
Department assessment that the creek has major potential to
be an excellent salmon producer. In 1997, there were an 
estimated 56,000 chum spawners.
Pink: The average escapement of pink salmon between 1983
and 1992 was 15,775 fish. The high during that period was
55,000 fish recorded in 1989. In more recent years, the num-
bers have been much lower. In 1992, only 25 pink salmon
returned to spawn in the creek. The number rose to 6,000 in
1996 and in 1997, 1,000 pinks spawners were counted.Roscoe Inlet & Roscoe Creek
Endangered: Coho in both creek and inlet

3 9 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
Recent Counts 1 9 8 7 1 9 88 1 9 8 9 1 9 9 0 1 9 9 1 1 9 9 2 1 9 93 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 5 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 7
C o h o n . o . 5 n . i . n . i . n . i . u n k .
C h u m 3 0 5 3 0 0 1 2 0 3 2 5 4 0 1 5 3 0 1 5 3 0 0 2 0 0 1 , 0 0 0
P i n k 6 0 0 1 3 , 0 0 0 1 0 0 9 0 0 1 0 0 7 , 0 0 0 2 , 1 0 0 1 2 5 n . i . 4 , 0 0 0 4 , 0 0 0
Historical Data 1950s A v g 1960s A v g 1970s A v g 1 9 8 0 1 9 8 1 1 9 8 2 1 9 8 3
C h u m 1 8 , 3 0 0 1 3 , 4 0 0 7 , 4 0 0 7 , 3 5 0 3 , 2 0 0 1 , 2 1 0 8 6 0
(4 streams including Skowquiltz) 
D F O ’ s target Escapement: 25,100This Mid-coast watershed has traditionally been used by 
the Nuxalk First Nation. The river valley and estuary support
populations of  wolverine, grizzly bear, black bear, mountain
goat, blacktail and whitetail deer and cougar. Western grebes,
trumpeter swans and other birds frequent the mudflats. 
Fish stocks include Dolly Varden, and resident rainbow trout.
The Skowquiltz is the largest intact pristine rainforest left 
in the Dean Channel region. There are two old village sites in
the valley and many culturally-modified trees bearing witness
to First Nation’s use of the area. 
Status of Logging
The area is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Forests’
Small Business Program. At present, a Forest Development
Plan for the area is on hold and subject to change. The area
is considered an unconfirmed candidate for a community
t e n u r e .Status of Salmon
Sockeye: Escapement between 1983 and 1992 is recorded 
as zero. In 1991, DFO observed 6 sockeye spawners in the
Skowqultz River.
Coho: The highest recorded escapement of coho was in 
1958 when 1,500 spawners were counted. Between 1983 and
1992, the average escapement was down to one fish, with a
1991 high of 5. No inspection has been carried out in recent
y e a r s .
Chum: Between 1983 and 1992, the average chum escape-
ment was 262 fish. The high, recorded in 1953, was 7,500
fish. Between 1987 and 1997 the highest return was 1,000
fish and the lowest was 15.
Pink: Average pink escapement between 1983 and 1992 
was 3,650 fish. The high for that ten-year period was 13,000
fish in 1988. The 1994 count was only 125 spawners, but in
1996 and 1997, 4,000 spawning pink salmon were counted
in the river.Skowquiltz River 
Endangered: Coho & Chum salmon

N O W  O R  N E V E R 4 0
S O U R C E S :
1. Escapement data 1987–1997 from DFO-PBS, Kim Hyatt
2. Pacific Region Salmon Stock Management Plan, Discussion
Document, 1986. Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Volumes: D-
Butedale, E-Bella Bella, F-Bella Coola and G-Rivers Inlet & Smith Inlet.
3. Salmon Expectations 1998, North Coast Areas 1-6, Central Coast
Areas 7-10. Department of Fisheries and Oceans.
4. Living Blueprint for B.C. Salmon Habitat, An Action Plan Produced
by an Independent Panel. Published 1998 by Independent Panel,
Distributed by Pacific Salmon Foundation
5. 1998 Forest Development Tracking List for the Midcoast, North
Coast and Kalum Forest Districts. July, 1998. John Nelson, David
Suzuki Foundation.
6. Speaking for the Salmon, Workshop Proceedings, January 1998.
Simon Fraser University. Edited by Dr. Patricia Gallaugher and Laurie
Wo o d .
7. Geographic Distribution of Salmon Spawning Streams of British
Columbia. By I.V. Williams and T.J. Brown. Department of Fisheries
and Oceans, Pacific Biological Station, March 1994.
8. Escapement Estimates, North Coast Management Areas 1–10,
J a n u a r y 1997. Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Prince Rupert.
9. Conservation Areas of Interest on the Mainland Coast of BC, Sierra
Club and Raincoast Conservation Society, April 1996. Salmon data
1983–1992 in Sierra report is from DFO — Canadian Technical Report
of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences No. 1967

4 1 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T
Based on research by
the American Fisheries
S o c i e t y , source: Living
Blueprint for B.C.
Salmon Habitat, 1998 C h i n o o k
Queen Charlottes
Naden River
Ain River
Skeena System
Deep Creek
North Coast
Diana Lake Creek
Central Coast
Kwatna River
Noelk River
Khutze River
Kiltuish River
Tsaytis River
Dala River
Quaal River
Rivers & Smith Inlets
D a l l e r y Creek
Ciyak River
NW Vancouver Island
Mooyah River
Sucwoa River
Deserted Creek
Tsowwin T. Espinosa
C r e e k
Narrowgut Creek
Malksope River
Colonial Creek
SW Vancouver Island
Gordon River
Sarita River
Franklin River
Somass River
Nahmint River
Henderson River
Toquart River
Bedwell River
Cypre River
Moyeha River
Megin River
Ice River
Sydney River
Johnstone Strait
Nimpkish River
Ordord River
Adam River
Georgia Strait/
Vancouver Island
Puntledge River (winter)
Haslam Creek
Coldstream RiverGeorgia Strait/
M a i n l a n d
Sloquet Creek
Cheakamus River
Toba River
Klite River
Lower Fraser
Stave River
Chilliwack River
Upper Fraser/
T h o m p s o n
Thompson River
Stellako River
Endako River
Kazchek Creek
North & South
T h o m p s o n
Mann CreekC o h o
Queen Charlottes
Kano Inlet Creek (outer)
M e rcer Creek
Mace Creek
Lagoon Creek
Dass Creek
Sewell Inlet Creek
( h e a d )
Little Goose Creek
Dana #1 Creek
Cresent Inlet Creek
Salmon River
Echo Harbour Creek
Kostan Creek
Matheson Creek
Skaat Harbour Creek (2)
Skaat Harbour Head
C r e e k
Forgotten Creek
Island Bay Creeks (2)
Tangle Cove Creek
Oxalis Creek
Cillision Bay Creeks (2)
Carpenter Bay 
Creeks (2)
Sedmund Creek
Louscoone Inlet Creek
Inskip Creek
Security Inlet Creek
South Bay Creek
Macmillan Creek
Breaker Bay Creek
Richardson Creek
Sedgwick Creeks (3)
Alder Island Creek
Heater Creek
Nass System
Vetter Creek
Kiteen River
Leverson Lake System
Toon River
Skeena System
Alastair Lake
Southend Creek
Fiddler Creek
Slamgeesh River
Glacier Creek
Goat Creek
Bulkley River below
H o u s t o n
Station Creek
Suskwa River
Natlan Creek
Harold Price Creek
Blunt CreekTrout Creek
Reiseter Creek
Morice River
Gosnell Creek
Nanka River
Boucher Creek
Morrison Creek
Bear River
North Coast
Belowe Creek
Kumealon Creek
Moore Cove Creek
Oar Point Creek
Hevenor Inlet Creek
Alpha Creek
Endhill Creek
Spencer Creek
Keswar Inlet Creek
West Creek
Foote Creek
Phoenix Creek
Central Coast
Namu River
Nootum River
Necleetsconnay River
Slowquiltz River
Eucott Bay Creeks
Roscoe Creek
Tankeeah River
Tuno Creek
West Tuno Creek
Mussel River
Green Bay Creek
Carter River
Marshall Creek
Head Creek
Scow Bay Creek
Klekane River
Kiltuish River
Crab River
Hirsch Creek
Kildidt Creek
Stewart Creek
Choke Pass Creeks (3)
Howyete Creek System
Jenny Bay Creeks (3)
Kakushdish Creek
Sally Creek
Deer Pass Lagoon
Creeks (2)
Der Pass Creek
Ship Point Creek
Sound Point Lagoon
C r e e kBC Stocks at at High Risk of Extinction

N O W  O R  N E V E R 4 2
C o h o c o n t ’ d
Kwakuadis River/ 
Yeo Lake
Cull Creek
Kwakwa Creek
M a ry Cove Creek
Bottleneck Creek
Duthie Creek
McKay Creek
Pyne Creek
Busey Creek
Dallain Creek
Argyh Creek
Penn Creek
Douglas Creek
Devil Creek
F u ry Creek
Linnea Creek
Duffey Creek
Sentinel Creek
Clifford Creek
Flux Creek
McDonald Creek
Salmon Creek
Eagle Creek
Stannard Creek (deep
Creek & Inlet)
Fish Creek
Cartwright Creek
Tuwartz Creek
Rivers & Smith Inlets
Coho Creek
Allard Creek
Beaver Creek
NW Vancouver Island
Silverado Creek
Jacklah River
Burman River
Hoiss Creek
M a rvinas Creek
Owossitsa Creek
Little Zeballos River
Mamat Creek
Chum Creek
Jansen Lake Creek
Power River & Lake
Kewquoqdie Creek
Kwokwesta Creek
Pegattem CreekSW Vancouver Island
Muir Creek
Doobah Creek
Poett Nook Creek
Sarita River System
Frederick Creek
Cous Creek
Effingham River
Lucky Creek
Smith Creek
Kennedy Lake &
Tr i b u t a r i e s
Clayoquot River
Tofino Creek
Tranquil Creek
Hootla Kootla System
Riley Cove Creek
Megin River
Ice River
Hesquiat River
Johnstone Strait
Quatam River
Ordord River
Unnamed Creek
Unnamed Creek
Read Creek
Tuna River
Unnamed Creek
Shoial Harbour Creek
Nimmo Creek
Bughouse Creek
Huaskin Creek
Cohoe Creek
Eva Creek
Warner Bay Creek
Stranby River
Shushartie River
Cluxewe River
Nimpkish River
Adam River
Amor De Cosmos Creek
Owen Creek
Christie Creek
Whiterock Pass Creek
Mohun CreekGeorgia Strait/
Vancouver Island
Cowie Creek
Chef Creek
Thames Creek
French Creek
Craig Creek
Rocky Creek
Holland Creek
Stocking Creek
Porters Creek
Mesachie Creek
Georgia Strait/
M a i n l a n d
Reay Creek
Mosquito Creek
Mackay Creek
Rodgers Creek
Cypress Creek
Eagle Creek
Nelson Creek
Pillchuck Creek
Dayton Creek
Unnamed Creek
Theodesia River
Toba River
Klite River
Little Toba River
Brem River
Brem River T r i b u t a r y
Lower Fraser
Sumas River
Stewart River
Hunter Creek
Serpentine River
Bonaparte River
North & South
T h o m p s o n
Besette Creek
Creighton Creek
Duteau Creek
Harris Creek
C l e a r water River
Brookfield Creek
Mahood River
Reg Christie CreekS o c k e y e
Queen Charlottes
Mamin River
Wright Inlet Creeks
Nass System
Tseax River
Bear River
Skeena System
Slamgeesh River
C l e a r water Ceek
Wesach Creek
Douglas Creek
Clear Creek
Bulkley River above
H o u s t o n
Atna River
Boucher Creek
Salmon Creek
Big Loon Creek
Bear River
Bear Lake
North Coast
Monckton Inlet Creeks
Hevenor Inlet Creeks
Spencer Creek
Bolton Creek
Kenzuwash Creeks
Lewis Creek
Ryan Creek
Keswar Inlet Creek
Central Coast
Tuno Creek
West Tuno Creek
Quaal River
Kildidt Creek
Howyete Creek System
Ship Point Creek
Cull Creek
Lagoon Creek
M a ry Cove Creek
Nais Creek
F u ry Creek
Sentinel Creek
Flux Creek
Eagle Creek
Fish Creek
Cartwright Creek
Cridge Inlet CreekRivers & Smith Inlets
Nekite River
NW Vancouver Island
Deserted Creek
Marble River
Johnstone Strait
Apple River
Glendale Creek
Klinaaklini River
Kakweiken River
Kingcome River
Mackenzie Sound Creek
Shushartie River
Adam River
Georgia Strait/
Vancouver Island
Puntledge River 
Lower Fraser
Chilliwack River
Sakwi Creek
Trout Lake Creek
Upper Fraser/
T h o m p s o n
Nithi River
Leo Creek
Macdougall River
Sinta Creek
North & South
T h o m p s o n
Tsuius Creek

Pink 
Queen Charlottes
Lagins Creek
West Narrows Creek
Dawson Harbour Creek
Dawson Inlet Creek
Cone Head Creek
Indian Bay Creek
Rennell Creek
Unnamed Creek
Port Louis Creek (outer)
Stanley Creek
Dinan Creek
McClinton Creek
Lagoon Creek
Little Goose Creek
Arrow Creek
Skaat Harbour Creeks
( 2 )
Bag Harbour Creek
Tangle Creek
Ove Creek
George Bay Creek
Oxalis Creek
Carpenter Bay Creeks
( 4 )
Louscoone Inlet Creek
Staki Creek
Flamingo Inlet Creek
F a i rfax Inlet Creek
Canoe Pass Creek
East Narrows Creek
Deena Creek
Skedans Creek
Alder Island Creek
Nass System
Vetter Creek
Gingit Creek
Gitzyon Creek
Seaskinnish Creek
Leverson Lake system
Cascade Creek
Turk Creek
Roberson Creek
Bear River
Skeena System
Fiddler Creek
Bulkley River above
H o u s t o n
Tobaggan Creek
Nine Mile CreekNorth Coast
Madeline Creek
Big Falls Creek
Sparkling Creek
Sheneeza Creek
Spencer Creek
Kingtown Inlet Creeks
Skull Creek
Rawlinson Anchorage
C r e e k
Foote Creek
Central Coast
Noeick River
Bullock Channel Creeks
( 4 )
Windfall Creek
Wathl Creek
Kildidt Creek
Kiididt Lagoon Creek
Sagar Creek
Green River
Ship Point Creek
Bulley Bay Creek
Osment Creek
Kwakwa Creek
Meyers Pass Creek
Bottleneck Creek
Quigley Creek
Powles Creek
Blee Creek
Bloomfield Creek
Dally Creek
Nais Creek
Packe Creek
Tyler Creek
Busey Creek
Steep Creek
Roland Creek
Linnea Creek
Duffey Creek
Noble Creek
Sentinel Creek
Clifford Creek
Mcdonald Creek
Salmon Creek
McMickling Creek
Tuwartz Creek
Rivers & Smith Inlets
Amback CreekNW Vancouver Island
Gold River
Leiner River
Tahsis River
Zeballos River
Kaoulk River
Arlish River
Tahsish River
Kauwlnch River
Mahatta Creek
Kewquodie Creek
Klootchlimmis Creek
Waukwaas Creek
Koprino River
SW Vancouver Island
Nitinat River
Sarita River system
Somass River system
Moyeha River 
Johnstone Strait
Gray Creek
Kamano Bay & Kamano
C r e e k s
Sim River
Ahta Valley Creek
Viner Sound Creek
Mackenzie Sound Creek
Stranby River
Nahwitti River
Shushartie River
Tsulquate River
Mills Creek
Hyde Creek
Tsitika River
Pye Creek
Turston Bay Creek
Granite Bay Creek
Georgia Strait/
Vancouver Island
Englishman River
Sloquet Creek
Mackay Creek
Ashlu Creek
Shovelnose Creek 
Lower Fraser
Kanaka Creek
West Creek
Whonnock Creek
Stave River
Silverdale CreekC h u m
Queen Charlottes
Chinukundl Creek
Clapp Basin Creek
Hobbs Creek
Carmichael Creek
Sewell Inlet Creek
Echo Harbour Creek
R a s p b e r r y Creek
Fanny Creek
Edwards Creek
Lomgon Creek
Bottle Inlet Creek
Douglas Inlet Creek
Peel Inlet Creek
South Bay Creek
Haans Creek
Skedans Creek
Breaker Bay Creek
Takellv Cave Creek
Burnaby Narrows Creek
Heater Creek
Luxana Creek
Nass System
Kincolith River
Chambers Creek
Ksemanaith Creek
Lachmach River
Leverson Lake system
Kwinamass River
Oth Creek
Donahue Creek
Georgia River
Bear River
Skeena System
Shames Slough
Zymagotitz River
Kleanza Creek
Lakelse River
Deep Creek
Lower Babine River
North Coast
Kumealon Creek
Denise Creek
Silver Creek
Three Mile Creek
Monckton Inlet Creeks
Mikado Lake system
Cuttle Creek
Alpha Creek
Endhill Creek
Banks Lake system
Ryan CreekCentral Coast
Koeye River
Namu River
Camp Creek
Dean River
Skowquiltz River
Deep Bay Creek
Pine River & Lake
Tankeeah River
Big Creek
Marshall Creek
Head Creek
Aaltanhash River
Klekane River
Paril River
Wathi Creek
Nalbeelah Creek
Kihess Creek
Kisameet Lake streams
Sally Creek
Deer Pass Lagoon
Creeks (2)
Sound Point Lagoon
C r e e k
Kwakwa Creek
Canoona River
Quigley Creek
Powles Creek
Fifer Creek
Packe Creek
Busey Creek
Dallain Creek
Wale Creek
Roland Creek
Chapple Creek
Salmon Creek
Fish Creek
Cartwright Creek
McMickling Creek
Tuwartz Creek
C h e r r y Creek
Rivers & Smith Inlets
Hogan Creek
Amback Creek
NW Vancouver Island
Silverado Creek
Jacklah River
Ban Creek
Canoe Creek
Cleagh Creek
Hawisnakwi Creek
Quashtin Creek
Dominic Creek4 3 E N D A N G E R E D  S A L M O N  O F  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N F O R E S T

N O W  O R  N E V E R 4 4
C h u m c o n t ’ d
SW Vancouver Island
Tugwell Creek
Doobah Creek
Pachena River
Carnation Creek
Franklin River
China Creek
Snug Basin Creek
Henderson River
Holford Creek
Useless Creek
Dutch Harbour Creek
e a s t
Pipestem Creek
Little Maggie River
Twin Rivers west
Lost Shoe Creek
L. Whitepine Cove Creek
Hot Springs Cove
Debbie Creeks
Johnstone Strait
Unnamed Creek
O rford River
Unnamed Creek
Klinaklini River
Lull Creek
Gilford Creek
Wahkana Bay Creek
Charles Creek
Bamford Creek
Nahwitti River
Tsulquate River
Keogh River
Salmon River
Georgia Strait/
Vancouver Island
Oyster River
Waterloo Creek
U n n a m e d
French Creek
Rockey Creek
Shawnigan Creek Georgia Strait/
M a i n l a n d
Mackay Creek
Eagle Creek
Nelson Creek
Ruby Creek
Forbes Creek
Klite River
Little Toba River
Brem River 
Lower Fraser
West Creek
Siddle Creek
Sakwi Creek
Serpentine River



Bald Eagles thrive in the coastal
temperate rainforests of B.C. and
are heavily dependent for food on
h e a l t h y , abundant runs of salmon.
( M c A l l i s t e r )The Khutze River valley is home 
to a rich variety of wildlife including
grizzly bears, wolves and the rare
marbled murrelet. It supports 
several species of salmon including
an endangered run of chinook.
Western Forest Products holds the
logging rights. ( M c A l l i s t e r )
G r e e n p e a c e
Founded in Canada, 1971
Fondé au Canada, 1971
Va n c o u v e r
1726 Commercial Drive
Va n c o u v e r
British Columbia
Canada  V5N 4A3
&604 253-7701
FA X604 253-0114
To r o n t o
Suite 605
250 Dundas Street W e s t
Toronto, Ontario
Canada  M5T 2Z5
&416 597-8408
FA X416 597-8422
M o n t r é a l
2444 Notre-Dame ouest
Montréal (Québec)
Canada  H3J 1N5
&514 933-0021
FA X514 933-1017