# Archivo original: offshore-wind-implementing-a.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:08 -03 2025

OFFSHORE WINDIMPLEMENTING ANEW POWERHOUSEFOR EUROPE
GRID CONNECTION ,ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
ASSESSMENT &POLITICAL FRAMEWORK
REPORT 2005
report |  offshore wind power  |  issue climate


published by Greenpeace International
date March 2005
institute Deutsche WindGuard GmbH,
Gerhard Gerdes, Andreas Jansen, Dr . Knut Rehfeldt
Greenpeace International, Sven Teske
editor Donna Mattfield and Rob Sykes
cover design Tania Dunster , kÏ design,The Netherlands
contact person sven.teske@int.greenpeace.orgOFFSHORE WINDIMPLEMENTING ANEW POWERHOUSEFOR EUROPE
GRID CONNECTION ,ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
ASSESSMENT &POLITICAL FRAMEWORK

 - 
 
 
  
“ Offshore Wind Energy - Implementing a New Powerhouse for Europe” Grid Connection, Environmental Impa ct, Assessment, Political Framework 
  
Contracting Body: Greenpeace International, Sven Teske 
Ottho Heldringstraat, 1066 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
 
 
Contractor: Deutsche WindGuard GmbH 
Oldenburger Straße 65, 26316 Varel, Germany 
Authors: Gerhard Gerdes, Andreas Jansen, Dr. Knud Rehfeldt Project-no.: VW04118  
  
 
 


 
 
 

 - 
 
 
 Table of Content
FOREWORD FROM GREENPEACE 1  
What are the obstacles hindering the implementation of offshore-wind? 3  
1 INTRODUCTION 8  
2 OFFSHORE WIND POWER DEVELOPMENT IN EUROPE 15  
2.1 Sweden 17 
2.2 Denmark 17 
2.3 Germany 17 
2.4 The Netherlands 18  
2.5 Belgium 19 
2.6 United Kingdom 19  
2.7 Ireland 19 
2.8 France 21 
2.9 Spain 21 
2.10 Overview of offshore wind energy projects in Europe 22  
3 OBSTACLES TO OFFSHORE WIND ENERGY UTILISATION AND REGULATIONS 28  
3.1 Obstacles relating to power transmission, grid connection and grid integration 
  28 
3.2 Legal framework conditions around environmental impact assessment 34  
3.3 Finance-related obstacles 44  
3.4 Chapter Summary 45  
4 TECHNOLOGICAL POSSIBILITIES OF POWER TRANSMISSION AND GRID 
INTEGRATION 47  
4.1 Transmitting electricity over long distances 47  
4.1.1  HVAC 48  
4.1.1.1  AC sea cable 49  
4.1.2  HVDC 51  
4.1.2.1  Classic thyristor-based HVDC 51  
4.1.2.2  Transistor-based HVDC 52  
4.1.2.3  DC sea cable 53  
4.1.3  Comparison of transport technologies 55  
4.1.4  Transmission onshore 57  
4.2 Technologies of submarine cable laying 57  
4.2.1  Trenching depth 58  
4.2.2  Digging methods 60  
4.2.2.1  Dredging 60  
4.2.2.2  Trenching 61  
4.2.2.3  Cable laying 64  
5 ECOLOGICAL ASPECTS 65  

 
 
 5.1 Subjects covered in research projects - overview 65  
5.1.1  Reports on offshore environmental impact assessments and studies 66  
5.1.2  Earlier studies with relevance of marine environmental impacts 67  
5.1.3  Further documentation of studies 67  
5.1.4  Summary of existing and ongoing studies 68  
5.2 Focus on specific subjects 70  
5.2.1  Electromagnetic fields 71  
5.2.2  Acoustical impact on marine life based on actual research programmes 72  
5.2.2.1  Birds 77  
5.2.2.2  Marine mammals 77  
5.2.2.3  Fish 80  
5.2.2.4  Benthic (benthos) 81  
5.2.2.5  Conclusion 81  
6 STRATEGIES TO DEVELOP THE OFFSHORE WIND ENERGY SECTOR 83  
6.1 Measures relating to power transmission, grid connection and grid integration 
  83 
6.2 Political measures 84  
6.3 Programmes, networks and incentives 85  
APPENDIX A 90 
APPENDIX B 120 
APPENDIX C 128 
APPENDIX D 141 
APPENDIX E 150 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 1
 Foreword from Greenpeace 
 
The Kyoto Protocol has now come into force, paving the way for the international community 
to take significant steps towards curbing harmful greenhouse emissions and combating 
climate change. Climate change is an undeniable reality and its impacts are now being felt 
across the world. Now is the time for the world to take action.  
According to the Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change Third Assessment Report 
(2001)1 the global average temperature had already increased by ± 0.6° C by the end of the 
20th century, and it is estimated that due to the greenhouse gases already emitted into the 
atmosphere we are irrevocably committed to 1.2 or 1.3° C warming, even if all emissions were stopped immediately.  
The longstanding policy of the Climate Action Network
2, of which Greenpeace is a member, 
states that the objective of climate policy should be to keep global mean temperature rise from human-induced climate change to less than 2° C above pre-industrial levels. This was 
recently reinforced by the report from the US, UK and Australian International Climate 
Change Task Force
3, which said, “Above the 2° C level, the risks of abrupt, accelerated or 
runaway climate change also increase. Although there are serious damages associated with 
temperature increases of between 1 and 2° C,  impacts rapidly become more severe above 
this level of warming. 
 
Point of no return 
There is a limited time window for limiting gl obal mean temperature warming to less than 2° 
C, and on the basis of current knowledge of the climate system means that concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere must peak at or near 400 ppmv and be decreased as 
rapidly as possible thereafter. To meet this target calls for dramatic action in the next one to 
two decades to cut emissions in the industrialised world, to level of the growth in rapidly industrialising economies, and reach global emissions reductions on the order of 50% by 
mid-century. 
Over the same time frame, utilities and politicians will be making the regulatory and 
investment decisions which will determine what the next generation of power plants will look 
like. The decisions they make, and in particular whether they choose to embrace offshore 
wind technology, will determine whether or not we and our descendents face a future of 
catastrophic climate change. 
 
Offshore wind – a crucial tool in the race to cut our carbon emissions  
Wind power is the fastest growing energy technology in the world. It has proved that 
renewable energy is ready and able to match conventional energy technologies euro for 
euro, kilowatt for kilowatt. The industry has now developed technology of sufficient size, 
reliability and efficiency that it is ready to unlock the vast offshore wind resources that exist 
around the world. In Europe alone, the North and Baltic seas boast massive wind resources that have so far remained largely unexploited.  
                                                
 
1 See http://www.ipcc.ch 
2 See “ Preventing Dangerous Climate Change: CAN position on adequacy of commitments ”, at: 
http://www.climnet.org/resources/futurecommitments.htm 
3 See “ Meeting the climate challenge: Recommendations  of the International Climate Change Taskforce ”, at: 
http://www.tai.org.au/WhatsNew_Files/Whats_New.htm 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 2
 The ‘repowering debate’ in Europe has already begun. Roughly two-thirds (100GW) of the 
overall installed coal-fired generating capacity within the 25-member EU is provided by power plants that are over 20 years old.  This means that between 75 and 100 coal-fired 
plants will retire within the next two decades. Europe’s power sector must seriously consider 
offshore wind farms, as offshore wind is ideally positioned to replace this retiring capacity. 
The wind industry itself is ready, but only if supported by European energy policy. Greenpeace is therefore calling for a drastic policy shift.  
 
Offshore wind is one of the most important technologies in the switch from fossil and 
nuclear fuels to clean, renewable energy sources.  
Greenpeace has been pushing the possible boundaries of offshore wind technology for a 
long time. This report was commissioned as part of a series of well-received reports that look 
at the various technological and regulatory barriers that need to be overcome for offshore 
wind to fulfil its potential. The present report should be read in the context of the existing Greenpeace publications: 
 
North Sea offshore wind – A powerhouse for Europe , a report published by Greenpeace 
in October 2000 and written by the German Wind E nergy Institute (DEWI), reveals that the 
technology and economics of wind power make it well able to tap the North Sea's vast quantities of wind energy. It also tackles in detail the environmental impacts of offshore wind 
farms on bird life, marine mammals, fish and other marine ecosystems, setting out guidelines 
for environmental best practice in future dev elopment. This report found that exploitation of 
an additional 1% per year, up to 2012, of the total offshore wind resource available to the six North Sea countrie
s could save 186 million tonnes of CO 2 emissions a year – equivalent to 
10.3% of the annual CO 2 emissions of these countries.  
 
Sea wind Europe  is a vision for offshore wind energy commissioned by Greenpeace from 
UK wind energy consultants Garrad Hassan and published in March 2004. It assesses whether it would be possible to supply 30% of EU electricity demand – 720TWh/year – from 
offshore wind by 2020. This scenario entails the installation of 240GW of generating capacity 
by 2020, which is approximately ten times more than the present combined amount of installed on- and offshore wind power in the EU. The report notes that it would require 
“50,000 of the largest offshore turbines placed in 3% of the EU's seabed. This capacity would 
generate 720TWh of electricity.” 
 
Windforce 12  is a joint report from Greenpeace International and the European Wind Energy 
Association – the latest edition was launched in May 2004. Windforce 12 is a “blueprint to 
achieve 12% of the world’s electricity from  wind power by 2020”. This report demonstrates 
that there are no technical, economic or resource barriers to supplying 12% of the world's electricity needs from wind power alone by 2020, even when set against the challenging 
backdrop of a projected two-thirds increase in electricity demand by that date. Again offshore 
wind farms play a vital role in this vision. 
 
Implementing a powerhouse for Europe 
Offshore wind energy technology is a new technol ogy created by the merging of classic wind 
energy technology and offshore technology of t he kind used to construct and install oil and 
gas platforms. Although the technology is still fairly new, experiences from the first offshore 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 3
 wind farms in Denmark, the United Kingdom, Ireland and Sweden – with a total capacity of 
more than 600MW – give cause for optimism that large-scale applications at sea are a very feasible prospect. However, there are still significant obstacles to overcome. The present report identifies some of the most pressing problems and gives some background 
information on the major aspects of grid integration and ecological compatibility. Urgent 
political action is needed on these issues in order to pave the way for the phasing out of fossil and nuclear fuels.  
In collaboration with Deutsche WindGuard GmbH , Greenpeace has compiled information on 
state-of-the-art technology to connect offshore wind farms to the onshore electricity grid; and a comprehensive overview of the ongoing work of  Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) 
within North European countries. 
 
What are the obstacles hindering the implementation of offshore-wind?  
 
New offshore wind projects face a number of pr oblems, such as confused legal frameworks, 
lengthy planning processes and uncertainty over long-term electricity prices.  
• institutional framework and administrative procedures: specifically the lack of well-
established and harmonised planning rules;  
• the difficulty of obtaining bank loans and insurance;  
• power transmission, including grid connection as well as grid integration; and  
• Environmental Impact Assessments: in particular, different national standards, and the need for offshore wind priority zones. 
The present report focuses on the issues of marine grid connection and environmental 
impact assessments only. 
 
Grid connection for offshore wind farms – a national debate with international 
relevance 
The difficulties of connecting large-scale offshore wind capacity to the existing grid are 
hindering the growth of offshore wind power. Although the situation in each European country is different, it is clear that structur al changes in the electricity supply system are 
needed in all cases. European utilities have reacted to this challenge in a variety of ways. 
While smaller utilities in the Netherlands and Denmark do not see major economic or technical barriers, large utilities companies such as the German-based E.on have said that 
integrating large-scale wind developments would cause serious difficulties at an 
unacceptable cost. However, a recent study of grid issues from the German Energy Agency 
(DENA) finds no grounds for such claims.  
The main results of this study (“Energy supply planning for the integration of wind energy into 
the grid in Germany
“) were as follows: 
 
• The integration of wind energy would require the rebuilding of approximately 5% of 
Germany’s existing high-voltage transmission lines by 2015. This would mean 
additional costs for the average household of less than €1 per year in 2015 – which 
could be covered simply by not leaving the TV set on standby. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 4
 • In total, 850km of new high-voltage grid will be required to accommodate the 
projected expansion of wind by 20154. Costs per year would be €110 million. In 
comparison, grid operators invest €2 billion every year in the whole 1.6 million 
kilometre-long grid. 
• Accelerated network expansion must begin immediately. 
• The additional costs of expanding wind energy will fall by more than half by 2015, 
based on a very conservative assumption of oil and gas price increases of 1.5% per 
year. Costs for balancing power and reserve capacity are already factored into these 
numbers.  
• Additional power stations are not required to balance wind energy. The integration of 
existing wind capacity has led to stability problems: however this was the result of 
the grid structure and the behaviour of the utilities rather than the inherent nature of 
wind power technology. 
The DENA study looks at how the onshore grid needs to change to integrate large-scale 
wind development quickly and economically. The present report complements DENA’s 
findings by looking at what needs to happen in order to construct a large-scale offshore wind 
grid infrastructure that can provide access to the integrated onshore grid outlined in the DENA report. Together, these reports outline what is required for Germany to exploit its 
entire wind resource, both onshore and offshore, to the full. 
 
More wind power leads to less need for backup capacity in Germany 
The technological advances incorporated into modern turbines enable them to provide 
considerable support to the grid. In fact the required backup capacity for dispatch within the 
German grid has decreased over the last two years by 12%, during which time 6GW of new 
wind power capacity was installed. 
 
No time to waste! 
This report takes the logical next step of looking into the development of an offshore wind 
grid. The integration of offshore wind requires urgent action and long-term planning. The 
initial proposals for projects totalling approximately 6 GW should experience no significant difficulties. However, according to the European Wind Energy Association, offshore wind 
capacity is planned to increase to 70 GW by 2020. Additional grid infrastructure will 
undoubtedly be necessary to integrate this capacity within Europe. Governments, utilities and grid operators must start preparing now in order to be ready to connect more than six gigawatts
 of clean electricity after 2010. Every delay,  every obstacle, every postponement of 
the necessary expansion of offshore wind will re duce our ability to combat climate change.  
 
Key findings  of the report 
The report concludes that currently planned offshore wind projects in the North and Baltic 
Seas and the North Atlantic should be constructed as soon as possible to garner more experience. For these projects, the problem is not grid integration but rather finance and 
insurance. To overcome these barriers, grants from national governments are required.  
However, the report also finds that a European offshore electricity grid will be required to 
integrate the offshore wind farms needed to meet the  offshore wind targets (e.g. Germany 25 GW by 2025, Netherlands 6 GW by 2020, UK 7 GW by 2015 – the overall target from 
                                                
 
4 Total wind capacity in 2015 (onshore and offshore) should be 36,6 GW 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 5
 EWEA for Europe is 70GW) which are in turn necessary to meet long-term CO 2 reduction 
targets. Planning and preparation of this grid must start now to guarantee an environmentally sound construction.  
The report also provides an overview of nearly  100 research studies relevant to offshore 
wind development in Northern Europe.  
 
Offshore wind – the way forward 
From a technical perspective, offshore wind is a proven technology. In terms of protecting the 
environment from climate change, as well as from atmospheric pollution and radioactive contamination, offshore wind is part of the solution. Economically, offshore wind is 
competitive. Now it is the task of politicians to ensure that the renewable energy revolution, 
spearheaded by offshore wind, is given the chance to succeed. 
 
Demands from the international wind sector for policy measures to facilitate implementation:  
1. More uniform procedures and practices throughout Europe e.g. EIA, zoning, approval 
procedures. 
2. Increased transparency, continuity and simplicity of legal procedures. 
3. Measures to reduce the risk for financiers and insurance companies.  
4. Provision of common grid facilities: an offshore grid and high voltage connections for 
offshore wind farms. 
 
Policy recommendations to the EU: 
1. The adoption of ambitious, legally bindi ng long-term targets for renewable energy 
sources and for the decrease of energy consumption. 
2. The removal of market barriers which hinder the growth of clean energy, including 
putting an immediate end to subsidies for dirty energy sources (fossil fuels and nuclear energy). 
3. The reform of national export credit agencies to give priority to renewable energy 
development and energy efficiency progra mmes. All energy-sector financial support 
should include targets for the uptake of renewable energies as reliable, modern energy sources for on-grid, industrial and residential applications. 
 
Sven Teske,  
Greenpeace International 
March 2005 
 
 
 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 6
 Greenpeace Policy on Marine Reser ves and Renewable Energy De-
velopments in the North Sea and the Baltic  
 
Greenpeace believes that to address the crisis in the North Sea and the Baltic it is absolutely 
vital to encourage the development of large-scale marine reserves which protect species and habitats and allow  fish populations depleted by over-fishing to regenerate. Greenpeace 
defines marine reserves as areas that are closed to all extractive uses, such as fisheries, oil 
and gas production or sand and gravel extraction and mining, as well as any form of disposal 
activity. Within these areas there would be core zones which are free from any human use, for instance areas that act as scientific refer ence areas or areas where there are particularly 
sensitive habitats or species. Human activities such as wind power installations, tourism, 
safe shipping, etc. would be permitted in the these marine reserves outside of the core zones. 
Greenpeace's proposals for marine reserves apply to the whole of the North Sea and the 
Baltic. They are large areas linked in a net work and incorporate the German government's 
proposed sites for the NATURA 2000 network's Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) under 
the Habitats Directive and Special Protection Areas (SPA) under the Birds Directive. 
Greenpeace supports these proposals.  The location of the core zones inside the reserves Greenpeace proposes must be prescribed by scientists. As matters now stand, the proposed SAC and SPA areas in the NATURA 2000 network are potentially core zones and thus areas 
in which no human uses ought to be allowed. 
In the same way as Greenpeace supports the development of marine reserves it supports 
the development of renewable sources of energy (Germany targeting 25,000 to 30,000 
megawatts from wind power by 2030). It is no w undisputed that our climate has got out of 
control. To limit the scale of this, discharges of greenhouse gases, particularly carbon dioxide, have to be very greatly reduced. Should the discharge of greenhouse gasses 
continue unabated, however, whole ecosystems are threatened with irrevocable destruction. 
The eventual damage as a result of climate c hange will at the same time cost Germany 
alone up to 137 billion euros by 2050. To chec k this development, renewable sources of 
energy must be developed on a huge scale in addition to seeing that energy is used more 
efficiently. It is feasible and sensible in the long term (by 2010) for energy to be supplied entirely from renewable sources. 
Given the urgent threat posed by climate change it is absolutely essential  to develop 
renewable energy facilities. On account of the se verity of the problem it may be necessary to 
make an exception and sometimes place wind plants in core zones, provided that: 
• There is no feasible alternative. A 'feasible alternative' must be broadly similar to the 
originally proposed site (depth, current, wind conditions, grid access, etc.) and not 
present practical obstacles which prevent the scheme from going ahead. 
• Potential impacts are subject to both a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) 
and an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). Both should be completed before 
permission for construction is granted. The SEA is an assessment of government 
plans and policies carried out prior to their implementation, the EIA is carried out by a developer in support of an application for project consent. The EIA must address the cumulative impacts of many development si tes in a specific area and not just assess 
the impacts on a case-by-case basis. The responsibility for any cumulative impacts 
assessment should always lie with the most recent developer (so that earlier developers do not have to rewrite their EIAs). 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 7
 • Where possible, severe ecological im pacts of renewable energy developments 
should be mitigated and/or compensated for as much as is reasonably possible. 
The development of renewable energy facilities in  core zones should never be taken as a 
precedent for any other kinds of development in these areas. It is only the extreme 
seriousness of the climate crisis that means that a broad ecological analysis will sometimes favour renewable energy developments in co re zones. There should be no automatic 
renewal of development permission at the end of a facility's life. 
But in order not to have to fall back on core zones for wind power, potentially suitable areas 
for wind installations which are outsi de the proposed SAC and SPA areas should be 
designated. In the case of Germany such areas could ensure the production of 25–30,000 
megawatts by 2030 and at the same time ensure the preservation of marine biodiversity. 
The costs of developing wind power in these suitable areas will probably be higher since, in 
the case of German EEZ, these areas may lie further offshore. But the marine environment 
cannot be preserved unless there are protected areas free from any human use.  
The approach outlined above is indispensable if climate change is to be stemmed and seas 
securely protected.  
 
Cable lines for offshore wind installations ought to: 
1. be grouped together  2. go through the Wadden Sea national  park as little as possible  
3. not go through protected area 1 of the national park  
4. not go through the core zones of the reserves, i.e. not through the SAC and SPA 
protection areas as they are now proposed. 
 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 8
 1 Introduction 
Offshore wind power is one of the largest-scal e solutions for a nuclear- and pollution-free 
electricity supply in the future. Moreover, o ffshore wind power is essential to achieve the 
CO2 emissions reduction targets of the European countries and their individual member 
states, which came into force along with the Kyoto protocol. It has the potential to become an essential part of global electricity supply. A report by Garrad Hassan, commissioned by 
Greenpeace in 2004, concluded that almost a third of Europe's total electricity demand could 
be met from clean, renewable offshore wind power by 2020. That is enough to supply electricity to every single one of the 150 million EU households [Ref 1]. 
The worldwide potential for offshore wind is vast and the implementation of the first offshore 
wind farms has already begun. Nevertheless offshore wind energy still faces questions and difficulties concerning technical, environmental and economic viability. The intention of this study is to look at current offshore wind energy development activities in Europe and to 
consider the impediments that lead to a prolonged development phase. In particular, the 
constraints around power transmission, grid connection and grid integration, and the potential environmental implications are address ed in more detail. Finally, strategies have 
been presented to overcome these constraints in order to realise the nationally set targets. 
Chapter 2 begins by presenting the EU targets for shares of electricity generated from 
renewable energy sources according to the European RES-E Directive from 2001. It then 
looks at ongoing activities and plans for offshore wind energy exploitation in several 
European countries, along with specific national political targets. In 2003 the European Wind Energy Association (EWEA) announced that it had increased its European target for installed 
wind power capacity by 2010 to 75GW, of which 10GW should be realised by offshore 
installations. Achieving this target would mean that wind power alone would meet one-third of the EU's total Kyoto commitment by 2010. For 2020 the target is set to 180GW total installed wind power capacity, of which 70GW should be realised offshore. 70 GW could generate 
approx. 10% of the EU´s electricity demand (Basis 2000). 
Chapter 3 introduces several of the constraints to offshore wind power development. It then 
examines in detail those constraints concer ning power transmission, grid connection and 
integration, European and national legal framew ork conditions for environmental impact 
assessment (EIA) and project financing.  
However, the move to offshore wind power means losing one of the big advantages that 
onshore wind energy offers over conventional power generation, i.e. that electricity can be generated in the same place that it is consumed. As offshore wind farms will initially be situated at some distance from the coast, the length of the cable routes required to transmit 
the energy to land will range from around 10km to more than 100 km. This distance becomes 
even longer, when we consider transmission direct ly into main energy consumption areas, as 
is the case in particular in the UK. 
Classic high voltage direct current systems based on thyristor technology are currently the 
only method for transmitting high capacities over large distances between wind farms and land. The alternative high voltage direct current transistor systems do not have these 
disadvantages, as they can transmit energy in both directions and can provide capacitive as 
well as inductive reactive power. The disadvantage to these systems is their limited transmission capacity, which at present lies at 250–300MW. Onshore grid connection causes 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 9
 further significant restrictions. The need fo r balancing energy is addressed, along with 
potential wind turbine refinements, which may be able to support grid stability. 
National rules dictate EIA requirements. Special attention has to be paid to any international 
or EU treaties or conventions in the implemen tation of offshore wind farm projects. In this 
context the European Council Directives 85/ 337/EG and 97/11/EEC (including amendments) 
are mentioned. Since EU Directives are incorpor ated into the national legislation of individual 
countries, legislation and regulative bodies differ from country to country and an overview is 
provided for some European countries (the UK, Denmark, the Netherlands, Ireland, Belgium 
and Germany). 
There is a need to creating more security in the project planning process in order to 
overcome the financial obstacles to developmen t. Firstly, questions over grid connection 
should be resolved. Secondly, insurance coverage has to be fair and realistic. Thirdly, planning security needs to be increased by  guaranteeing power purchase agreements or 
feed-in tariffs. To bring this about, countries must establish appropriate remuneration 
systems, including stipulations that ensure that electricity supplying companies and grid 
operators are obliged to purchase electricity generated by offshore wind power. A tariff-based system is therefore most suited to promotion of this new market, as has been shown 
by the onshore wind sector in Denmark, Germany and Spain. 
Chapter 4 comes back to the issues of electricity transmission over long distances, grid 
connection and grid integration. Several types of transmission systems and cables, suitable 
for offshore wind power applications, are considered. Modern methods of offshore cable 
laying are also addressed. 
Two main types of transmission systems exist, high voltage alternating current (HVAC) and 
high voltage direct current (HVDC) systems. Both systems, HVAC and HVDC may be based 
on high or extra high voltage level. A high transmission voltage reduces transmission losses 
in the cables. 
Theoretically, the voltage of HVAC systems can reach up to 800kV; however, for offshore 
applications such a high voltage level is not realistic, as the enormous level of insulation 
needed for sea cables would not be mechanically feasible. There are basically two types of 
AC sea cable, the three-conductor cable and the single-conductor cable. The great 
advantage of the three-conductor cable is that the electromagnetic field of the three 
conductors is almost neutralised at the surface of the cable, and plastic is used instead of oil as stabilising material to fill the hollow space, preventing broken cables from emitting oil into the sea water. The single-conductor cable is a cable with just one conductor for a single 
phase, so that three single-conductor cables are required for a three-phase system. The 
advantage of this type of cable is its high transmission capacity, even though the absolute losses rise with increasing transmission capacities. For three-phase AC transmission, as the 
cable length increases so does the reactive power, causing higher losses. Reactive power 
compensation can only take place at either end of the cable, and the reactive power in the cable drastically reduces the ability to transmit power through a very long AC cable. These 
losses mean that the maximum practicable length of a three-phase AC sea cable is 
approximately 120km. Additional limiting parameters for sea cables are the weight and stiffness of the cables, which can cause problems while laying them.  
For transmission of electricity over long distances, high-voltage DC transmission is therefore 
preferable. There are however only a limited number of systems with capacities large enough 
for undersea power transmission. Two quite di fferent systems exist: thyristor HVDC and 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 10
 Insulated-gate bipolar transistor HVDC transmission (HVDC-IGBT). HVDC systems are far 
more expensive than HVAC. HVDC systems are usually designed to be bipolar, which allows 
a higher transfer voltage at lower insulation levels. As both converters work fully symmetrically, no current flows to ground level.  A big advantage of classic HVDC is the high 
transmission tension. A disadvantage is that it cannot generate a three-phase grid voltage to 
the offshore wind farm and cannot provide reactive power. To generate an AC voltage at fixed frequency offshore and to provide reactive power to start up the wind turbines, a 
separate diesel generator is needed. Another option is the installation of an AC cable parallel 
to the DC sea cable, to provide a voltage and reactive power source. However, this increases the number of cables needed. In contrast to thyristors, IGBTs can, by means of 
pulse-width modulation, generate sinusoidal AC voltages, which means that energy transfer 
is possible in both directions and in both regions, inductive and capacitive respectively. In offshore wind farms this feature makes it possible to generate a grid without an additional AC connection or diesel generator and to deliver reactive power if desired. 
DC sea cables have similar structural element s compared to AC ones, but are different in 
electrotechnical design. DC cables have no induced voltages and currents and thus no losses from their metal jackets. To avoid the impact of electromagnetic fields on environment 
by DC cables, the two poles of a DC system , the forward and the return conductor, have to 
be installed parallel and close to each other in order to neutralise each other: this is called a bipolar system. In monopolar systems, str ong electromagnetic fields are generated along the 
single cable and electrolysis occurs at anode and cathode of the return conductor, the sea 
water. These effects mean that monopolar syst ems are not suitable for offshore wind farm 
use. Other than this, the different transmission systems described present no clear favourite. Systems should be chosen on the basis of transmission distance and capacity and their 
particular advantages and disadvantages. Cables in coastal waters must be routed so as to 
avoid major conflicts with shipping and the natural environment.  
Depending on the situation, three options are possible for transport on land: reinforcing 
existing lines to permit higher voltages, extending high-voltage overhead lines, or continuing 
the offshore transport system on land. As offshore wind farms will probably use HVDC systems offshore, the same systems could be used for direct overland connection to the 
main consumption areas. 
Cable routes are mainly determined by environm ental and safety conditions. Several criteria 
need to be considered during cable laying and operation. The depth of the cable trench is determined by substrate type and by environment al, economic and safety factors. Digging 
and trenching methods are reviewed. The big advantage of trenching is that it can be applied 
to existing submarine cables, as well as  having a low impact on the marine environment. 
Within chapter 5, the ecological aspects are investigated. Considerable efforts have been 
made to study the influence of offshore wind farms on various areas of marine flora and 
fauna, the environment and maritime safety. No universal conclusions are possible at the moment. A major requirement identified for the future is therefore the continuation of these 
investigations. Much of the research so far conducted has been in the context of offshore 
projects that have now been constructed. Further research has been carried out in other offshore fields. This pool of research should be taken into account in order to make maximum use of the knowledge and insights that have already been gained. Moreover, some 
non-offshore related studies contain valuable and occasionally transferable knowledge. The 
magnetic fields of buried submarine cables ar e small or even zero, and it can be assumed 
that the electromagnetic fields of submarine cables for offshore wind power will not have any 
significant effects on the marine environment. However, more research could help to 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 11
 understand the effect of electromagnetic fields on marine life. The impact on the environment 
by noise and vibration constitute another topic that needs to be addressed seriously. During the construction phase of a wind farm, in particular, some species may be disturbed. It is therefore important to time construction acti vities around any seasonal migration so as to 
minimise the effects. Devices to scare vulnerable species, so as to force them temporarily to 
leave the area under construction, should al so be considered. Generally, however, a 
conscientious approach should be able to keep the effects to an acceptable degree.  
Studies on the subject show that any impacts on birds are expected to be negligible 
especially compared to statistics on bird mortality from other anthropological influences. 
Mammals form an important group, as they ar e in physiological terms highly vulnerable to 
underwater noise. The timescale is important, as no long-term (10–20 years) observations 
currently exist on behavioural change. Many spec ies are not shy and may partially return to 
baseline levels within the wind farm area at the end of construction. However, further research should be conducted into this. During noise-intensive activities the exclusion of 
specific species from that area should be c onsidered. Common seals and grey seals seem 
not to be significantly disturbed by the pres ence of offshore wind turbines, however, central 
corridors for movement between foraging areas and haul-out banks should left undisturbed 
and timing of engineering activities should allow for parturition seasons, mating seasons. 
Consideration should also be given to zones of special ecological value. 
The noise emitted from wind turbines could pot entially have an effect on the navigation and 
behaviour of fish, depending upon the frequency, intensity and duration. Fish may leave an 
area permanently, which would have a major impact on the whole food chain. Significant noise effects in the relevant frequency range are expected to being confined to the immediate vicinity of the wind turbines, with a radius of no more than several hundred 
metres. Moreover, due to the distances that the low-frequency hydrodynamic/acoustic fields 
will extend from the windmills, fish will perceive them as very different to the low-frequency 
sound emitted by other animals. Therefore, it is not expected that fish will be impaired in their 
ability to detect and interpret low-frequency sound from other marine animals. Furthermore, 
fish may become habituated to wind farm noise due to its continuous nature, as has been substantiated by one study. Nonetheless, it is recommended that more research is carried 
out into the impacts on fish species, because of the variation in potential effects from species 
to species and the influence of migrating fish species on the food chain and hence the whole ecosystem. 
Research has shown that the benefits to benthic species by settling on the wind turbine 
structures predominate the possible impact by noise and vibration. As benthos is an 
important part of the food chain, the influence of changed benthic population on marine life in the wind farm environment should be considered. 
The knowledge that has been accumulated concerning the influence of offshore wind farms 
on marine fauna and flora and on maritime safety is already reflected in most of the approval procedures for offshore wind farms. The envir onmental impact regulations have been made 
rather comprehensive, so as to avoid any serious impacts. However, as all research up until 
now has been conducted on comparatively small offshore wind farms, future EIAs need to take into account the cumulative effects of numerous installations. They will accordingly need 
to be carried out across national borders, which is particularly relevant in the case of the 
Wadden Sea. To guard against long-term environmental damage, continual and regular 
monitoring is required after the first wind farms have been installed. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 12
 Chapter 6 deals with strategies for reducing the obstacles to offshore wind farm 
development. For environmental, technical and economic reasons the linking of the cable 
systems of a number of separate wind farm proj ects to a common grid connection offers a 
good solution. If project developers are not them selves in a position to realise such a 
common approach, then governmental measures may instead be an effective means of 
achieving common grid connections or a common offshore grid. 
It is predicted that, in contrast to the upward trend in prices of conventional energy sources, 
the price of wind energy will decrease. Unlike conventional energy prices, wind energy prices 
are not determined by external factors such as political instability and rising energy demands in other regions of the world. The cost of electricity generation by wind energy is very stable 
and mainly depends just on the manufacturing costs for wind turbines, a fact, which will grow 
very important for those countries that lack the resources necessary for conventional energy. The low energy amortization time of wind turbines that is required to repay the energy needed for manufacturing and construction, and which amounts to a few months only,, 
contributes to the cost stabilising effect of wind energy. 
The solution to the question of grid connection could be the installation of a combined 
offshore-interconnected network, to which different wind farms can connect to, or the 
approval of large-capacity cable routes to separate wind farm areas. A government financial 
guarantee would allow the installation of an offshore extension to the onshore grid, without the need for the wind farm projects to have finalised approvals and finance. The security of 
knowing that a grid connection point was to be provided would give project development 
companies a secure basis on which to proceed with their wind farms. 
EU programmes, networks and incentives on tec hnical, political, social and environmental 
issues create platforms for discussion, re search, and knowledge transfer and exchange, as 
well as a basis for transnational initiatives. These transnational initiatives have a synergic 
effect and form a common lobby for pushing forward national and European offshore wind power plans and targets, while helping to reduce the legal and administrative constraints by 
improving transparency, continuity and simplicity. 
 
Principle findings:
 
 
Technical aspects:  
One of the most challenging aspects is the tran smission of electricity from the offshore wind 
farms to the onshore interconnected grid. The present study gives an overview of the technologies available for high-voltage transmissi on with high capacities over long distances, 
and also of the technologies to lay sea cables with a minimum impact on marine life. A 
comparison shows the advantages and disadvantages of alternating and direct current 
systems as well as the differences in semiconductor applications.  
The transmission of electricity to land can be carried out with low impact on the environment. 
Modern conversion and transmission technologies allow the environmentally friendly and 
ecologically safe transmission of electricit y through vulnerable ecosystems and habitats. 
However, the huge total capacity of the offshore wind farms planned in the North Sea will 
lead to a large number of cable routes. Depending on the technology chosen and the degree 
of combined planning, the number of cables required could vary substantially. As long as no 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 13
 governmental development plan is generated, devel opers of different offshore wind farms will 
plan their cable routes independently. 
 
Politics:  
The framing conditions for offshore wind farm approvals are in place. This is of course a 
great advantage for the future offshore development. In addition, in some countries the economic conditions are already established to  operate offshore wind farms on an financially 
viable basis. There are however still some considerable political obstacles to offshore wind 
energy development. These obstacles arise from the connection of wind farms to the onshore interconnected network. The first problem lies in the approval of the cable routes, which politicians can resolve by implementing development plans for sea cables in coastal 
areas. The second problem lies in the integration of large-scale wind energy capacities into 
the onshore interconnected network. Utilities are concerned about the large share of the grid that wind energy will have. They argue that syst em stability will decrease drastically and that 
large capacities of control power will be needed in the grid. However, a recent grid study in 
Germany has shown that the necessary technical grid improvements will be financially possible. In addition the technological advances of modern turbines enable them to provide 
greater support to the grid and, as recently recognised by the Bundesverband Windenergie 
(German Wind Energy Association), control powe r in the German grid fell by 12% over the 
last two years, while during the same period 6GW of new wind power capacity was installed. Whilst utilities claim that the integration of large-scale wind energy will significantly increase 
energy costs to consumers, the recent German study showed that these increases will be 
marginal: an average household will have to bear an additional €1 a month of costs in 2015. In addition the recent increase in energy prices caused by rising fossil fuel prices (for 
households in Germany in 2004, an increase of 8% for natural gas and 4.4% for electricity on 
average) suggest that it is not unlikely that that one of the very few energy sources with a stable or decreasing price in the foreseeable future will be wind energy.  
Technologically we are ready for offshore wind e nergy. Environmentally offshore wind energy 
is one of the few options, as it enables us to combat climate change while avoiding pollution 
and radioactive contamination. Economically it is competitive. Now it is the task of politicians 
to pave the way for offshore wind energy against the bias of inflexible traditional industries. 
 
Ecological aspects:
 
A broad range of investigations and studies into the impacts of the installation and operation 
of offshore wind farms on nature and environment accompanies the planning, development and installation process. Studies are on one hand collected in the frame of approval of single 
wind farm projects, on the other hand within a broad range of research projects and 
programmes. The present study gives an overview  of these investigations and research and 
of the great variety of topics that have been covered in nearly a hundred studies. 
Brief details of 99 studies are presented in tabular form, covering accidents and pollution; 
barrier effects on fauna; the benthos; seabed life and reefs; birds; risks of collision by ships; SEA and Natura2000 guidelines; electromagnetic fi elds, cables and grid; fish; hydrography; 
mammals; noise and vibration; and sediment and substrate. A short outline of most of these 
studies is given in the appendices. This snapshot of the numerous investigations that have been conducted gives an idea of the tremendous effort, which has been and continues to be 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 14
 made to investigate all the possible impacts  on nature and the environment that offshore 
wind power could have.  
In addition to the studies reviewed, which ar e mostly publicly available, numerous EIA 
studies have been conducted by offshore wind farm developers. National EIA standards 
demand a baseline survey for up to two comple te successive years before approval of a wind 
farm. The surveys to be performed cover the bird, fish, mammal and benthic life in the area of the proposed wind farm and a reference area of equal size. After the construction of an 
offshore wind farm monitoring continues for several years, to serve as input for future 
approvals of offshore wind farm installation s or extensions. The enormous amount of 
information gathered by this large number of studies and assessments offers a range of 
insights into the coastal marine fauna and flora, which would not have been gained for 
decades without the efforts of the wind energy sector. 
So far the results of these studies show that many areas far out to sea are unproblematic for 
wind energy use. The continuation of these investigations now that the first wind farms have 
been installed is a major demand of ecological organisations, which is already reflected in 
most of the approval procedures for offshore wind farms. From the studies and research programmes collected in the present report it can be concluded, that the process of installing 
offshore wind farms in European waters is accompanied by a responsible, careful and 
expertly conducted assessment and monitoring process. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 15
 2 Offshore Wind Power Development in Europe 
In line with the Kyoto Protocol, which came into effect on 16 February 2005, the European 
Union (EU) is obliged to achieve an 8% reduction in its CO2 emission equivalents (CO 2 eq) by 
2012, as compared to 1990 levels. The target of the European Union for 2020 is a reduction 
of 30% CO 2 eq, with 60% to be achieved by the year 2050. 
Table 1 shows the reductions that several EU Member States will have to achieve by 2012: 
Member State CO 2 eq reduction by 
2012 
Belgium -7.5% 
Denmark -21.0% 
Germany -21.0% 
Finland 0.0% 
France 0.0% 
Great Britain -12.5% 
Greece 25.0% 
Ireland 13.0% 
Italy -6.5% 
Luxemburg -28.0% 
Netherlands -6.0% 
Austria -13.0% 
Portugal 27.0% 
Sweden -4.0% 
Spain 15.0% 
EU-15 Total -8.0% 
Table 1: CO 2 eq emission reduction targets of several EU Member States by comparison to 
1990 levels5. 
 
A proportion of these reductions should be achieved by increased energy efficiency in 
industrial processes (technology, replacement materials, etc) and by the modernisation of 
existing power plants. However, a significant part of the reduction is intended to be achieved 
through increased use of renewable energy sources. In 2001, after long discussions between various institutions, the EU issued a directive on the promotion of electricity produced from 
renewable sources (the RES-E Directive). This directive sets out to create a framework, 
which in the medium term will facilitate a significant increase in renewable electricity 
generation within the EU. It constitutes an important milestone in shaping the regulatory framework for renewable electricity in the EU . Table 2 below shows the projected share of 
total electricity to be generated by renewable sources by 2010 in several EU Member States. 
                                                
 
5 http://www.ises.org/CDM/Mueller_German.pdf  at 06/03/2005 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 16
  RES-E % 2010 
Belgium  6% 
Denmark  29% 
Germany 12.5% 
Finland 31.5% 
France  21% 
Great Britain  10% 
Greece 20.1% 
Ireland 13.2% 
Italy  25% 
Luxembourg  5.7% 
Netherlands  9% 
Austria 78.1% 
Portugal  39% 
Sweden  60% 
Spain 29.4% 
EU-15 Total  22% 
Table 2: Proportion of total electricity to be generated by renewable energy sources by 
2010, according to the 2001 European RES-E Directive6. 
 
The RES-E Directive sets the target that 22.1% of overall electricity consumption should be 
provided by renewable energy sources by 2010.  The directive offers a broad definition of 
renewable energy sources. It includes biomass (solids, bio fuels, landfill gas, sewage 
treatment plant gas and biogas), solar (PV, heat, thermal electric), geothermal, wind, hydroelectric (large- and small-scale), wave and tidal power. 
However, offshore wind power seems to be one of the most economically attractive and 
viable options for renewable energy generation in  the short and medium term. Other studies 
show that by 2020 offshore wind power in Europe could provide 30% of the EU’s electricity, 
which is just a fraction less than is current ly supplied by nuclear power. Success on this 
scale would not only deliver enormous environm ental benefits from this clean, safe energy 
source, but would also generate an economic boom in Europe worth hundreds of billions of euros and creating up to 3 million jobs [Ref 1]. 
The first European countries began to look at offshore wind power as early as the late 1980s. 
The first pilot projects were carried out in Denmark (Vindeby, 1991). Other European countries followed closely with the Netherlands setting up three projects (Lely, 1994; 
Dronten, 1996 and Medenblik 1990ties), both of them in inshore waters. In Sweden the first 
single offshore wind turbine was erected in 1990, and in 1997 the first commercial offshore wind farm was completed (Bockstigen). 
In 2003 the European Wind Energy Association (EWEA) announced that it had increased its 
2010 target for European installed wind power capacity to 75GW, of which 10GW was to be provided by offshore sources. Achieving this ta rget would mean that wind power would meet 
one-third of the EU's total Kyoto commitment by 2010. For 2020 the target is set at 180GW 
total installed wind power capacity, of which 70GW should be in the form of offshore sources 
                                                
 
6 http://www.eufores.org/ Æ EU Policy on RES Æ Legal Documants at 06/03/2005 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 17
 [Ref 2]. 70 GW offshore wind power could generate approx. 10 % of EU´s electricity demand 
(Basis 2000). 
This chapter presents an overview of the curr ent development of offshore wind energy in 
Europe. 
2.1 Sweden 
Sweden has a national target of 10 TWh wind annually by 2015, of which at least half is 
expected to be from offshore wind. The energy agency has identified areas of national interest for wind development both on- and offshore. Sweden has identified it as a source of electricity generation that could replace nuclear, coal and oil. The state has earmarked 
funding for research and development of offshore wind power. Many political and other 
groups are lobbying in favour of offshore wind power, and have proposed legal and regulatory changes to encourage it. Some of the groups involved represent developers and 
manufacturers with vested interests in promoting offshore wind technology, and some claims 
for future growth are considered unrealistic 
7. The following Fig. 1 presents the offshore wind 
power projects that are completed (3, red), those that are approved (1 yellow) as well as 
those, which are planned (10, white). The total capacity of all 14 projects amounts to about 
2’5GW [Ref 3]. However, probably not all the planned projects will receive approval. 
2.2 Denmark 
Offshore wind power is expected to play a dominant role in the future electricity supply 
pattern in Denmark. The following Fig. 1 presents the offshore wind power projects that are 
completed (7, red) and those that are planned (2, white). No approved projects currently 
exist. The total capacity of all 9 projects amounts to about 809MW [Ref 3]. Further wind farms are planned; their realisation depends on the future political goals for offshore wind power in Denmark. 
2.3 Germany 
A serious debate about offshore wind energy started at the end of the 1990’s against the 
background of a decreasing annual installation onshore, which was expected to happen within the next years. In 2002 the German Government set a target of creating the institutional framework conditions for the real isation of 20 GW to 25 GW installed offshore 
wind power capacity to be realised by 2025 or 2030. The obstacles posed by power 
transport, grid connection and grid integration arose with progressing approval procedures
7. 
The following Fig. 1 presents the offshore wind power projects that are approved (9, yellow) 
as well as those, which are planned (31, white). The red marked project refers to a single 
near shore wind turbine. The total capacity of all 41 projects amounts to about 70GW [Ref 3]. However, by far not all projects will be realised, as not all planned projects will receive 
approval. Therefore this number is beyond realisti c predictions of the future installation 
capacities. The more realistic goal is the political target of 20-25GW by 2025-2030.  
                                                
 
7 http://www.bmu.de/files/pdfs/allgemein/app lication/pdf/windenergie_strategie_br_020100.pdf  at 06/03/2005 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 18
 Fig. 1: Offshore wind power development in northern Europe. [Ref 3] 
 
2.4 The Netherlands 
The Dutch Government is taking steps to stimulate the large-scale adoption of renewable 
electricity generation. The application of offshore wind energy is part of this policy. 
The construction of the Near Shore Wind Farm (NSW) demonstration project will be an 
important first step in the development of offshore wind energy in the Netherlands. This 
project aims to gain the knowledge and experience necessary for the construction and operation of large offshore wind farms. In addition, the Government is taking steps to 
encourage the development of 6 GW of offshore wind power by the year 2020
8. Fig. 1 above 
presents the offshore wind power projects that are completed (3, inshore red), those that are 
                                                 
8 http://www.offshorewindenergie.novem.nl/default.asp?DOC_ID=27918  at 06/03/2005 


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 19
 approved (2, yellow). There are very preliminary initiatives proposing 19 offshore wind farms 
since 1.Jan.2005. 
2.5 Belgium 
The Belgian Government has issued a zoning plan to facilitate a total of 2 GW of offshore 
wind power9. Fig. 1 above presents the offshore wind power project that is approved (1, 
yellow) but none has so far been completed and no more are yet at the planning stage. The 
total capacity of the approved project is 600 MW [Ref 3]. 
2.6 United Kingdom 
In total the British Wind Energy Association (BWEA) projects, that offshore wind will 
contribute 4% of the Government’s 2010 targets for renewable energy10. The following Fig. 2 
presents the offshore wind power projects that are completed or under construction (4, red), 
those that are approved (9, yellow) as well as those, which are planned (17, white). Projects with planning consent but awaiting construction total over 1 GW, and a second round of offshore tenders by the Crown Estate (for which applications have not yet been made) will 
add a further 7.2 GW, in total equivalent to 7 % of UK supply. The total capacity of all 30 
projects amounts to about 8.9 GW [Ref 3]. How many of the planned projects will be approved is not clear yet. 
2.7 Ireland 
In Ireland 2GW of capacity are expected from already granted exploration licences
11. The 
following Fig. 2 presents the offshore wind power projects that are completed (1, red), those 
that are approved (1, yellow) as well as those, which are planned (6, white). The total capacity of all four projects, whose installation capacities are known, amounts to about 
1.3 G W, however, the capacity of further planned projects and hence also the total capacity, 
is estimated only [Ref 3]. 
                                                
 
9 http://home.wxs.nl/~windsh/offshore.html  at 06/03/2005 
10 http://www.bwea.com/offshore/info.html  at 06/03/2005 
11 http://www.ewea.org/documents/0927-Offshore WD FINAL.pdf  at 06/03/2005; Background paper - Offshore Policy Workshop 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 20
 Fig. 2: Offshore wind power development in the United Kingdom and Ireland. [Ref 3] 
 


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 21
 2.8 France 
The French Government announced in August 2003 that it aims to develop 500MW of 
offshore wind power in domestic waters with projects in the Mediterranean Sea, North Sea 
and Atlantic Ocean12. The following Fig. 3 shows the two planned offshore wind power 
projects marked in white, though none has yet been approved or completed. The total 
capacity of the two planned projects amounts to 60 MW [Ref 3].  
2.9 Spain 
Spain has no national plans or specific inc entives for offshore wind energy development13. 
Six projects are at the planning stage (see Fig. 3). No projects have yet been completed or approved. The total capacity of all six planned projects amounts to about 2.6 GW [Ref 3]. 
 
Fig. 3: Offshore wind power development in south-west Europe. [Ref 3] 
                                                 
12 http://home.wxs.nl/~windsh/offshore.html  at 06/03/2005 
13 http://www.offshorewindenergy.org/ca-owee/indexpages /Activities_and_Prospects.php?file=actpros_p4.php  at 06/03/2005 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 22
 2.10 Overview of offshore wind energy projects in Europe 
In order to meet the EU’s agreed Kyoto targets as well as those stipulated within the 
European RES-E Directive, the European Wind Energy Association has declared targets for 
wind power development as shown in Table 314: 
Year Total installed 
capacity (MW) Installed Off-
shore (MW) 
2010 75.000 10.000 
2020 180.000 70.000 
Table 3: Latest EWEA targets.  
To achieve the EU and EWEA targets, the realization has to be pushed at an early stage. 
Therefore, in addition to the defining of common targets, the developing of common approaches between EU Member States may be beneficial in some areas. Increased 
dialogue around a range of trans-boundary aspects may pave the way for such common 
approaches by simplifying and harmonising admin istrative procedures and institutional 
frameworks as well as improving transpar ency and continuity. This approach may be 
particularly beneficial with regard to: environmental impact assessments; assignment of 
areas to be developed, cable routes, traffic routes and shipping areas; and safety standards.  
 
                                                
 
14
 http://www.ewea.org/documents/13190_policy briefing_4.pdf  at 06/03/2005 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 23
 Table 4 gives key information about the offshore wind energy projects so far developed 
within the EU, while Table 5 lists all the offshore wind energy projects mentioned in sections 
2.1 - 2.9 and shown in Fig. 1 - Fig. 3 above. 
Table 4: Offshore wind energy projects so far completed within the EU. [Ref 4]  Project Country CompletedCapacity 
[MW]Turbines 
(amount, type)Water 
depth [m]Distance 
from coast 
[km]OperatorTotal investment in 
millions of euros*Investment per 
MW in millions 
of euros*
Vindeby Denmark 1991 4.9511 * Bonus 450 
kW3 – 5 1.5 Energi E2 10.25 2.1
Lely (Ijssel 
Lake)The 
Netherlands1994 24 * NedWind 500 
kW5 – 10 0.75 Nuon 4.5 2.3
Tuno Knob Denmark 1995 510 * Vestas V39 / 
500 kW3 – 5 6 Midtkraft 10.4 2.1
Dronten (Ijssel 
Lake)The 
Netherlands1996 16.828 * Nordtank 
600 kW5 0.02 Nuon 20.5 1.2
Bockstigen Sweden 1997 2.755 * WindWorld 
550 kW5.5 – 6.5 4 Vindkompaniet 4.7 1.9
Utgrunden Sweden 2000 10.57 * Enron Wind 
1.5 MW8 – 10 8 GE Energy 13.9 0.97
BlythUnited 
Kingdom2000 42 * Vestas V66 / 
2 MW8.5 1Blyth Offshore 
(Amec Wind, 
Powergen, 
Shell, Nuon)6.32 1.11
Middelgrunden Denmark 2000 40 20 * Bonus 2 MW 4 – 8 2Middelgrunden 
Wind Turbine 
Cooperative, 
Energi E251.3 0.9
Yttre 
StengrundSweden 2001 105 * NEG Micon 
72 / 2 MW7.5 – 8.6 5 Energi E2 13 1.3
Horns Rev Denmark 2003 16080 * Vestas V80 / 
2 MW6 – 14 14 – 20 Elsam, Eltra 300 1.31
Samsø Denmark 2003 2310 * Bonus 2.3 
MW11 – 18 2.5 Samsø Havind 35 1.07
Frederikshavn Denmark 2003 10.62 * Vestas V90 / 
3 MW, 1 * Bonus 
2.3 MW, 1 * 
Nordex N90 / 2.3 
MW1 0.5 MBD / Elsam n.s. n.s.
Nysted Denmark 2003 165.672  * Bonus 2.3 
MW6 – 10 9Energi E2, 
Dong, Sydkraft268.8 1.19
Arklow Bank Ireland 2003 25.2 7 * GE 3.6 MW 2 – 5 12GE Energy, 
Airtricityn.s. n.s.
North HoyleUnited 
Kingdom2003 6030 * Vestas V80 / 
2 MW8 – 12 7 – 8RWE npower 
renewables105.7 1.23
Emden Germany 2004 11 * Enercon E-
112, 4.5 MW3 0.01 Enova n.s. n.s.
Scroby SandsUnited 
Kingdom2004 6030 * Vestas V80 / 
2 MW2 – 12 2 E.ON UK 107.1 1.25
Total 601.4 326
* Source: Garrad Hassan

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 24
  Number Project Name Project Developer Number 
of Tur-
bines (in 
brackets: 
extension 
phase) Capacity 
[MW] (in 
brackets: 
extension 
phase) Status 
 Sweden      
 1 Bockstigen  Vindkompaniet   5 2.75 built in 
1997 
 2 Utgrunden  GE Energy  7 10.5 built in 
2000 
 3 Yttre Stengrund Energi E2  5 10 built in 
2001 
 4 Utgrunden II Airicole   24 90 approved
 5 Klasarden  Vindkompaniet   16 44 approved
 6 South Öland Airicole   50 180 planned 
 7 Southeast Öland Airicole   21 75.6 planned 
 8 Northeast Öland Airicole   21 50 planned 
 9 Blekinge  Airicole   30 108 planned 
 10 North Midsjöbanken Airicole   79 280 planned 
 11 South Midsjöbanken Airicole   227 820 planned 
 12 Smygehamn  Airicole   28 100.8 planned 
 13 Lillgrund Bank Eurowind   48 110 approved
 14 Kriegers Flak Sweden Offshore Wind 128 640 planned 
 Denmark      
 15 Vindeby  Energi E2  11 4.95 built in 
1991 
 16 Tuno Knob  Midtkraft     10 5 built in 
1995 
 17 Middelgrunden   Middelgrunden Wind Turbi-
nen Kooperative/Energi E2 20 40 built in 
2000 
 18 Horns Rev  Elsam/Eltra     80 160 built in 
2002 
 19 Nysted   Energi E2/Dong/Sydkraft    72 165.6 built in 
2003 
 20 Samsø   Samsø Havind    10 23 built in 
2002 
 21 Frederikshavn   MBD/Elsam     4 10.6 built in 
2003 
 22 Horns Rev II not given away yet ca. 80 200 planned 
 23 Nysted II  not given away yet ca. 80 200 planned 
 Germany, North Sea     
 24 Emden   Enova     1 4.5 built in 
2004 
 25 Butendiek   OSB Offshore-Bürger-
Windpark Butendiek   80 240 approved 
2002 
 26 Borkum West  Prokon Nord    12 -208 60 (1040) approved 
2001 
 27 Wilhelmshaven   Winkra/Enercon     1 4.5 approved
 28 Borkum Riffgrund 
West Energiekontor     80 -458 280 (1800) approved 
2004 
 29 Borkum Riffgrund  Plambeck     77 -180 231 (746) approved 
2004 
 30 Amrumbank West  Rennert Offshore/Eon Energy 
Projects  80 400 approved 
2004 
 31 Nordsee Ost 
(Amrumbank)     Winkra     80 -250 400 (1250) approved 
2004 
 32 Sandbank 24      Sandbank 24/Projekt GmbH  120 -980 420 (4720) approved 
2004 
 33 Dan Tysk      Geo     80 -300 400 (1500) planned 
 34 Meerwind       Windland     75 -234 265 (819) planned 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 25
  Number Project Name Project Developer Number 
of Tur-
bines (in 
brackets: 
extension 
phase) Capacity 
[MW] (in 
brackets: 
extension 
phase) Status 
 35 Weiße Bank 2010     OSB Offshore-Bürger-
Windpark Butendiek   540 2700 planned 
 36 Forseti       Prokon Nord    1750 17500 planned 
 37 Globaltech I Nordsee Windpower    80 -320 360 (1440) planned 
 38 Offshore North Sea 
Windpower    Enova     45 -251 2025 
(1255) approved 
2005 
 39 Hochsee Windpark 
Nordsee 54°25’    EOS Offshore    119 -508 5355 
(2286) planned 
 40 Godewind       Plambeck     80 -224 320 (896) planned 
 41 Uthland       Geo     80 400 planned 
 42 Weiße Bank      Energiekontor     80–90 -
170 280-315 
(595) planned 
 43 Jules Verne      Plambeck     3000 13500 planned 
 44 Ventotec Nord 1     Arcadis (Deutsche Bank  50 -200 150 -600 planned 
 45 Ventotec Nord 2     Arcadis (Deutsche Bank  50 -200 150 -600 planned 
 46 Nördlicher Grund      Geo/ABB/Global  Renewable 
Energy Partners  87 -402 360 (2195) planned 
 47 Hochsee Windpark 
He dreiht Eos Offshore      119 535.5 planned 
 48 TGB North   ep4 offshore      287 -596 10045 
(2549.5) planned 
 49 H2-20    Geo       80 -800 400 (4000) planned 
 50 Nordergründe    Energiekontor       25 -45 125 (270) planned 
 51 Riffgat    Enova       44 220 planned 
 52 Bard Offshore I  Bard Engineering      80 -320 400 (1600) planned 
 53 Austerngrund    Rennert Offshore      80 400 (400) planned 
 54 Deutsche Bucht   Rennert Offshore      80 400 (400) planned 
 Germany, Baltic Sea     
 55 Arcona Becken 
Südost  AWE (Eon Energy Projects 80 -201 400 (1005) planned 
 56 Pommersche Bucht   Winkra       70 -200 350 (1000) planned 
 57 Adlergrund    OWP       80 -160 280 (720) planned 
 58 Beltsee    Plambeck       25 (59-83) 75 (415) planned 
 59 Kriegers Flak   Offshore Ostsee Wind AG    40 -80 140 
(320.5) planned 
 60 Ventotec Ost 2  Arcadis (Deutsche Bank  50 -200 150 (600) planned 
 61 Sky 2000   Geo/Eon Energy Projects     Mai 50 10 (100) planned 
 62 Baltic I  Offshore Ostsee Wind AG  21 51 planned 
 63 Breitling   Offshore Ostsee Wind AG  1 2.3 planned 
 64 Wismar   Arcadis (Deutsche Bank  1 2 planned 
 United Kingdom     
 65 Blyth   Eon UK/Amec/Shell/Nuon    2 4 built in 
2000 
 66 North Hoyle  RWE npower renewables   30 60 built in 
2003 
 67 Scroby Sands  Eon UK    30 60 under 
construc-
tion 
 68 Kentish Flats  Elsam/Global Renewable 
Energy Partners  30 90 under 
construc-
tion 
 69 Solway Firth  Offshore Energy Ressources  60 216 approved
 70 Barrow   Centrica/Dong/Statkraft     30 108 approved
 71 Burbo Bank  Elsam/Seascape Energy    30 90 approved

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 26
  Number Project Name Project Developer Number 
of Tur-
bines (in 
brackets: 
extension 
phase) Capacity 
[MW] (in 
brackets: 
extension 
phase) Status 
 72 Rhyle Flats  RWE npower renewables   30 150 approved
 73 Scarweather Sands  United Utilities    30 108 approved
 74 Gunfleet Sands I GE Gunfleet Ltd.   30 108 approved
 75 Cromer   Norfolk Offshore Wind   30 108 approved
 76 Lynn   Centrica/AMEC     30 108 approved
 77 Inner Dowsing  Centrica/Offshore Wind 
Power 30 120 approved
 78 Shell Flat  Cirrus Energy  90 324 planned 
 79 Teeside   Northern Offshore Wind 30 90 planned 
 80 Walney   Dong/Statkraft   k.A. 450 planned 
 81 West Duddon  Scottish Power  k.A. 500 planned 
 82 Gwynt y Mor RWE npower renewables 200 750 planned 
 83 Thanet   Warwick Energie Ltd. k.A. 300 planned 
 84 London Array  London Array  300 1000 planned 
 85 Gunfleet Sands II Delatic   k.A. 64 planned 
 86 Greater Gabbard  Airtricity/Flour   140 500 planned 
 87 Sheringham   Ecoventures   60–80  315 planned 
 88 Docking Shoal  Centrica/AMEC   k.A.  500 planned 
 89 Lincs   Centrica/Offshore Wind 
Power k.A.  250 planned 
 90 Race Bank  Centrica/AMEC   k.A.  500 planned 
 91 Dudgeon East  Warwick Energy  k.A.  300 planned 
 92 Triton Knoll  RWE npower renewables k.A.  1200 planned 
 93 Humber   Humber Wind Ltd.   k.A.  300 planned 
 94 Westernmost Rough Total     k.A.  240 planned 
 Ireland      
 95 Arklow Bank  GE Energy    7 -200 25 (545.2) built in 
2003 
 96 Kish Bank  Kish Konsortium    n.b.  50 planned 
 97 Blackwater Bank -1 Wind Farm Development 
(first right) n.b.  n.b. planned 
 98 Blackwater Bank -2 Harland & Wolf (2nd right) n.b.  n.b. planned 
 99 Codling Bank  Harland & Wolf   220 660 planned 
 100 Bray Bank  Kish Konsortium    n.b.  25 planned 
 101 Dundalk Bay  Sure Partners Ltd   n.b n.b planned 
 102 Gaoithe Sceirde Teo Skerd Ro cks    n.b. n.b. planned 
 The Netherlands 
 103 Lely (Ijsselmeer)  Nuon     4 2 built in 
1994 
 104 Dronten I (Ijssel-
meer) Nuon     28 16.8 built in 
1996 
 105 Ijmuiden / Q7  Evelop 60 120 approved 
in 2004 
 106 NSW (Demonstra-
tionsprojekt)  Noordzeewind (Shell/Nuon)   36 100 approved
  19 new projects are very preliminary proposed initiatives  
 Belgium      
 107 Thornton Bank   C-Power   60 300 approved 
in 2003 
 France      
 108 La Rochelle   Universität La Rochelle 1 2 planned 
 109 Port La Nouvelle/ 
L’Aude Total   16 58 planned 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 27
  Number Project Name Project Developer Number 
of Tur-
bines (in 
brackets: 
extension 
phase) Capacity 
[MW] (in 
brackets: 
extension 
phase) Status 
 Spain      
 110 Mar de Trafalgar  Sogemar/EHN   n.b 994 planned 
 111 Banco de Trafalgar  NEK Umwelttechnik 
(Schweiz) n.b 253 planned 
 112 Cabo de Trafalgar  Umweltkontor Espana  n.b 250 planned 
 113 Playa El Palmar  Capital Energy  n.b 250 planned 
 114 Delta de l’Ebro  Capital Energy  n.b 432 planned 
 115 Vinaròs - Benicarló  Capital Energy  n.b 384 planned 
 Source: BSH, BWEA, companies, Research journal 'Neue Energie', Date: November 2004 
Table 5: Offshore wind energy projects in Europe: the numbers correspond to those shown in 
Fig. 1 - Fig. 3. The red and orange coloured rows are representing completed projects as 
well as such under construction. The yellow and rose-colored rows are representing ap-
proved projects, whereas the white and blue coloured rows are representing planned pro-jects. Based on [Ref 3] 
 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 28
 3 Obstacles to Offshore Wind Energy Utilisation and Regula-
tions 
A variety of obstacles to the development of offshore wind farms exist: zoning issues and the 
legal assignment of areas for offshore wind power development; public acceptance; competing utilisation; administrative procedures; the requirements of environmental impact 
assessment; financing and insurances; institutio nal or legal framework conditions; long-term 
contract for power sales as well as power transmission; and power transmission, grid connection and grid integration. 
In this chapter the obstacles presented by power transmission, grid connection and grid 
integration, by legal framework conditions on environmental impacts, and by financing are 
examined in more detail. Environmental and technical subjects discussed here, are 
presented in more detail in the subsequent chapters. 
3.1 Obstacles relating to power transmission, grid connection and grid integration 
Offshore wind power projects are planned by a r ange of parties, in most cases each with a 
separate application for an own cable route. The main obstacle to the development of most of these wind farms lies not in obtaining development approval, but in connecting to the 
onshore grid. 
Technical problems relating to power transmission, grid connection and grid integration of 
offshore wind power lie in several areas. 
There is a need to install electrical transmission systems with as large a capacity as possible, 
to limit the number of submarine cables needed. Classic HVDC systems based on thyristor 
technology are currently the only method of transmitting high capacities over large distances between sea and land. These systems have the di sadvantage of requiring a large amount of 
reactive power at the offshore wind farms, which has to be provided either by diesel 
generator sets, phase shifters or a parallel AC cable. This increases investment and operational costs. 
The alternative HVDC-IGBT systems do not have this disadvantage, as they can transmit 
energy in both directions and can provide capacitive as well as inductive reactive power. The disadvantage of these systems is their limited tr ansmission capacity, which at present lies at 
250–300MW. This is a result of their lower voltage, which currently lies at 145kV. The voltage 
may be increased in future systems. Developments in semiconductor technology may also help to overcome this limitation. 
Further significant restrictions are caused by the onshore grid connection. Inevitably, offshore 
wind farms connect to the main onshore grid in coastal areas, often at a distance of around 
100km from the main consumption areas. This is a particular problem in some regions of Europe – for example the parts of the Scottish coast best suited to the generation of wind 
energy, are mostly a long distance from main consumption areas. The same is true of large 
German projects.  
To give an overview of the existing interconnected network,  Fig. 4 depicts the high voltage 
grid around the North Sea, while  Fig. 5 shows the grid around the Baltic Sea. The dots in the 
figures represent grid nodes, some of which may be possible connection points for large wind farms. As can be seen, a substantial number of nodes lie along the coastal areas 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 29
 around both seas. According to the rules of the Union for the Co-ordination of Transmission 
of Electricity (UCTE) the power generation capacity connected to each node should not exceed 3GW.  
 Fig. 4: Electrical transport network in the countries around the North Sea [Ref 49
]. The red 
lines indicate 380kV grid. The small dots on the lines (open circles) indicate network nodes. The black and coloured squares and the larger coloured dots indicate power plants.
 
 
 
 


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 30
  Fig. 5: Electrical transmission network in the countries around the Baltic Sea. The red lines 
indicate the 380kV grid, the blue lines the 300kV grid and the green lines the 220kV grid. The small black dots on the lines indicate grid nodes. The black and blue rectangles and the lar-ger black dots indicate power plants [Ref 49
]. 
 
The German case is a special one, as the grid near the coast already has to cope with a 
comparatively large proportion of onshore wind energy, and a large number of additional 
offshore projects are planned. Access to the nodes in coastal areas, and hence to the onshore grid, is planned by various project developers. Fig. 6 shows the transmission 
network, grid nodes and power plants in Northern Germany. The amount of additional wind 
power that can be incorporated into the grid in the coastal areas of the North Sea is estimated to be 3GW [Ref 8]. These 3GW will have to be divided between new offshore and onshore installations. Due to the fact that most of the suitable onshore sites close to the 
coast have already been used and only a few new sites will be approved onshore, it can be 
assumed that the larger share will be available for offshore wind energy. 
Recently a study [Ref 51] was carried out on behalf of the German Energy Agency (DENA), 
in which the influence of a large proportion of wind power on the stability of the German grid 
was investigated by the main German grid operators. The German grid operators argue that the further implementation of wind energy would significantly raise the cost of balancing 


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 31
 energy produced by conventional power plants. This ignores the fact that balancing energy is 
required to balance power output against fluctuating consumption. Power output is constantly determined by power consumption – more power cannot be produced than is consumed, and if less is produced, the supply system will fail. 
Fig. 6: Electrical transport network in northern Germany [Ref 49]. The red lines indicate the 
380kV grid, the green lines the 220kV grid. The small open circles indicate grid nodes. The 
black and coloured squares and the larger coloured dots indicate power plants. 
 
Power generation can be divided fundamentally into controllable and non-controllable 
generation. Controllable generation is provided by conventional power plants (mainly gas 
and oil), designed for fast control, and also by large hydro power plants. The output of wind 
turbines and base-load providing plants such as large coal and nuclear power plants falls into 
the non-controllable category. In most European countries the energy market has no choice but to buy the power produced by nuclear power  plants, and the system operator has to 
arrange the adaptation of this constant power production to the fluctuating power 
consumption by deployment of control power pl ants. Adjustment of the output of base-load 
power stations is far too slow to follow the fluctuations of power consumption. In this context wind energy is a fluctuating power source compared to the constant power generation of 
base-load power stations. How this fluctuati ng production matches fluctuating consumption 
has not been methodically analysed. It might well prove to be the case that fluctuations in renewable energy production correlate to some degree with power consumption, the 


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 32
 stagnation of balancing energy in Germany during the past years during a steady growth of 
wind energy may give a first indication. Some basic research into this subject was done in the 1980s and 1990s, but there are no significant up-to-date publications. 
It is difficult to assess the amount of wind power, which is hourly fed into the grid, as grid 
operators do not measure power output of wi nd farms – only energy output is counted and 
recorded integrally. With this in mind, the German utility E.on has installed an assessment method to gather the amount of wind power produced every 15 minutes by means of wind 
speed and power measurements on few selected wind farms and a simulation system. This 
system should allow operators to distinguish between fluctuating consumption and fluctuating wind power production within a selected network region. Even though it entails some 
uncertainties, this system should provide basic information on the temporal behaviour of wind 
power production and hence on the balance between wind, general renewable power production and consumption. 
Refinement of databases and statistical procedures, together with the application of meso-
scale wind prediction tools and a more flexible grid management and operation system, 
could serve to match these fluctuations even better, without negatively affecting grid stability, but actually enabling a decrease in the level of control power required. At present we can 
only go so far as to say that the amount of control power being required has decreased in 
Germany in recent years. Ref 48 shows that the level of available power required for control fell from 8.3GW in 2002 to 7.3GW in 2004, during which time an additional 6GW of wind 
power capacity were installed.  
Furthermore, the use of wind prediction systems to forecast output for the coming hours 
could reduce the control power capacity required for wind power. If wind power output can be more reliably predicted, then the base-load level can be adapted to the expected wind power 
level. Various European system operators have al ready installed or are about to install wind 
prediction systems. 
Further development and refinement of wind turbine technology towards turbines with grid 
supporting features will allow larger grid connection capacities. Until the second half of the 
1990s German utilities required wind farm operators to switch off turbines automatically if the grid frequency fell below 49.5Hz or rose above 50.5Hz. This requirement led to an 
increasingly dangerous situation in terms of system stability: if a large power plant (e.g. 
1.2GW) would drop out, the resulting short-term regional frequency shift would lead to a dropout of a further large capacity of wind power – perhaps another gigawatt. As this situation violated the UCTE rules, the German utilities decided to change the connection 
rules, allowing a larger shift in the grid frequency before turbines were required to be to cut 
off. This has led to increasing system stability, since wind turbines can now be used to support the grid in case of a dropout. 
The issues concerning power transmission, grid connection and grid integration discussed 
above can be well summarised by the example of the German Bight: 
More than 20GW of wind power capacity are planned to be installed in the German Bight. In 
most of the proposed wind farm areas, only a limited number of wind turbines are planned for 
the initial step. These initial projects total 3–4GW (see Fig. 7) and are planned with separate submarine cable connections. The capacities of these cables are often around 100 to 250 MW in average. For the total planned capacity this will lead to a large number of cable 
routes, meaning a serious impact on concurring utilisations as the national park Wadden Sea 
or shipping areas. To reduce the number of cable routes, it is recommended to concentrate 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 33
 the grid connection of several of the smaller projects with only limited power. This may be 
also useful for pilot project approaches. 
Traffic routes and shipping areas and/or areas of the national park Wadden Sea have to be 
crossed, to connect these offshore wind farms to the on land grid. Although the 
representatives of the administration offices of both areas are positive towards offshore wind 
energy installations, both of them refuse the crossing of their respective area. To solve this problem a combined planning of cable routes is required, in order to reduce the number of 
cables and to allow a controlled development. 
Fig. 7: Offshore wind projects currently in the approval phase in the German Bight. In the 
first (pilot) phase, the depicted areas will only partially be occupied by wind turbines, totalling a capacity of 3–4G W .  I n  a  s e c ond phase a much larger number of turbines is planned, with 
a total capacity of more than 20 GW [Ref 8].  
 
However, there are various problems restricting a combined planning of grid connection of 
several projects: 
• There is no obvious reason for project developers to want to combine their planning. 
Their own planning may be slowed down, if agreements have to be reached and approvals obtained for combined cable routes. Furthermore, at present combined planning offers no economic benefit to the developers. 
• For network operators, there is no certainty about the economic viability of single offshore 
grid connections, since at present it is simply not clear which of the projects (first and 
second phase) will become reality. 
Borkum RiffgrundBorkum WestBorkum Riffgrund „West“Offshore North Sea WindpowerHochsee WP-Nordsee Globaltech I
Hochsee WP-He dreiht Sandbank 24 
Nördlicher Grund 
Dan Tysk 
Butendiek
Amrumbank West
Nordsee Ost
Meerwind 
Borkum Riffgat
(12sm-Zone)Nordergründe
(12sm-Zone)Godewind 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 34
 To overcome this situation political measures need to be taken to solve the problem of large-
scale grid connection. 
 
3.2 Legal framework conditions around environmental impact assessment 
When looking at studies and research projects on the environmental effects of offshore wind 
energy use, different European and national regulations have to be addressed. Some of these European and national regulations deal with the requirements and guidelines for 
environmental impact assessments (EIAs) and strategic environmental assessments (SEAs) 
for national offshore wind energy projects, and some with the declaration of protected zones for animals, habitats and ecosystems. The EIA guidelines provide information on the types of  
surveying which are needed in order for specific projects to meet the requirements to obtain 
building approvals. Conversely, the EIAs that have either already been performed or are still 
going on have led to a considerable amount of knowledge and experience, which is in turn useful for research projects. For example, most studies on environmental impacts at the 
Danish wind farms Nysted/Rødsand and Horns Rev make use both of the EIAs on these 
sites, and of the monitoring programmes, which have been conducted since 1999. 
On an international level there are treaties and conventions that need to be adhered to, 
relating most often to areas that are protected for the sake of sensitive and valuable biotopes 
and habitats. Examples of international agreements are the London Convention (relating to dredging where the sediment is dumped at another site), the OSPAR Convention 
(1992/1999), the Ramsar Convention (1971), the Bonn Convention (1979), ASCOBANS 
(1992), the Convention on Environmental Impa ct Assessment in a Transboundary Context 
(1991), the European Bird Directive 79/409/EEG (Special Protection Areas (SPAs), 1979), the European Habitat Directive 92/43/EEG (Special Areas of Conservation (SACs), 1992), 
the Treaty of Bern (1979), the Convention on Biological Diversity (1992 Rio de Janeiro) and 
the designation of Important Bird Areas (IBAs). 
Another two important European Council Directives are 85/337/EEC and 97/11/EC (including 
amendments and in particular Appendix II).  These are the main documents setting out the 
basis for rules on EIA for Member States of the European Union and they are of special importance for the Denmark, Germany and The Netherlands as being the three ‘Wadden 
Sea States’. 
The Council Directive 85/337/EEC of 27 June 1985 on the assessment of the effects of 
certain public and private projects on the environment, as amended by Council Directive 
97/11/EC of 3 March 1997, “establishes a procedure to enable decision-makers to make 
appropriate decisions regarding the environmental impact of proposed projects in certain 
categories. The main objective is to introduce general principles for the assessment of environmental effects with a view to supplem enting and co-ordinating development consent 
procedures governing public and private projects. In keeping with the principle of subsidiarity, 
each Member State decides on the particular policies and measures, which it needs adequately to implement the Directive. The Directive establishes the EIA procedure as an 
integral part of the development consent process. The EIA must be conducted on the basis 
of the (appropriate) information supplied by the developer. This information may be supplemented by the people who may be concerned by the project in question.” [Ref 43] 
The Directive includes four annexes: 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 35
 1. Annex I contains a list of types of projects, which must be subjected to an 
assessment. 
2. Annex II contains a list of types of projects, which may be subjected to an 
assessment, if their potential impact on the environment or other parameters laid 
down in Annex III requires it. The need for an assessment is determined by the 
concerned Member State, either on a case-by-case basis, or using established thresholds or criteria. The relevant selection criteria can be found in Annex III. 
3. Annex III gives the specific selection criteria (characteristics, location and potential 
impacts of projects) to be used to decide whether an Annex II project must be subjected to an assessment. 
4. Annex IV defines the basic criteria for the content of the EIA report or statement. 
The screening process for Annex II projects implies, that before determining the type of 
approval procedure to be applied to an Annex II project (i.e. with or without EIA), certain parameters laid down in Annex III must be che cked on the basis of existing information 
(maps, plans, etc.). If this check reveals possible incompatibilities with environmental 
protection goals (such as Natura 2000 areas), or the project is likely to have major effects (such as emissions, or interactions with existing projects), an EIA needs to be carried out. 
Another relevant Council Directive is 2001/42/EC of 27 June 2001 – the Strategic 
Environmental Impact Assessment Directive. While the EIA Directive of 1985 (as amended 
by Directive 97/11/EC) covers EIA procedure at an individual project level, the Strategic 
Environmental Impact Assessment Directive stat es that an environmental assessment must 
be carried out for overall plans and programmes that are likely to have significant environmental effects. 
As Member States do have a certain degree of freedom to implement Directives in their 
individual national legislation, the current legal framework and responsible authorities in a 
number of European countries are summarised below. 
A good overview of legal aspects, relevant bodies and procedures in diverse European 
coastal states can be found in Ref 43: Enabling Offshore Wind Developments; 3E – EWEA; 
Brussels 2002 . 
Many passages used within this section were found in official documents, and taken over as 
a quote, especially market with quotation marks. The according references as well as 
presented information on the author and publisher represent the owner of the copyright. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 36
 United Kingdom:  
Offshore Wind Farms: Guidance Note for Environmental Impact Assessment in Re-
spect of FEPA and CPA Requirements [Ref 45] 
Authors: Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS) 
Publisher / Date: Crown / Version 2 - June 2004 
Guidance provided by this document refers only to those requirements necessary to enable 
the assessment of an application under the Food and Environmental Protection Act 1985 
(FEPA ) and Section 34 of the Coast Protection Act 1949 ( CPA ). Both Acts require 
assessment of a proposed project within the marine environment with regards to its potential for environmental impact. 
The purpose of this guidance note is ‘”to assist the offshore wind farm industry and its 
consultants. Its primary aim is to provide scientific guidance to those involved with the gathering, interpretation and presentation of data within an EIA as part of the consents application process in England and Wales. The guidance is intended to supplement the 
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI)’s guidance ‘ Offshore Wind Farm Consents Process’ . 
It is not definitive and it is therefore recommended that it be read in conjunction with the legislation and the other sources to which it refers. It replaces the November 2001 document 
of the same name.” [Ref 45] In addition the Guidelines for the conduct of benthic studies at 
aggregate dredging sites  should be consulted, which has been done by CEFAS and DTLR in 
May 2002. The main competent authorities involved in the procedure for offshore wind 
developments are: 
• The Crown Estate (Commissioners) 
• Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), which is responsible for consenting envi-
ronmental controls and licensing of energy facilities; 
• The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra); 
• The Department for Transport (DfT); 
• The National Assembly for Wales (NAW); 
• The Scottish Executive (for Scotland); and 
• The Marine Consents and Environment Unit (MCEU), a joint unit for regulating marine 
consents. It comprises representatives from DfT, the Welsh Assembly Government 
and Defra (which is responsible for consents in England, but also acts on behalf of the Welsh Assembly in this respect). 
“The Crown Estate, as main landowner of the territorial seabed, is the primary authoritative 
body concerning sea areas, from which permissi on (via leasing/licensing) must be sought for 
the use of its sea property. The Crown Estate's Commissioners, under the provisions of the Crown Estate Act 1961, manage the Estate. Some competencies also lie with the relevant 
planning authority, whose competence to grant a planning permission extends to the mean 
low water line. […] The Crown Estate grants leases or licences on its estate. The largest leaseholders are local authorities, ports and harbours and conservation bodies such as English Nature, the National Trust and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds. Some 
570 kilometres (21%) of foreshore is leased specifically for conservation purposes and it is 
intended to extend this in consultation with English Nature. The activities licensed by the Commissioners of the Crown Estate are the extraction of marine sand and gravel, the laying 
of oil and gas pipelines and electricity and telecommunications cables, and the construction 
of maritime networks.” [Ref 43] 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 37
 DTI is the “lead government authority in the offshore wind farm consenting procedure by 
virtue of its Offshore Renewables Consents Unit, which has the co-ordinating role for offshore wind farm applications in the territorial waters around England and Wales. Furthermore, the amalgamation of Defra’s Marine Environment Branch and DfT’s Ports 
Division into the MCEU serves a central facility for the receipt of consent applications and for 
administrative co-ordination for relevant marine works (under the Food Environment and Protection Act, Coast Protection Act, Telecommunications Act, and other legislation). The 
MCEU performs these functions for Wales as well as England.” [Ref 43] 
The Crown Estate owns the total area of the territorial waters of the United Kingdom and 
hence any project developer for an offshore wind farm must follow the Crown Estate’s 
procedure for granting leases. The latter is co nditional upon the developer obtaining all the 
necessary licences or consents from the consenting authorities. The administrative procedure may be broken down as follows: 
• The pre-exploitation; 
• The exploitation phase; and 
• The decommissioning phase 
For England and Wales an EIA is likely to be needed for all applications under the Electricity 
Act as described in the Electricity Works regulations 2000 (SI 2000/1927). In contrast to 
England and Wales for proposals in territorial waters adjacent to Scotland, an EIA will be 
required to comply with the Electricity Works Regulations 2000. [Ref 43] 
 Denmark:
 
In 1998 the Danish Government instructed the electricity companies to erect five large-scale 
demonstration projects of a total of 750 MW on the basis of the recommendations in the 1997 Havvindmølle-handlingsplan for de danske farvande  (“Offshore Wind Turbine Action Plan for 
Danish Waters”). Denmark has a 2030 target of 4 GW of offshore wind power capacity,
15 with 
the first milestone of 800 MW to be achieved by 2008. 
An environmental programme for the demonstration projects before, during and after their 
establishment was recommended in Havvindmøllehandlingsplanen  to ensure that the 
development of offshore wind farms gave due consideration to nature and environmental 
interests. 
The Danish Energy Authority (DEA) made the implementation of an environmental 
programme an approval condition for the demonstration offshore wind farms. 
The principles put forward were implemented in 2000 through a Government decree – 
Bekendtgørelse om vurdering af virkninger på miljøet (VVM) af el-produktionsanlæg på havet 
(Government decree 2000:815 of 28 August 2000. Translation: Government order on the Assessment of Environmental Impact from elec tricity production plants on the Sea) – which 
sets out the procedures for the EIA and conforms with EU maritime legislation. However, the 
decision on whether a VVM procedure is required is made by the DEA. [Ref 43] 
                                                
 
15 http://www.offshorewindenergy.org/ca-owee/indexpages/Act ivities_and_Prospects.php?file=actpros_p4.php at 10/02/2005 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 38
 Besides the DEA there is a range of other authorities that supervise health, safety and the 
environment on and around offshore installations. However, the DEA is the most important body in terms of the national EIAs. The Danish State has all competence within the 12 Nautical Mile Zone (NMZ) and in the Danish  exclusive economical zone (EEZ). Consents 
and approvals for offshore wind-power are handled by the DEA and the Ministry for 
Economic and Business Affairs in co-operation with the following authorities: 
• Danish Forest and Nature Agency (Ministry of the Environment); 
• Danish Maritime Authority (Ministry for Economic and Business Affairs); 
• Ministry of Defence; 
• Royal Danish Administration of Navigation and Hydrography (Ministry of 
Defence); 
• Danish Civil Aviation Administration (Ministry of Transport); 
• Danish Coastal Administration Agency (Ministry of Transport); 
• National Working Environment Authority (Ministry of Employment); 
• Counties; and 
• Municipalities. 
 
The Netherlands:  
The Netherlands has expressed the ambition to install 6 GW of offshore wind power capacity 
within the North Sea area by 2020. The current status of this ambition is unclear. The 
permitting procedure always begins with an EIA followed by a permit application. There are four official consultation rounds for the public in the course of this procedure. The Ministry of 
Transport, Public Works and Water Management issues the permit. As in the UK, many other 
ministries are also involved, including the Ministries of Economic Affairs, Environment, Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality, as well as the National Coastguard as regards 
shipping safety. The “M.E.R.-richtlijn” (environm ental effect report) is the directive, which 
concern the delivery of the EIA. The official name is “Richtlijn 85/337/EEG van de Raad van 27 juni 1985 betreffende de milieueffectbeoordeling van bepaalde openbare en particuliere projecten”. To build, operate or decommission offshore wind turbines a “Wbr-licence” (Wet 
Beheer Rijkswaterstaatwerken) ) is necessary. 
It is still not certain whether the strategic MER (SMER) will apply in future for offshore wind 
turbines. Some parties have been arguing in favour of the SMER, as this requires monitoring 
of any significant and cumulative effects (e.g. cumulative effects of several proposed offshore 
wind farms, or of offshore wind farms and other marine activities)
16. 
The typical administrative procedure for an offshore wind development may generally be 
broken down into the following stages: 
• The pre-exploitation; 
• The exploitation phase; and 
• The decommissioning phase 
                                                 
16 http://www.noordzee.nl/ruimtelijkeor dening/windmolensMER.html at 10/02/2005 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 39
 However, the Netherlands makes an additional distinction between ‘near-shore’ wind farms 
(i.e. those located within the 12-mile zone) and ‘offshore’ wind farms (i.e. those located beyond the 12-mile zone). The border between these two types roughly coincides with the 20m depth line.  At present the Dutch regulat ions prohibit the development of any further 
wind farms within the 12nm zone. 
This may have different implications for the procedural phases to be followed, in particular in 
the pre-exploitation phase. The pre-exploitation phase is therefore described separately for 
the two types of wind farms. [Ref 43] 
 Ireland:
 
The relevant EU Directives (85/337/EEC and 97/11/EC) have been incorporated into Irish 
law. According to these directives, the preparation of an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is obligatory for wind energy installations of more than five turbines or having output greater than 5 MW. An EIS is required for all offshore wind farms, and as wind farms multiply 
will be required to address cumulative impacts, both visual and environmental. Consultation 
with interested parties (other users of the waters concerned, environmental groups, local authorities, coastguard, aviation authority, etc) is actively encouraged prior to preparation 
and publication of an EIS. 
The relevant EU Directives (85/337/EEC and 97/11/EC) have been incorporated into Irish 
law. According to these directives, the preparation of an Environmental Impact Statement 
(EIS) is obligatory for wind energy installations of more than five turbines or having output 
greater than 5 MW. An EIS is required for all offshore wind farms. For  several  wind farms it will be required to address cumulative impacts, both visual and environmental. Consultation with interested parties (other users of the waters concerned, environmental groups, local 
authorities, coastguard, aviation authority, etc) is actively encouraged prior to preparation 
and publication of an EIS. 
Details on the information to be included in the EIS are given within the policy document 
‘Offshore electricity generating stations – Note for intending developers’  provides for a two-
phase approach. The purpose of the EIS is to provide the competent authority – the Minister for Communications Marine and Natural Resources – with information to enable a decision 
on a particular project, in full knowledge of its likely environmental impact. 
“The pre-exploitation phase therefore relates primarily to the acquisition of licences etc. for 
the use of the Irish Foreshore for the purpose of investigating the suitability of sites for the construction of an offshore wind farm. This is a two-stage process, involving applications for: 
Foreshore Licence and the Foreshore Lease. 
Foreshore Legislation and the Foreshore Leases and Licences, which are required for 
“offshore electricity generating stations, fall under the competence of the Foreshore Section 
of the Department of Communications, Marine and Natural Resources.” Ref 43 
The Foreshore Licence recognises the suitability of the site for the intended wind farm 
project. Licenses are granted for works (like laying of submarine pipelines and cables) and 
purposes (e.g. aquaculture). When a licence-holder is satisfied that the site is appropriate, 
then application may be made for a Foreshore Lease for the development. Application for a Foreshore Lease is contingent on the applicant having held a Foreshore Licence for 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 40
 investigation in good order, and on his making a valid Foreshore Lease application within 12 
months of the Licence’s expiry. A valid application must be accompanied (among other documents) by an EIS. The granting of the Lease allows construction and operation of the wind farm. [Ref 43] 
The key underlying legal instruments thereby are as follows: 
• Electricity Regulation Act 1999; 
• Foreshore Act 1933; 
• Foreshore (Amendment) Act 1992 (No. 17); 
• Fisheries and Foreshore (Amendment) Act 1998 (No. 54); 
• European Communities (EIA) Regulations 1989; 
• Foreshore (EIA) Regulations 1990; 
• European Communities (EIA)(Amendment) Regulations 1998; and 
• European Communities (EIA) Regulations 1999. 
 
Belgium:
 
The “Wet van 20 januari 1999 ter bescherming van het mariene milieu” (Law of 20 January 
1999 on the Protection of the Marine Environment) is the relevant Belgian law and is based 
on the international framework mentioned at the beginning of this section. The law still has to be implemented and foresees the creation of five types of marine protected areas (state May 2004). The law will not allow areas to be excl uded from wind farm development. [Ref 39] 
Planning an offshore wind farm in Belgium requires the submission of a request to the 
Ministry of Social Affairs, Public Health and the Environment for exploration permission and 
subsequently for an authorisation to build the offshore wind farm. However, cable laying additionally requires permission for exploitation, an environmental evaluation and an 
authorisation to dredge or trench. 
According to Article 25 of the law on the Protection of the Marine Environment, certain 
activities associated with offshore wind energy exploitation require environmental permits – 
that is licence or authorisation. This further entails a requirement for an Environmental 
Impact Statement (EIS) (milieu effectenrapport (M ER)) to be provided by the developer. The 
two procedures are the ‘domain concession’ and ‘licence and authorisation of environmental permits’. Conditions and procedure for the granting of domain concessions for the 
construction and exploitation of installations fo r the production of electricity from water, 
streams and winds in the areas at sea under Belgian jurisdiction, are laid down in the Royal Decree of December the 20th in 2000. The implementing legislation concerning the 
licensing/authorisation and EIA/EIS aspects of Law on the Protection of the Marine 
Environment with regard to offshore wind farm developments are the Royal Decree of 20th of December 2000 with regard to the rules applicable to the Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA Decree) and the Royal Decree of the 20th of December 2000 comprising the 
procedures for permission and authorisation of certain activities in Belgian territorial waters. According to the Decree an applicant for an offshore wind park will need two permits relating to environmental protection: a licence for the exploitation of the wind park, and an 
authorisation for the building of the wind park, both to be procured in the pre-exploitation 
phase. The application for licence/authorisation must be accompanied by an Environmental 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 41
 Impact Statement (EIS), which, amongst other th ings, will form the basis of an Environmental 
Impact Assessment (EIA). “The EIA Decree describes the procedure for conducting the Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), which must be submitted by the developer with his application for licence/authorisation. The Decree refers to the Environmental Impact 
Assessment Directive (1985) of the European Council and to the Convention on EIA in a 
Transboundary Context (Espoo Convention). It makes a distinction between the EIA preliminary to the granting of a licence or authorisation (chapter II) and the EIA of the 
licensed or authorised activity (chapter III). The EIA must be therefore conducted before the 
granting of the licence or authorisation, and also after the acquisition of the licence or authorisation. Thus, after the granting of a licence or authorisation, the activities at sea will 
be submitted to a permanent evaluatio n by monitoring programs and permanent 
examinations.” [Ref 43] 
“The EIS of the developer outlines the potential environmental impact of the project and 
provides a basis, amongst other things, for the formulation of an Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) or Environmental Impac t Evaluation (Milieu-effectenbeoordeling). The 
competent administrative body for the formulati on of the EIA is the Management Unit of the 
North Sea Mathematical Models (MUMM)”. [Ref 43] 
 
Germany:
 
In Germany the Federal Government has created a strategy for offshore wind power 
development. The strategy foresees the installation of 500 MW of offshore capacity by 2007 
and 2–3G W  b y  2010. In the long term 20 – 25 GW of installed offshore capacity may be 
achieved by 2030 [Ref 41]. 
The major part of the offshore wind farms are planned to be installed in the Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ). The appropriate approving authority, the Bundesamt für 
Seeschifffahrt und Hydrographie (Federal Office for Maritime Traffic and Hydrography), set up a concept for EIA: “ For installations in the 12 nm zone an application for permission must 
be submitted to the responsible body of the respective federal state. This permission covers 
wind turbines, as well as cables needed to conduct electricity from the wind park to onshore connection points. The competent authorities for permits in the 12 nm zone are those 
responsible for the “Imissionsschutzrechtliche Genehmigungen” (Imission Control Regulation 
permit), in accordance with the Bundesimmissionsschutzgesetz (Federal Imission Control Act). Permission for the installation of rigid and floating structures in the exclusive economic zone has to be obtained from the Federal Maritime and Hydrographic Authority (BSH). For 
planned wind parks in the EEZ, two permit applications must be submitted to the Federal 
Maritime and Hydrographic Authority – one for the wind park, and a separate one for submarine cables. Completed applications are treated on a first-come-first-serve basis – that 
is, the application, which is the first to obtain all the necessary permissions 
(genehmigungsfähig) is the one, which gains priority over the site in question. At the same time, the application is weighted for its quality and focus towards the objective, so as to avoid 
situations in which applicants 'block' locations without serious interest in developing the wind 
park in the near future. Wind parks in the EEZ must also receive permission for the installation of submarine cables in the 12 nm zone. This permission must also be obtained from the respective federal state. The EU Directive on Environmental Impact Assessment 
97/11/EG, 85/337/EWG has been implemented into German national law as of 3 August 
2001. The Offshore Installations Ordinance states that the Federal Act on Environmental Impact Assessment will apply for offshore wind parks in the EEZ. The EIA must cover direct 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 42
 and indirect impacts on humans, flora and fauna, ground water, climate, landscape, cultural, 
and other assets. The law also requires a public participation. ” [Ref 43] 
The relevant standard concerning EIA requirements17 is worth to being considered in 
somewhat more detail, as it forms a very good and comprehensive example of a national set 
of EIA requirements, which must be fulfilled in order to gain a license for an offshore wind 
power development. Therefore a more complete extract of this standard may be found in Appendix E. 
Standards for Environmental Impact Assessments Impacts of offshore wind turbines 
on the marine environment [Ref 44] 
Authors: Issued by Bundesamt für Seeschifffahrt und Hydrographie (BSH) and others 
Publisher / Date: Federal Maritime and Hydrographic Agency (BSH) / 2003-2-25 
Any potential adverse impacts of the projected facilities on the marine environment have to 
be assessed within the framework of the approval procedure for offshore wind farms in the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). In additi on to following the amendment to the 
Seeanlagenverordnung (effective 5 April 2002), an EIA is now mandatory for most projects, 
according to Article 2a of the Seeanlagenverordnung. “ In the Standards for Environmental 
Impact Assessments, information is provided to applicants on the scope of investigations required by the approval authority, with all relevant details and explanations. The Standards 
for Environmental Impact Assessments constitute a framework of the thematic and technical minimum requirements for marine environmental surveys and monitoring in order to assess compliance with Article 3, Seeanlagenverordnung .” 
The German EIA standard is divided into two parts: a set of general conditions (Part A), and 
a technical code of practice (Part B). The main features of this standard are represented below. 
Part A 
contains the general conditions and therefore deals for example with possible 
adverse impacts of offshore wind farms on t he marine environment. Various risks have been 
identified for the construction, operation and decommissioning phases. They can be 
summarised as risks concerning the construction phase, the operation phase and the 
removal phase. The objectives of investigat ing impacts on environmental features that 
should be protected (i.e. fish, benthos, birds, and mammals) can be summarised as follows: 
determination of spatial distribution and temporal variability in the baseline survey; monitoring 
the effects of construction, operation and removal; evaluating the monitoring results, with the baseline data serving as a basis for comparison; and conducting within the preliminary fish 
studies a quantitative determination of the near-bottom stationary fish species. 
A distinction is made in terms of the degree of progress of a particular project. Thereby 
division is made into Pilot phase, Expansion phase and Removal phase. 
“Pilot phase:  Large-scale wind farm projects presently have to be preceded by a pilot phase 
to establish whether the authorisation requirements are met. Prior to and after the pilot 
phase, baseline surveys and monitoring have to be carried out following notification of the probable scope of the investigations based on the Standards for Environmental Impact 
Assessments. The scope of the monitoring will depend on the results of the baseline 
surveys, taking into account experience gained in the process. 
                                                
 
17 http://www.bsh.de/en/Marine%20uses/Industry/Wind%20f arms/standard_environmental.pdf at 24/03/2005  

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 43
 Expansion phase:  For every expansion step following the pilot phase, baseline surveys and 
monitoring in accordance with the Standards for Environmental Impact Assessments will be mandatory. Modifications required at individual sites will be laid down in the notification of the scope of monitoring. 
Removal phase:  The wind turbines including their foundations have to be removed 
completely, with subsequent onshore disposal. In principle, the monitoring requirements during this phase correspond to those in the construction phase, as specified in the 
Standards for Environmental Impact Assessments. Possible environmental impacts depend 
mainly on the dismantling techniques used. Dismantling techniques are expected to undergo major developments over the coming decades, as numerous oil and gas platforms are due for removal. Therefore, the scope of monitoring will be determined at a later date .” 
Periods of assessment apply to all project phases (pilot phase, expansion phases) and are 
described as follows: 
“Baseline survey:  Prior to the start of construction, in accordance with the Standards for 
Environmental Impact Assessments, a baseline survey has to be performed which covers the 
investigations made during two successive, uninterrupted complete seasonal cycles. One 
seasonal cycle comprises 12 calendar months including the month in which the survey 
begins. The baseline survey remains valid for two complete years. If construction work is not 
begun in the third year after completion of the baseline survey, the baseline survey should be updated with an additional seasonal cycle. Other details regarding the follow-up period will 
be dealt with on an individual case basis. 
Construction phase:  The construction phase covers the period from the start of 
construction work until completion of the construction project. Construction-phase monitoring has to be performed throughout this period. If essential components are put into operation 
prior to completion of the construction project, operation monitoring in the project section 
concerned may be started in co-ordination with the approval authority. However, it must be ensured that such continued construction activities do not have a significant impact on the 
results of operation monitoring. The precise time for stopping the construction monitoring will 
be determined by the approval authority in each individual case. 
Operation phase:  The Standards for Environmental Impact Assessments define the 
operation phase as the phase following the completion of construction work, when the wind 
turbines are put into operation. After the wind farm has become operational, operation monitoring has to be performed for a period of at least three years or, if required, up to five years in the entire project area. The end of operation monitoring will be determined by the 
approval authority in each individual case. 
Part B
 outlines technical instructions concerning the environmental features to be protected. 
Technical details of the investigation and monitoring to be carried out in order to protect 
benthos, fish, birds, and mammals will be provided in the following. The scope and targets of 
the investigations, methods to be used, and the evaluation basis are described for each of 
the environmental features to be protected .” 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 44
 
 
Fig. 8: Investigation of sediment through side scan sonar. The wreck of a ship is visible at the 
left-hand side. 
 
3.3 Finance-related obstacles 
The impediments related to financing issues can be resolved by the building in of more 
security within the planning processes. This can be achieved by several means. For 
instance, questions concerning cable routes, grid connection and grid integration need to be clarified so as to limit the number of offshore cables leading to land and to enhance planning security among project developers. Thereby a governmental surety would be a good means 
of overcoming a number of difficulties, especially within the initial phase of offshore wind 
power exploitation, but also for the longer term. 
In some European countries, legal assignment of areas for offshore wind power utilisation is 
still necessary to increase planning security and hence reduce financial obstacles. Moreover, 
insurers must show a willingness to offer fair and realistic terms of coverage. Another important measure to increase the security during the planning processes is the certainty 
about power production certificates, which enable the operator of an offshore wind farm to 
sell the generated electricity to the mains during the project lifetime. There is a need for national Electricity Acts, containing stipulations to ensure that electricity supply companies or 
grid operators are obliged to purchase any electricity generated by offshore wind farms (as 
well as other renewable energy sources). A tariff- based system is best suited to promotion of 
this new market, as shown by onshore experiences in Denmark, Germany and Spain.  
However, the crucial problem is the impact of the uncertainties mentioned above on the risk 
assessment of a project. For small and medium -sized companies (such as are often involved 
in offshore wind power development), these risks can make it difficult to attract outside finance, so that project financing becomes a major obstacle. Banks are still relatively 
inexperienced in dealing with the risks attached to the new technology and its offshore 
application, and so demand increased security before financing projects, rather than simply taking the project itself as collateral security. In order to decrease this financial uncertainty surrounding wind power projects and thus overcome the caution of institutional lenders, there 
is a need for projects to be guaranteed either by larger companies or by national 
governments. The reduction of risk by such means  is especially important in the case of 
pioneering wind power projects, and will continue to be so while banks lack experience of 
project finance in the field. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 45
  
3.4 Chapter Summary 
Technical problems concerning the power transmission, grid connection and grid integration 
of offshore wind power cover several areas. Elec trical transmission systems with the largest 
possible capacity must be installed, so as to limit the number of submarine cables. Classic 
HVDC systems based on thyristor technology are currently the only method for transmitting 
high capacities over large distances between wind farms and land; however, they have the disadvantage of requiring a large amount of reactive power at the wind farm. In contrast, HVDC-IGBT systems can provide capacitive as well as inductive reactive power, but 
currently have a limited transmission capacity of 250–300MW due to the lower voltage of 
about 145kV. Industrial developments in semic onductor technologies may help to overcome 
this limitation.  
Competing uses such as marine protected areas and shipping lanes oblige project 
developers to reduce the overall number of cable routes. To facilitate this, it is recommended that the grid connections of a number of smaller projects with limited output be combined. 
This may also be a useful approach for pilot projects. Integrated planning of cable routes is 
therefore required to reduce the number of cables and to allow controlled development. However, project developers fear that their own planning may be impeded by the need to reach agreements and gain approvals for combined cable routes. 
Furthermore, network operators lack sufficient assurances as to the economic viability of 
single offshore grid connections, since at present  it is unclear which wind farm projects will 
actually be built. As long as no planning assurances are given for combined offshore 
networks to which several projects could c onnect, administrative and financial obstacles and 
delays will persist. To overcome this situation po litical measures must be taken in order to 
resolve the issue of large-scale grid connection. 
Further restrictions are caused by onshore gr id connection on land, as the connection points 
lie in coastal areas, often at a considerable distance from the main consumption areas. Moreover, according to the rules of the UCTE, the power generation connected to each onshore node should not exceed 3GW.  
As wind energy is a fluctuating power source compared to the constant power generation of 
conventional base-load power stations, the question must be asked of how this fluctuating production matches fluctuations in consum ption. This issue has not been methodically 
analysed. It might well prove to be the case that fluctuations in renewable energy production 
correlate to some degree with those in consumption. Refinement of databases and statistical procedures, as well as meso-scale wind prediction tools, could help to match these 
fluctuations and thereby decrease the amount of balancing energy needed. Further 
development and refinement of wind turbine technology towards turbines with grid supporting features will allow larger grid connection capacities, while increasing system stability by using wind power to supporting the grid in case of dropouts. 
There are EU-wide and national rules concerning EIA requirements. Moreover, special 
attention must be paid to various international and EU treaties and conventions in the implementation of offshore wind farm projects.  
The German EIA standards represent one of the most demanding approaches to meeting 
environmental requirements. As Germany plan s to install 25GW of offshore wind power 
capacity by 2030, these standards are extremel y relevant to the environmental impact of 
wind power development in Europe as a whole.  

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 46
 Within the EU, there are ambitious plans to install up to 10GW of offshore wind power 
capacity by 2010 and as much as 70GW by 2020. In order for this planned expansion to be 
achieved, there is a need to reduce uncertainties within the development planning processes, particularly in the early stages of offshore wind development. Insurers must show 
a willingness to offer fair and realistic conditions of coverage. Certainty also is required about 
guaranteed feed-in tariffs or power purchase agreements for long-term periods. Such measures will help to reduce the risks attached to offshore projects, which make it difficult for 
small and medium-sized companies to attract outside finance. However, the best means to 
reduce the risks to lenders would be for large companies or national governments to guarantee schemes.  

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 47
 4 Technological possibilities of power transmission and grid in-
tegration 
4.1 Transmitting electricity over long distances 
Compared to onshore, offshore wind farms will have large power installations in the size of 
conventional power plants. Modern transmissi on technologies operating at high and extra 
high voltage levels will be required in order to transmit high levels of power over long 
distances. Two main types of transmission system exist, based on either alternating or direct 
current (AC or DC): 
• High voltage three-phase alternating current transmission (HVAC); and 
• High voltage direct current transmission (HVDC). 
Offshore wind farms will operate at medium te nsion levels, i.e. between 30 kV and 60 kV. The 
long distance interconnected network in Europe operates at extra high voltage levels of up to 
380kV. The transmission system for an offshore wind farm has to connect these two voltage systems by means of a sea cable and a suitable conversion system. 
The basic set-up of the transmission system is shown in Fig. 9: this is the same for both 
HVAC and HVDC systems. Power is collected from individual wind turbines by a medium 
voltage system and transmitted to a substation at sea. This substation has to convert the 
medium voltage into high or extra high voltage for onward transmission. In the case of AC 
systems the substation consists of a transfo rmer, which transforms the medium AC voltage 
into high-tension AC. The transmission of the electricity to land then occurs via a three-phase high-tension cable. On land the power has to be transformed again from the AC voltage of 
the cable into the AC voltage of the onshore transmission network. 
In case of DC systems the substation consists of a converter, which converts the power from 
the wind farm from medium AC voltage into high-tension DC. The power is transmitted to 
land by a two-pole high-tension DC cable. On land the power has to be converted from the 
DC voltage of the cable into the three-phase AC voltage of the onshore transport network. 
The transmission capacity is defined by the capacit y of the converter or transformer stations 
as well as by that of the sea cable. Both systems, HVAC and HVDC, may be based on high 
or extra high voltage for power transmission. A high transmission voltage reduces transmission losses in the cables. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 48
  
Fig. 9: Transmission scheme for offshore wind power. 
 
 High Voltage Alternating Current High Voltage Direct Current 
Abbreviation HVAC HVDC 
Voltage form of 
transport system Three-phase alternating voltage Direct voltage, two pole 
Voltage range  Up to extra high voltage  
(< 420kV) Up to extra high voltage  
(< 800kV) 
Required cable Either three single cables or one 
three-conductor cable Two single cables or one two-
conductor cable 
Required station at sea Transformer from medium to extra 
high voltage  
(e.g. 30kV to 400kV) Converter from medium AC voltage 
to extra high DC voltage  
(e.g. 30kV AC to 400kV DC) 
Required station on land Transformer from extra high volt-
age to main land grid voltage 
(e.g. 400kV to 380kV) Converter from extra high DC volt-
age to main land AC grid voltage 
(e.g. 400kV DC to 380kV AC) 
Table 6: Overview on the basic differences between HVAC and HVDC systems. 
 
4.1.1 HVAC 
Three-phase AC transmission is the typical sy stem for energy distribution and transmission 
on land. This system can also be used to connect offshore wind farms to the main onshore 
grid. The set-up of an HVAC system is shown in Fig. 10.  
The power of the individual wind turbines is collected by a cabling system at a medium 
voltage level. The switchgear and bus bar are located on a central offshore platform within the wind farm, where the transformer station is  also located. The transformer increases the 
three-phase medium voltage to high tension and then the power is transmitted by a sea Transformer or converter 
station on landTransformer or converter 
station on seaOffshore wind farm Transport and 
distribution network
Transformer or converter 
station on landTransformer or converter 
station on seaOffshore wind farm Transport and 
distribution network

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 49
 cable to land. The transfer voltage very much depends on the characteristics of the sea 
cable. Theoretically the voltage of HVAC systems can reach up to 800kV, which is the highest voltage level of conventional network technology for switchgears and overhead transmission lines. For offshore installations this extra high voltage level is not realistic, since 
the enormous insulation required for the sea cables would be mechanically unfeasible. 
Available sea cable technology is therefore a limiting parameter for the voltage of the offshore transmission system. 
On land a further transformer station is required to adapt the voltage level to that of the 
onshore interconnected network grid. 
Fig. 10: Schematic diagram of the HVAC grid connection.
 
 
4.1.1.1 AC sea cable 
A sea cable is very different from the typical cables used for low voltage distribution in 
households or industry. Sea cables are designed especially for the specific purposes of a 
project. The electrical characteristics of c ables for AC and DC are fundamentally different – 
cables are designed for either one or the other voltage type. Common to all cable types however is the basic structure of insulation and metal and plastic sheaths. The metal sheaths 
serve two purposes, as a cover against corrosion and as armour to bear the mechanical 
forces. The need for corrosion protection is often met by a lead jacket, which prevents seawater from diffusing through the insulation. The need for armour is met by a wire mesh, it 
absorbs the forces acting on the cable during installation, as generally the cable is lowered 
from a ship to the sea floor and therefore hanging down through the entire water depth. The outer jacket of the cable is usually plastic. 
For three-phase AC two main types of cables exist, the three-conductor cable and the single-
conductor cable. In a three-conductor cable all three conductors of the three-phase system are kept within one cable. Each conductor is insulated separately, with the metal shield and outer insulation covering all three conductors in one. The great advantage of this type of 
cable is that the electromagnetic field of the three conductors is almost neutralised at the 
surface of the cable, since the sum of the voltages and currents of the three phases is zero at any one time. To ensure mechanical stabilisation, three-conductor cables require a 
substance to fill the hollow space between the conductors. In the past oil was used for this 
purpose, however modern cables use plastic. Sea Land
Long distance 
AC Sea CableTransformer
StationExtra high 
interconnected network gridOffshore 
wind farm
HVAC systemTransformerStation Sea Land
Long distance AC Sea CableTransformer
StationExtra high 
interconnected network gridOffshore 
wind farm
HVAC systemTransformerStation 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 50
 The single-conductor cable is a cable with a single conductor for a single phase. Hence for a 
three-phase system three single-conductor cables are required. The main advantage of this type of cable is its high transmission capacity.  
The limiting parameters for sea cables are weight and flexibility. During installation a cable is 
lowered from the cable-laying ship to the seabed: the stress on the cable is determined by 
the dead weight of the hanging cable, which in turn depends on the water depth; the deeper the water, the heavier the hanging cable. Consequently, very heavy cables cannot be laid in 
deep waters. In addition, large forces may act on the cable when the seabed underneath the 
cable is washed away, leaving it free-hanging for perhaps several tens of meters. These forces have to be absorbed by the cable and in particular by the metal armour, the heavier 
the cable, the more likely it is to be damaged in such circumstances. 
The flexibility of the sea cable is also an important factor in the installation process. A stiff 
cable means high bending radii, requiring a large cargo area on board the cable-laying ships. Moreover, low flexibility results in a greater length of free-hanging cable during the laying 
procedure, and thus increases the stresses on the cable. 
The power transmission capacity of a cable is determined by the current and voltage it is 
designed for. The current capacity depends on the diameter of the metal conductor, and the 
maximum voltage depends on the thickness of the insulation, both of which influence the 
weight and stiffness of the cable. Thus mechanical parameters determine the limits for the transmission capacity of sea cables. 
The three-conductor cable is the optimum design for a three-phase system, except that the 
mechanical parameters mentioned above limit its transmission capacity to comparatively low 
values. The advantages of an almost completely neutralised electromagnetic field and of the need to lay only one cable route must be considered against the maximum transmission 
capacity of 200 MVA – see Table 7. 
 
Cable type Maximum tension  Maximum transferable 
power 
Three-conductor cable 170 kV 
in future 245 kV 200 MVA 
in future 250 MVA 
One-conductor cable 420 kV 1’200 MVA 
Table 7: Maximum voltage and transfer capacities of actual AC sea cables. 
 
For the same reasons the transmission capacity of the single-conductor cable is much 
higher. The single cables can bear higher currents and at the same time far higher tensions. 
As shown in Table 7, the voltage of 420kV allows a power transmission of 1200 MVA. A disadvantage of this cable type, however, is its higher power losses. The current in the 
conductor induces a voltage in the metal wire mesh of the cable. As this metal armour is 
grounded to earth at the connection point, a comparatively high current is flowing to earth, resulting in both power losses and a thermal load on the cable. 
If the three-phase AC system is used for l ong-distance transmission, another disadvantage 
becomes apparent. The three parallel cables or conductors act as a capacitor to the AC 
voltage, and generate reactive power as a result. With increasing length of the cable, higher losses are generated due to the growing reactive power. To reduce these losses, reactive 
power compensation units are necessary along the cables. As this is not a feasible option at 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 51
 sea, the compensation can only take place at either end of the cables. Hence reactive power 
generation drastically reduces the ability to transmit power through a very long AC cable run. As a result of these losses, the maximum lengt h of a three-phase AC sea cable run is limited 
to approximately 120 km.  
The sea cable is the most restrictive factor on power transmission capacity. The power of 
converter or transformer stations, on land or offshore, may be increased by adding parallel units. This is also possible for cables, but addi tional cables mean additional cable routes. 
 
4.1.2 HVDC  
For long distance electricity transmission HVDC is the preferable technology. However, 
around the world only a limited number of lar ge HVAC systems exist, mainly for marine 
power transmission. These systems are of the classical type with thyristor technology. But in 
principle two different systems are available: 
• Thyristor HVDC transmission and 
• Insulated-gate bipolar transistor HVDC transmission (HVDC-IGBT, also known as 
VSC-HVDC (VSC = Voltage Source Converter) or product names like HVDC Light 
(ABB) and HVDCplus (Siemens)) 
Both systems have the same fundamental set-up, as depicted in Fig. 11. At sea the medium 
voltage of the wind farm busbar is transformed into high AC voltage and then rectified into high DC voltage. The power is then transmitted to land at this high voltage level by a DC sea 
cable. On land an inverter system converts the DC voltage back into a 50Hz AC high voltage 
and it is then adapted by a transformer to the level of the extra high voltage of the onshore interconnected network. The thyristor transmissi on system is the classic HVDC technology, 
up to now no IGBT system with large transmission capacities exist. 
 
Fig. 11: Schematic diagram of the HVDC grid connection.
 
4.1.2.1 Classic thyristor-based HVDC 
In the classic thyristor-based HVDC system, t he AC voltage to be transmitted is converted 
into DC by a rectifier. At the other end of the system, the DC current is converted back into 
AC by a thyristor bridge that switches the DC poles alternatively to the three phases of the Sea Land
Converter
StationConverterStation Long distance DC Sea CableOffshore 
wind farm
HVDC systemExtra high interconnected network gridAC          DC DC          ACSea Land
ConverterStation ConverterStation Long distance DC Sea CableOffshore 
wind farm
HVDC systemExtra high interconnected network gridAC          DCAC          DC DC          ACDC          AC

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 52
 AC system. This classic HVDC converter requ ires an existing AC grid for operation and it 
draws reactive power from it. The resulting AC current has staircase form and requires extensive filter units. Because of the additional need for rectifiers and inverters, HVDC systems are far more expensive than HVAC.  
A schematic representation of the thyristor-based HVDC set-up is shown Fig. 12. HVDC 
systems are usually designed to be bipolar, wh ich means that two converters are working 
symmetrically to ground level, with matching positive and negative output levels. This allows 
a higher transmission voltage at a lower insulation level. The voltage level across each of the 
two conductors is exactly half the total operating voltage. As both converters are working fully symmetrically, no current is flowing to ground level. 
Fig. 12: HVDC-thyristor technology for energy transport by rectifier and inverter in one direc-
tion.
 
 
A major advantage of classic thyristor-based HVDC is the high transmission tension. 
Thyristors have a very high electrical strengt h, allowing operations up to 800kV. Modern 
thyristor-based HVDC technology is thus able to transmit 800 to 1000MW with a bipolar, two-
conductor cable. One disadvantage of classic HVDC, however, is that it cannot generate its 
own grid voltage and frequency at the offshore wind farm. To provide AC voltage offshore – which is necessary to start up the wind turbines – a separate diesel generator has to be 
installed, which provides voltage and frequency as well as reactive power for wind turbines 
with induction generators. Another option is the installation of an AC cable, in parallel with the DC sea cable, to provide voltage to the turbines. The disadvantage of this solution is that it increases the number of cables to land, though it could be a viable option for offshore 
projects, which involve a pilot phase. Pilot pr ojects usually have a low power rating between 
a few ten and a hundred megawatts, for which a DC transmission system would be unnecessarily expensive. The AC cable, whic h would therefore be used for transmission 
during the pilot phase, could subsequently be used as the auxiliary cable for the extended 
wind farm with HVDC transmission. 
4.1.2.2 Transistor-based HVDC 
Modern insulated-gate bipolar transistors (IGBTs) are the basis for HVDC-IGBT systems. 
Compared to normal transistors, IGBTs have a relatively high voltage and current strength, 
making them suited to use in high-voltage and high-current applications, though they do not 
match the electric strength values of thyristors. In contrast to thyristors, IGBTs can be switched within half an AC sine-wave. Inverters based on IGBTs with pulse-width modulation 
(PWM) technology can thus generate sinusoidal AC voltages in four-quadrant operation (see 
Fig. 13), which means that energy transfer is possible in both directions as well as in inductive and capacitive region. In offshore wind farms this feature makes it possible to DC
ACDC
ACDC
ACDC
ACDC
ACDC
ACDC
ACDC
AC

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 53
 provide voltage and frequency to the turbines without an additional AC connection or diesel 
generator and to deliver reactive power if desired. 
Fig. 13: Pulse width modulation inverter output voltage 
 
4.1.2.3 DC sea cable 
Although the electrical characteristics are different, the physical configuration of DC sea 
cables is similar to the AC design. The conduc tor is encased by an high-voltage insulation, 
an armour jacket, an anticorrosion layer and a watertight bitumen or plastic sheath, as shown in Fig. 14. In an AC cable the current, alternating at 50Hz, induces a voltage in the metal 
jackets of the cable. A DC cable has no induced voltages and currents and thus no power 
losses through the metal jackets. As long as the current remains constant, a single-conductor DC cable causes a static electromagnetic field, the strength of which depends on the current 
intensity. This electromagnetic field could potentially have a harmful impact on marine 
animals (for example on cetacean navigation) as well as on maritime navigation. To overcome this problem, the two poles of a DC system, the forward and the return conductor, 
have to be installed parallel and close to each other, so that the electromagnetic fields will 
neutralise each other. This is known as the bipo lar system of power transmission, in contrast 
to the monopolar system, in which only one conductor connects the two converter stations while the sea and the seabed act as the return conductor. The undersea electrodes used in 
the monopolar system for the return current produce electrolysis. These impacts mean that 
the monopolar systems are not planned for offshore wind farm use.  
Vi 
t 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 54
 
 
Fig. 14: Example of a HVDC cable (source: Nexans).  
 
For bipolar transmission three options are av ailable: two separate cables, a bipolar two-
conductor cable or a concentric cable. When using two separate cables, they must be buried 
in the seabed parallel to and at a short distance from each other. The distance between the 
cables is determined by the capacity of the cable-laying ship to position the cables accurately, which depends mainly on the velocity of the ship, sea conditions, water depth and 
the mechanical characteristics of the cable. Di stances achieved vary from 1m to over 10m.  
A bipolar cable is a single cable including both conductors for forward and return current. 
One type is the flat cable, where the two conductors lie side by side within a common shield. 
Formerly the hollow spaces of this type of cable were filled with oil, but this has been 
replaced by a plastic filling, to prevent envir onmental pollution in case of accidents. The 
distance between the two conductors is negligible, only determined by the thickness of the insulation material between them. Maximum neutralisation of the electromagnetic field is 
achieved by a concentric cable, in which an outer hollow conductor encases an inner 
conductor, separated from it by high-voltage insulation. The outer conductor is also encased in both insulation and metal shields. The coincidence of the radial magnetic lines of force 
results in the absolute neutralisation of the forward and return fields.  
As previously explained, HVDC converters are bipolar, so that forward and return conductors 
operate at only half of the transmission voltage level. Thus for a system of 800kV operating 
voltage a two-cable transmission would mean a voltage of just 400kV over each cable, thus 
reducing the thickness of the insulation required by half compared to a concentric cable, in which the insulation between inner and outer conductor has to cover the full voltage of 800kV, in addition to outer insulation sufficient for 400kV. Therefore, as the diameter of sea 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 55
 cables is limited by weight, the power transmi ssion capacity of a bipolar two-cable system is 
far higher than for a bipolar concentric cable, as shown in Table 8. 
Cable type Maximum tension Maximum  
transmission capacity 
Bipolar or concentric ±400 kV 800 MW  
Two separate cables ±600 kV 800 MW to 1 GW,  
future development 2.5 GW 
Table 8: Transmission capacity of an HVDC system with a bipolar concentric cable and with 
two separate cables. 
 
4.1.3 Comparison of transport technologies 
The different transmission systems described in the previous sections present no clear 
favourite system. Systems should be selected fo r particular projects according to required 
transmission distance and capacity and their specific advantages and disadvantages. An 
overview of the characteristics of the different systems is given in Table 9. 
For inshore wind farms the HVAC system offers the best solution, as it provides the simplest, 
least expensive, most tried and tested technology for grid connection, and is similar to the transmission network used on land. However, as transmission distances increase the losses from the HVAC system increase significantly. To avoid ineffective operation AC cable length 
should be limited to a length of approximately 120km (see Fig. 15).  
For offshore wind farms further from the land and with higher capacities, HVDC is the more 
economical system, even though the technology  is more expensive. At present, HVDC 
systems for large capacities are of the classi c thyristor type. The high transmission capacities 
of such a system keep the number of cabl es required to a minimum. Modern HVDC-IGBT 
systems, however, offer clear technological advantages, though their transmission capacity 
is still too small to connect large amounts of offshore wind power capacity to the grid. 
Further advantages of the HVDC systems are the avoidance of reactive power in the sea 
cable and the capability to control reactive power in the wind farm. The disadvantage of these systems against HVAC are the smaller c ontribution of short circuit power to the 
interconnected network and the larger demand for space at sea, as the converter systems 
require large platform. 
 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 56
 HVDC 
 HVAC 
Thyristor technology IGB-Transistor-
technology 
Transmission losses High, increasing with 
distance Low Low 
Supply of grid voltage 
and frequency Possible Impossible Possible 
Supply of reactive power Yes No, instead a source of 
reactive power is needed 
offshore Yes, by inverter 
Control of active and 
reactive power  Impossible by transmission 
system Possible by transmission 
system Possible by transmission 
system 
Transmission direction Bi-directional In one direction only Bi-directional 
Required space Low with gas-insulated 
switchgear Very high due to air-
insulated thyristors and use 
of extensive harmonic  
filters High due to air-insulated 
semiconductor 
Advantages Comparatively simple 
technology 
Proved in numerous 
applications onshore Very high transmission 
capacities Bi-directional transmission
Supply of reactive power 
to induction generators 
Disadvantages High losses, increasing with 
cable length No provision of reactive 
power 
No generation of a grid 
voltage Limited transmission 
capacity 
Only few applications up 
to now 
 
Table 9: Comparison of the technical characteri stics of the different transmission systems. 
 
 
Fig. 15: Trade-off between operational costs of HVDC and HVAC cables as function of the 
transmission distance [Ref 9].  Investment and 
operational costs
Transmission distanceHVDCHVDC
HVACHVAC
120 km Sea cableInvestment and 
operational costs
Transmission distanceHVDCHVDC
HVACHVAC
120 km Sea cable

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 57
 4.1.4 Transmission onshore 
The first offshore wind farms are planned to be connected to mainland grids at points not far 
from the coast. However, as cable routes in coastal waters need to avoid major conflicts with 
shipping and nature, the cable route chosen may lead to longer distances both offshore and onshore. To avoid land conflicts and long planning times, the onshore lines to the connection 
points are usually planned as underground cable. 
For the second generation of large offshore wind farms it may be necessary to transmit the 
electricity generated directly to the main consumption areas. One way of doing this would be to reinforce existing lines, by replacing lower voltage lines with the highest onshore voltage 
level of 380kV. Another option would be to build additional high voltage overhead lines. The 
latter would face considerable public resistance and would involve longer planning times of ten years or more. 
A third option would be to continue the offshore transmission system on land. The majority of 
large offshore wind farms will probably use th e HVDC system for transmission to land. This 
transmission system could be extended to connect directly with the in main consumption 
areas. In this case the on-land DC/AC-converter stations would be situated directly at the 
connection points, instead of in the coastal areas, large amounts of energy would be transmitted with high efficiency from the sea directly to the main consumer areas. 
The further solution, to transport the energy by AC underground cables to the consumption 
areas has some disadvantages against the DC solution. High voltage AC power can be 
transported via overhead lines with a high effici ency, but with far lower efficiency by AC 
cables. Due to the so-called natural load, the characteristic wave impedance of an electric 
line, an AC overhead line is capable of transporting six times more power at the same 
conductor diameter as an AC underground cable. This makes AC underground cables unsuitable for long-distance transmission. DC cables do not share this disadvantage and are 
therefore far more suitable for long-distance transmission.  
A recent study on grid reinforcement cost [Ref 7] presents figures comparing costs of 
underground cable to costs of overhead lines. The costs vary with voltage level, the higher the voltage, the higher the cost relationship. For voltage levels of 110kV and 220kV the costs 
for cable lie between 1.3 and 3.1 times higher than for overhead lines. For 380kV cable the 
relationship varies between 2.2 and 4.5. 
 
4.2 Technologies of submarine cable laying 
The parameter for laying sea cables for offshore wind farms are determined by environ-
mental, safety and economic aspects. The main variables are the depth to which the cable 
trench is dug and the course of the cable route. The cable route is determined mainly by 
environmental, economic and safety considerations, but the fine alignment depends on the laying technology and speed. 
As already mentioned, one design objective for s ea cables is to limit the number of cables 
needed by maximising transmission capacities. Ho wever, large offshore wind farms will still 
necessitate several cables being laid.  
The issues to be considered fall into two separate categories: cable-laying issues and 
operational issues. 
During cable laying the following issues should be considered: 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 58
 • The impact on environment and nature during cable laying should be limited to a 
minimum 
• The work should be performed in minimum time 
• The influences of the laying work should vanish as soon as possible 
• In coastal waters the distance between diffe rent cables should be as small as possi-
ble to minimize the extension of the total cable corridor 
• In maritime traffic zones the cable laying method should allow deeper trenching 
depth  
• The cable route should be as short as possible to minimise costs 
• The meteorological conditions should be favourable. 
 
Operational issues include the following:  
• A minimum distance between cable should be kept to allow for possible mainte-
nance and repair later on 
• The trenching depth should be chosen in order to minimise possible accidents and 
to avoid a significant temperature raise at the sea floor above the cable. 
 
4.2.1 Trenching depth 
The depth of the cable trench is determined by  environmental, safety and economic factors 
as well as by seabed type. 
Environmental:  Sea cables produce heat in proportion to the power transmitted. Due to the 
immense heat capacity and conductivity of seawat er, local heat production along the cable is 
not really a problem. For an HVDC cable it ca n be assumed that a significant temperature 
rise at the sea floor above the cable can be avoided if the trench has a depth of at least 1 m. 
Safety:  Sea cables may be fouled by bottom trawl nets or dropped anchors, or hit by falling 
ship cargo (e.g. containers). To avoid fouling by dragged bottom nets it is necessary to bury 
the cable, but only a small depth is required. No truly effective measure can be taken against anchors dropped from large ships, as modern anchors can dig deep into the seabed. The depth of trench to completely avoid a probabl e incident would be economically unviable. 
However, the accident by hitting a cable has no severe environmental and only a limited 
safety impact. Should the cable be torn, the re sulting electrical short-cut will lead to an 
equipment overload and the shut-down of converte r or transformer stations. Due to the high 
electrical conductivity of seawater, resulting in a complete earthing of the damaged cable, the ship involved will suffer no electrical shock. The economic damage, however, may be 
considerable, as the repair of broken cables is especially cost-intensive.  
Economy:  The cost implications of sea cable trenching depth involve three factors: mainte-
nance costs, downtime costs and cable-laying costs. The deeper the trench, the more poten-tial economic damage from dropped anchors or falling sea cargo is prevented (see Fig. 16). Thus a deeper trench reduces costs both of downtime and of maintenance and repair. At the 
same time, the actual cost of cable laying increases with deeper trenches. The total cost 
curve resulting from the three cost factors therefore shows an optimum, where the sum of operational and installation costs is minimal. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 59
 Fig. 16: Costs of laying sea cables depending on trench depth.  
 
Seabed type:  The type of seabed also affects trenching depth. In soft sediments (sand or 
mud) it will be easy to achieve the planned cable depths by trenching. In heavy sediments 
the speed of trenching will slow down and the planned depth may not be achieved. For 
extremely heavy or compact sediments a cutter dredger may be required, while for rock chainsaws may be necessary. In those areas of the North and Baltic Seas where offshore wind farms are currently planned, it can be assumed that soft sediments are predominant in coastal areas. 
 
Maintenance and repair
Out of operation
Cable laying
TotalCosts
Trench depth
Maintenance and repairOut of operation
Cable laying
TotalCosts
Trench depth

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 60
 4.2.2 Digging methods 
Basically, there are two different methods for burying sea cables, dredging and trenching. 
Dredging involves excavating a trench and depositing the excavated material either 
alongside the trench or in a different area of the seabed, the trench is filled back by the natural movement of the seabed. The cable is laid after the dredging process. In the 
trenching process the cable is laid either before or during trenching. The sediment is washed 
away underneath the cable, thus causing the cable to sink into the trench. More information 
is given in the following sections. 
 
 Dredging Trenching 
Digging 
method Removing sediment by suction 
and pumping it into the ship Dissolving the sediment in the 
trench by a water jet or by 
ploughing 
Deposition of 
removed 
sediment Transport and dumping of 
sediment in a different sea area 
or alongside the trench Dissolved sediment sinks down 
beside or back into the trench, no 
transport necessary 
Cable laying In a separate process after the 
excavation During excavation or in a 
separate process before 
excavation 
Typical width 
of trench Approx. 15m plus 10m width per 
1m depth, very gradually sloping 
sides Approx. 1m, steeply sloping sides  
Table 10: Comparison of the two main trench digging methods. 
4.2.2.1 Dredging 
Dredgers are either suction or flow dredgers. Suction dredgers excavate the sediment and 
pump it into barges or into the loading bay of the ship, see Fig. 17 (ships constructed as 
suction dredgers with a loading bay are called hopper). The sediment is then deposited in a 
different sea area. The hopper is suitable for dredging in soft sediments. The so-called cutter in addition is a suction dredger equipped with a cutting head and is thus suitable to dig also in heavy or hard sea beds. As both types deposit  the removed material in the sea, they 
cause a temporary increase in water turbidity in the disposal area. As the cable is laid after 
the dredging is completed, the trench has to have a large width and gently sloping sides to prevent it silting up due to lateral movement of sediment. The trench bottom also has to have 
a minimum width to make sure that the cable hits the trench during laying. For example, a 
1.5m deep trench has to have a width of 30m including sides, with a bottom width of 15m. 
A flow dredger washes the sediment away by pumping water through a jet pipe against the 
sea floor, rather than sucking it away. The sediment settles on both sides of the trench. The 
water temporarily becomes rather muddy and the cable has to be laid immediately after the 
dredging to prevent sediment filling up the trench again. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 61
 
Fig. 17: A large suction hopper dredger, excavating sediment at different sea depths. The 
excavated sediment is pumped into the ship’s cargo bay and is later deposited in a different 
sea area. 
4.2.2.2 Trenching 
In contrast to dredging, in trenching the submarine cable is laid before or during the 
excavation process. There are two trenching methods, plough trenching and jet trenching. Both methods use pumps and jet pipes to dissolve sediments in a narrow trench, so that the 
cable can be placed or left to sink to the bottom. The trench produced is far narrower (e.g. 
1m at the bottom) than that produced by dredging, and is steep-sided.  
The jet trenching method involves the cable being laid down on the sea floor first and then 
washed into the ground by a strong water jet from a trenching device, which blasts aside the 
sediment from underneath the cable – a process known as mass flow excavation, see (Fig. 18). Jet trenching may be carried out by either a ship with jet pipes, a sledge or a remote 
vehicle. Latter is either dragged or controlled by a ship. The trenching ship with jet pipes has 
a pipe or jet tube, which it guides along the cable during the burial process. One advantage 
of this method is that it can also be applied to existing submarine cables, either to bury them 
to a greater depth or to rebury them in the case that they have been exposed by shifting of 
sediments. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 62
 Fig. 18: Jet trenching with mass flow excavation  
 
The second means of jet trenching involves pulling a sledge equipped with a jet sword over 
the sea floor along the previously laid cable. The sledge is pulled by a ship and guided by the cable itself.  
The Remote Operated Vehicle (ROV) is similar in operation to the sledge. It is a wheeled 
vehicle, which powers itself over the sea floor (see Fig. 19). Again, a jet sword is used to bury the cable. The ROV is guided along the cable route by means of a control line linking it 
to the trenching ship. It should be noted, that the submarine cables for offshore wind farm 
grid connection will be much more thick and heav y as the telecommunications cables, for 
which the ROV is mainly used at present. 
Fig. 19: A remote operated vehicle to burry the submarine cable by jet trenching.
 
 
Jet swordCableControl cable
Jet swordCableControl cable


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 63
 The second trenching method, plough trenching, again uses a sledge to bury the submarine 
cable. Cable laying and trenching are performed simultaneously. The burial sledge has two runners, on which it is pulled over the sea floor by the cable-laying ship, see Fig. 20. The cable is guided into the plough via a cable inlet, and emerges behind the ploughshare. The 
ploughshare itself is adjustable in depth and will be lowered to the laying depth of the cable. 
It is equipped with jets, which beam seawater against the sea floor to blast away the sediment allowing the ploughshare to sink deep into the ground and to lower the cable. The 
water is fed to the jets by large pumps mounted on the sledge. The depth the cable is laid at 
depends on the sediment characteristics, being greater in soft sediment than in heavy sediment. In ideal conditions, the burial sledge allows a laying depth of up to 5m. 
Fig. 20: Burial sledge for submarine cables (a: cable inlet; b: pumps; c: sword with nozzles, 
able to be lowered to different depth; d: sledge runners).
 
 
The plough trenching burial sledge, in a smaller and lighter version, can also be used to lay 
submarine cable in areas exposed at low tide, such as the mud flats around the Wadden 
Sea, see Fig. 21. In this case it is pulled, i.e. by a winch onshore, across the mud flats, burying the cable in a small trench.  
The great advantage of trenching as opposed to dredging is its low impact on the marine 
environment. The trench itself is  kept very narrow, which also limits the movement of 
sediment. The removed material is not deposited elsewhere: the suspended sediment starts settling directly after the cable is buried. 
a
c
db
a
c
db

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 64
 Fig. 21: Burial sledge for laying cable in shallow water and mud flats.  
 
4.2.2.3 Cable laying 
Specialised ships, storing the cable in lar ge compartments, lay the submarine cables by 
paying them out over the stern. The positioning of the cables is performed with the help of a high-accuracy Differential Global Positioning Syst em. This navigation system allows the ship 
to lay the cable within an accuracy of as little as 1m. However, the accuracy of cable laying 
depends on the one hand on water depth and the effects of any extreme currents, and on the other hand on the speed of the cable-laying ship. Where the current is extreme, or in deep-
sea areas, the deviation from the planned route may therefore be somewhat greater. 
A detailed route survey precedes the cable laying operation, examining water depths, 
surface slopes, sediment types and any obstacl es on the sea floor. Existing cables, pipes 
and shipwrecks may all present obstacles. The crossing of existing cables or pipelines that 
are laid at only a shallow depth can be expensive, as they may be lowered to greater depth 
or the new cable has to be laid below the existing ones. Shipwrecks can be avoided only by going around them. 
The laying ship presents an almost immobile obstacle to other sea traffic, having only very 
restricted manoeuvrability, as it is fixed to its position by the sea cable. As such, measures 
must be taken to avoid collisions with the ship or the hanging submarine cable. Where 
possible other sea traffic is requested to keep at a safe distance (e.g. one nautical mile) and 
in traffic zones the work has to be carefully supervised. At night and in fog, warning ships have to be positioned up- and downstream in the traffic route to alerting approaching vessels.  
Bad weather and heavy seas can render cable layi ng difficult or impossible. Cable laying can 
be stopped in bad weather and the cable may have to be cut in extreme situations. 


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 65
 5 Ecological aspects 
Due to the current limited experience of offshore wind power generation, the ecological 
impacts warrant close consideration. Non- sustainable and undesirable conditions and long-
term side effects of offshore wind power must be prevented. Section 5.1 begins by giving an 
overview of research projects and studies, which have focused on the potential effects of offshore wind energy utilisation on the marine env ironment. Summaries of relevant research 
projects and study reports can be found in Appendices A–C, corresponding to sections 5.1.1 
to 5.1.3 respectively.  
In section 5.2, specific aspects of the electr omagnetic impacts of different cable types and of 
the acoustical impacts of wind farm construc tion and operation on marine life are addressed. 
5.1 Subjects covered in research projects - overview 
Increasing consciousness of the lack of knowledge about the environmental impacts of 
offshore wind power has led over the past few years to an enormous number of research 
studies. Many of these studies have proved in valuable as background information during the 
licensing process for offshore wind farms. Recently, in particular, there has been a great deal 
of study activity within the EU, in connecti on both with the Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) guidelines and directives and with the perceived need to increase knowledge in areas 
where it was seen to be lacking. In addition more understanding has been gained from the 
construction and operation of the first pilot offshore wind farms. 
Studies have been classified into the following types: 
1. EIA reports (final or interim) and documentation of studies and research projects 
referring directly to impacts of offshore wind power installations on the marine 
environment. These are dealt with in section 5.1.1 and especially in the corresponding Appendix A. 
2. Earlier studies and fundamental research that is relevant to basic knowledge and un-
derstanding. These are mentioned in section 5.1.2, while a list of all the literature 
considered for this section can be found in Appendix B. 
3. Section 5.1.3 and Appendix C give further documentation of studies and research 
projects with direct links to: 
• The environmental impacts on birds of onshore and/or inshore wind energy 
projects; and 
• Further probable environmental impacts of offshore wind energy projects, 
however without having evaluated these reports for the time being. 
In certain cases no evaluation of the study was carried out or summary produced, mainly 
because (final) reports of research projects were not accessible – either because projects 
were still ongoing or because reports were confidential. Note also that only those research reports published in English, Dutch and German have been considered here, and that not all 
research projects were accessible to the authors of the present report. It can therefore be 
assumed that a considerable amount of research exists which was not considered for this report. 
Many studies have already been carried out in the fields of offshore engineering, the effects 
of (coastal) onshore wind turbines on birds, marine ecology and animal physiology. However, 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 66
 further research is recommended in the following areas, in order to increase knowledge of 
potential environmental impacts of offshore wind energy projects: 
• Development and propagation of noise and vibration under water; 
• Orientation and acoustic communication of fishes and marine mammals in the 
context of electromagnetism and noise; 
• Influence of offshore construction works and boat travel on the marine environment; 
• Risks and prevention of collision of vessels with offshore structures; 
• Effects of offshore oil platforms on the distribution of marine species; and 
• Onshore bird response to wind farms, including collisions, compared with 
response to other high structures including transmission lines. 
More effort should be made to apply the results of investigations in these specific fields to 
EIA requirements and the practice of offshore wind engineering. Application of such 
knowledge in the context of offshore projects could increase general understanding and the effectiveness of the EIA process. Most of the information in the appendices originates directly – sometimes as a quote – from the corresponding reports. Hence copyrights for the most 
part belong to the author(s) and/or publisher listed. 
5.1.1 Reports on offshore environmental impact assessments and studies 
Within EIA an initial baseline study is conducted before any impacts can occur. Subsequent 
monitoring is necessary to record any changes within the marine environment, which may have been caused by anthropogenic factors. The monitoring phase may go on for several 
years, and evaluations and conclusions are updated annually to assess changes over time. 
The same procedure is applied to an untouched reference site, in order to act as a control to assess the significance of any changes in meas ured factors. Fig. 22 shows an example of 
the management of site investigation for the EIA of an offshore wind farm. The yellow area 
represents the planned site of the wind farm. The green area represents the adjacent area, which will need to be investigated in addition to the planning site itself. The blue area 
represents the reference area. The thick li ne shows the route of a surveying transect. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 67
 
Fig. 22: Example of offshore wind farm site under development (yellow), the actual baseline 
and wind farm relevant EIA area (green, incl. yellow) as well as the EIA-reference site (blue). Transect route shown in brown.
 
 
For the most relevant studies in this context, see Appendix A. 
5.1.2 Earlier studies with relevance of marine environmental impacts 
In most European coastal states national regulations have been established covering the 
procedures required to obtain building permits for offshore wind farms and their components. The project developing body has to assess in qualitative and quantitative terms the expected 
environmental impacts on the marine environmen t. These procedures ensure that projects 
comply with international and EU law, conventions and regulations regarding habitat and wildlife conservation. Many study projects were  conducted to establish the basic principles 
and knowledge, which form the basis of the current EIA recommendations, guidelines and 
directives. These pioneering studies and fundamental research projects form a substantial and important body of information, encompassi ng the results of both desk studies and field 
investigations. Appendix B provides an overview of this literature. 
5.1.3 Further documentation of studies 
There exists an additional pool of information that warrants consideration in relation to the 
environmental effects of offshore wind power de velopments. Many studies have been carried 
out in other disciplines, such as oil and gas exploitation; marine ecosystems and physiology; 
and the interactions of onshore wind power installations with birds or bats. The evaluation of 
the findings of these reports and, where possible, their application in the context of offshore wind energy, could lead to new hypotheses, better understanding and new approaches to 
EIAs. Studies in this category have not been reviewed in detail by the authors of the present 
report. Nonetheless most of these could form a potential pool of significant background information, and the topics concerned are recommended as a basis for further research projects by the relevant parties. This is particularly the case with the first two reports 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 68
 mentioned below, the most recent and perhaps most remarkable studies concerning the 
impact of onshore and near-shore wind power installations on birds (Appendix C no. 82 and 83). 
 
5.1.4 Summary of existing and ongoing studies 
Table 11 summarises the treatment of a range of topics in the reports listed in appendices A–
C, and is divided into three colour-coded parts. The first part shows reports listed in Appendix 
A. Next are listed those given in Appendix B, which are often of a more general and 
comprehensive character. Reports listened in  
Appendix C are given in the lowest part of the table. 
Many studies have been conducted into wide-ranging aspects of the offshore wind power 
industry and its potential impacts on the marine environment. Not all impacts are necessarily 
detrimental. However, the detrimental impacts  that exist need to be addressed seriously to 
develop a sustainable industry. To ensure this, there are many research projects ongoing or 
in a planning phase. The specialised and de tailed long term EIA surveys and analyses 
considered here were conducted on existing wind farms, in particular Horns Rev (Denmark), Utgrunden (Sweden), and Nysted/Rødsand (Denmark). In  addition, strong research activity is 
ongoing in the UK and Germany. In large part due to the uncertainties and risks concerning 
the environmental impacts of large-scale offs hore wind energy use, developers, backers and 
industry have held back for a long time. The curr ently ongoing research activities contribute 
to greater confidence and security during the planning and operational phases. 
Table 11 below summarises the previously introduced reports and their key subjects. 
Subject Accidents/ 
pollution Barrier 
effects 
(fauna) Ben-
thos/ 
seabed 
life 
/reefs Birds Collision 
risks 
(ship) SEA/ Natu-
ra2000 
/GuidelinesEM-
fields/ 
cables/ 
grid Fish Hydro-
graphyMam
mals Noise/ 
vibra-
tion Sediment/ 
soil 
Frequency 
dealt with: 6 23 26 44 5 10 14 16 10 19 14 15 
Report-
No:             
01       X X     
02           X  
03   X    X X  X X  
04  X  X         
05    X         
06           X  
07  X  X         
08   X X   X      
09    X      X X  
10   X     X     
11          X   
12          X   
13        X     
14        X     
15   X          
16          X   
17  X  X         
18  X           

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 69
 Subject Accidents/ 
pollution Barrier 
effects 
(fauna) Ben-
thos/ 
seabed 
life 
/reefs Birds Collision 
risks 
(ship) SEA/ Natu-
ra2000 
/GuidelinesEM-
fields/ 
cables/ 
grid Fish Hydro-
graphy Mam
mals Noise/ 
vibra-
tion Sediment/ 
soil 
19   X          
20  X        X X  
21          X X  
22  X  X         
23    X         
24    X         
25  X  X         
26   X          
27  X  X         
28   X X         
29  X X X    X  X X X 
30   X    X X   X X 
31         X   X 
32  X        X   
33   X      X   X 
34 X        X   X 
35   X         X 
36   X          
37   X          
38  X  X         
39          X   
40  X X X X       X 
41    X         
42 X    X        
43 X  X X X     X   
44    X         
45       X X     
46   X          
47    X      X   
48  X  X         
49  X    X       
50   X         X 
51         X   X 
52            X 
53       X X     
54  X        X   
55    X         
56           X  
57   X          
58         X   X 
59         X   X 
60             
61       X      
62           X  
63       X      
64    X         
65           X  
66  X X X   X X X X   

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 70
 Subject Accidents/ 
pollution Barrier 
effects 
(fauna) Ben-
thos/ 
seabed 
life 
/reefs Birds Collision 
risks 
(ship) SEA/ Natu-
ra2000 
/GuidelinesEM-
fields/ 
cables/ 
grid Fish Hydro-
graphyMam
mals Noise/ 
vibra-
tion Sediment/ 
soil 
67      X       
68    X  X       
69 X X X X X X  X X X   
70 X    X        
71      X       
72   X      X   X 
73  X X X  X  X  X   
74 X X X X  X X X X X  X 
75    X         
76  X  X         
77  X  X  X    X X  
78      X X      
79           X  
80             
81             
82    X         
83    X         
84    X         
85  X  X  X       
86    X         
87   X    X X     
88   X    X X  X   
89   X    X      
90    X         
91    X         
92    X         
93    X         
94        X     
95    X         
96    X         
97    X         
98    X         
99    X         
Table 11: Summary on research topics, frequency and applicatory genre. The background 
colours indicate the relation to the different chapters, 5.1.1 (yellow), 5.1.2 (blue) and 5.1.3 (green) and their corresponding Appendices A, B and C.  
 
 
5.2 Focus on specific subjects 
This section gives an overview of the impacts of electromagnetic fields and noise/vibration. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 71
 5.2.1 Electromagnetic fields 
An electric current passing through a conductor causes an electromagnetic field around it. 
This field usually surrounds the conductor concentrically, and its strength is proportional to 
the current flowing through the conductor. Due to the high currents used in power transmission from offshore wind farms, sea cables generate strong electromagnetic fields. 
Systems using a monopolar cable, where the return conductor is missing (the current is 
flowing back via seawater and the sea bottom), have an especially powerful magnetic field, which may have a strong impact on marine animals and on shipping. Some whale species, for example, navigate by sensing the earth’s  magnetic field and the electromagnetic field 
from a monopolar cable could impair their ability to do so. It could have a similar effect on the 
compass navigation of ships. For this reas on monopolar cable systems are not considered 
suitable for power transmission from offshore wind farms. The design of offshore wind farm 
power transmission is instead based either on three-conductor cable systems for AC 
applications, or on two-conductor cable systems for bipolar DC applications. 
In a bipolar DC system with two parallel conductor s, the magnetic fields of the currents in the 
forward and return conductors are counter-rotating, see Fig. 23. The two fields are 
superimposed on one another, and if the distance between the two conductors is small, then they will cancel one another out and the resulting magnetic field will be zero at a certain distance from the cable if the forward and return current are equal. For the concentric cable 
the superposition of the magnetic fields is optimum, the resulting magnetic field around the 
cable surface will be zero, see Fig. 24. 
 
Fig. 23: Magnetic field around a parallel bipolar cable, with currents in opposite directions. 
At a certain distance the resulting magnetic field is zero, due to the superposition of the two 
counter-rotating magnetic fields.
 
 Current emerging out of plane
Current pointing into plane

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 72
 Fig. 24: Magnetic field around a concentric cable, with opposite currents in the inner and 
outer conductors. The resulting magnetic field is zero, due to the superposition of the two 
counter-rotating magnetic fields. 
In three-phase AC systems, the magnetic field around the cable is also zero, as the sum of 
the currents in the three phases is zero at all times. 
Since the magnetic fields of both types of cable, bipolar and concentric, are either small or 
zero, it may be concluded in the context of the studies listed in the Appendices and Table 16 that the electromagnetic fields of submarine c ables for offshore wind power will not have any 
significant effects on the marine environment. 
5.2.2 Acoustical impact on marine life based on actual research programmes 
As outlined earlier, there have been several studies conducted on the noise and vibration produced both during the construction of offshore structures in general and by the operation of offshore wind turbines, and the disruptive effects of that noise on the marine environment and particularly on mammals and birds. 
As the acoustical impacts on marine life are considered a major environmental factor, this 
issue is now considered more closely. The available literature has been reviewed and a general summary of the acoustical impacts on marine life is given before consideration of 
specific impacts on particular groups of organisms, including birds, mammals, fish and the 
benthos. 
Finally, a list of further literature on acoustics  is included as Appendix D. These references 
are potentially useful both for their background understanding of marine environmental 
impacts, gained in the context of other industrie s, and for aspects of animal physiology which 
may be relevant to an offshore wind context. However, it should be emphasised that not all the studies listed have been evaluated by the authors of the present report. 
Generally speaking, the noise output of wind turbines can be subdivided into mechanical 
noise and aerodynamic noise. The components emitting the highest sound level (dB) are the generator, the yaw drive (motor and gear ring), the gearbox and the blades. Some of the 
noise generated by these components is regular and some of it irregular, but all of it (except, 
that generated by the yaw mechanism) is present only while the turbine is actually in operational mode. Even then, compared to road traffic, trains, construction activities and 
many other sources of industrial noise, the noi se generated by wind turbines in operation is 
comparatively low [Ref 15]. Current emerging out of plane
Current pointing into plane

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 73
 However, it is not only the operational phase that needs to be considered. During 
construction and decommissioning certain offsho re engineering activities such as ramming 
and explosions take place. Ramming of monopiles may lead to sound pressure levels of as much as 250 dB [Ref 20], though they are often much lower, depending on substrate of the 
sea bed. In the Rødsand (DK) wind farm area, the ramming of the monopile foundations 
caused noise levels of no more than 150 dB, with 91 dB in a part of an EU Special Protection Area and 71 dB in a part of a nature reserve (a seal sanctuary)  [Ref 23]. The noise level 
during the construction phase is expected to be even lower if the caisson foundation type is 
used. 
During operations, the noise from the wind turbines and the transformer is emitted to both, air 
and water (via the tower and foundations). Measurements of noise from wind turbines show 
that the airborne noise makes a negligible contribution to the underwater noise level. Therefore the noise measured underwater is transmitted almost entirely through the tower and foundations. During operation, the underwater noise emitted in the frequency range 
above approximately 1 kHz is no higher than the ambient noise level. In the frequency range 
below approximately 1 kHz, the underwater noise emitted is higher than the ambient noise 
level. During operation, the turbines also transmit noise to the surroundings, which could 
have an impact on the benthic fauna, fish and marine mammals in the vicinity of the 
foundations. So far, this impact has not been investigated thoroughly and knowledge of the subject is very limited [Ref 24]. 
Fig. 25 shows the sound pressure levels of a range of underwater noise sources as a 
function of frequency [Ref 20]. 
Fig. 25: A comparison of peak intensities in the frequency spectrum of noise for selected an-
thropogenic, underwater noise sources. The sound pressure level is depicted versus the fre-quency of the emitted noise.
 
 
The effects of anthropogenic noise can be broadly categorised into behavioural and 
physiological effects. Behavioural impacts in clude attraction or avoidance behaviour, panic 
and increases in the intensity of vocal communi cation. Such behavioural changes can in turn 
affect populations of sensitive species in an area. Physiological effects are less well 
documented. However, studies have shown that long-term exposure to noise can cause 


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 74
 damage to the inner ear animals, even if for example many cetaceans appear to readily 
habituate to anthropogenic noise [Ref 20]. 
Studies of the impact of anthropogenic noise on fish, invertebrates and planktonic species 
have focused almost exclusively on the effects of geophysical surveying, and in particular the 
‘airguns’ used in seismic surveys. These devices have been shown to produce a range of 
impacts on fish, from avoidance behaviour to ph ysiological impacts. Studies have also shown 
that noise in general, such as that associated with shipping, causes avoidance or attraction 
behaviour in fish. Former can lead to avoidance of migration routes and feeding and 
spawning areas. Reports describing the impacts of noise on invertebrates and planktonic organisms are much fewer in number. However, the general consensus is that there are very 
few effects, behavioural or physiological, unle ss the organisms are very close to a powerful 
noise source [Ref 20]. 
A recent UK survey [Ref 35] investigated the levels of background noise at typical offshore 
wind farm sites, including source and impulse levels during piling at North Hoyle and Scroby 
Sands and source levels during cable trenching at  North Hoyle, as well as rock socket drilling 
components and harmonics. This study is a valuable addition to knowledge of acoustical impacts of offshore wind farms on marine species. The main objectives of the study were: 
• To characterise the noise spectrum and the level of underwater noise created during the 
construction, operation and decommissioning of wind farms;  
• To identify which marine mammal species and other marine organisms use the coastal 
areas in the vicinity of the wind farms, and to determine their sensitivity to noise; and 
• To determine the effects that noise may have on these species, and the duration of such 
effects. 
Based on previous works of Yelverton et al. [Ref 36], Table 12 was compiled, to summarise 
the effects of impulses on mammals diving beneath the water surface. The effects of given 
noise levels should not however be overestimated on the basis of this table, as it records effects on terrestrial mammals (sheep, dogs, monkeys) rather than marine mammals, which 
are adapted to the pressure changes of diving and have increased body wall thickness. 
Table 12: Summary of effects of different impulses on terrestrial mammals diving beneath the 
water surface. 
In summary, the unweighted North Hoyle pile hammering measurements showed that: 
1. the effective source level of the piling noise measured at 5m depth was 260dB re 1 
µPa @ 1m, and at 10m depth was 262dB re 1 µPa @ 1m. The corresponding transmission loss is given by 22 log (R), where R is the range; and 


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 75
 2. the level of noise fell evenly with range in all directions, i.e. there were no 
preferential directions for propagation of noise. 
Furthermore, pile-hammering measurements in dBht units within a range of up to 10km from 
the piling site show that: 
3. About 75% of the measurements were in excess of a value of 90dB ht, indicating that 
significant avoidance reaction by a range of species would be likely. Hence 
behavioural effects (avoidance behaviour) of both marine mammals and fish could occur at several kilometres from the piling. 
 
The ranges at which significant avoidance reac tion would be expected (based on a criterion 
of 90 dBht) have been calculated and are tabulated in Table 13 below. [Ref 35] 
 
Table 13: Calculated ranges for significant avoidance reaction by various species.  
 
Following [Ref 35] Yelverton et al. [Ref 36] moreover noted that 163 dB (re 1 µPa·s) was the 
threshold for a high incidence of moderately severe blast injuries to marine mammals, 
including eardrum rupture. The use of this effect threshold in conjunction with the results above implies that injury might occur within ranges of 77 m at 5 m water depth, and 60 m at 
10 m water depth. The severity of the injury would be expected to increase for marine 
mammals at lesser ranges. 
The trenching noise at North Hoyle was found to be a mixture of broadband noise, tonal 
machinery noise and transients, which were probably associated with rock breaking. It was 
noted at the time of the survey that the noise was highly variable depending on the physical properties of the particular area of seabed that was being cut at the time. Furthermore it may be noted that, with one exception, all of the measurements were below 70 dB
ht, and hence 
below the level at which a behavioural reaction would be expected. [Ref 35]  
The report also outlines measures to mitigate any environmental impacts, distinguishing 
between engineering methods (appropriate engineering, pile diameter, bubble curtains, 
vibropiling) and non-engineering methods (marine mammal observers, active or passive 
acoustic monitoring, acoustic harassment devices, scheduling, soft start). [Ref 35] 
Simmonds and Dolman [Ref 21] provide a comp rehensive list of the possible impacts of 
noise on marine mammals in general. Behavioural impacts listed include the gross 
interruption or modification of normal behaviour, displacement from an area, masking of communication with individuals of the same species, masking of other biologically important noises, and interference with the ability to interpret the environment acoustically. Physical 
impacts include temporal or permanent hearing threshold shifts and gross physical damage 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 76
 to hearing apparatus and body tissues. Other impacts of noise can result in decreased 
viability of individuals, increased vulnerability to disease and increased potential for impacts from cumulative effects, such as chemical pollution combined with noise-induced stress. In this context also habituation to noise impacts may exacerbate other effects [Ref 20]. 
In general Ref 20 is a valuable source of in formation concerning acoustic impacts on marine 
life, especially as much information is  presented on audiograms, thresholds, hearing 
sensitivity and underwater vocalisation for several species present in the UK territory waters. 
Another research programme at Utgrunden provided some valuable insights into several 
physical and technical aspects of underwater noise [Ref 32]. Some of the programme’s key questions are listed below: 
• What is the character of sound from a single power station? 
¾ The turbines radiate sound mainly at a few dominant frequencies from 30Hz 
up to 800Hz. At frequencies below 3Hz no contribution from the turbines can 
be detected due to the high background level from the waves and the low tower vibration level.  
• What mechanisms in the turbine generate the sound?  
¾ Gearbox mesh frequency vibrations that are transmitted via the tower 
structure and radiated out to the water generate most of the sound. Airborne 
blade sound is effectively dampened in the transition from air to water.  
• How does the sound attenuate with increasing distance at different frequencies?  
¾ The average attenuation per doubling of distance for frequencies between 
31Hz and 722Hz is approximately 4dB in the measured positions. No clear 
variation in attenuation according to frequency could be found.  
• How does the sound pressure level vary with increasing wind speed?  
¾ With increasing wind speed, the sound pressure level increases and the 
dominating frequencies move upward due to increasing turbine rotational 
speed.  
• How does sound from different power stations interfere with each other and 
influence the over all sound image?  
¾ No clear tendencies of interference could be observed in this study. This could 
be because of small variations in turbine speed and the possibility that the hydrophone positions needed to be less dominated by a single turbine.  
• How do passing vessels influence the sound level in the wind farm?  
¾ The passage of ships dominates the sound in the wind farm for frequencies 
higher than approximately 63Hz, though this varies greatly according to type 
of ship, distance, etc. 
Several other research projects have included measurements and investigations to assess 
the propagation of vibrations and noise through water, air and the seabed. An overview of 
additional studies related to noise or vibrations can be found in Table 11 of section 5.1.4. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 77
 In the following section a brief overview of acoustical impacts on various types of marine life, 
collected from actual research programmes, is given. 
5.2.2.1 Birds 
Compared to what exists for other marine animals, there is a substantial amount of information available on the impacts of offshore wind power installations on birds, though this 
is still considerably less than the information available from onshore investigations on the 
same topic. Wind farm layout (and its effect on bird flyways), collision detection systems, bird 
counting, bird alimentary behaviour, bird flight behaviour and avoidance behaviour have been seriously addressed, and research activities are undertaken not only by project 
planners, but also by pressure groups and conservation organisations. 
However, while it is generally difficult to isolate any impact of wind turbine acoustical noise, 
this is especially true in the case of impacts on birds. One reason for this is that noise 
emissions only occur when the turbine is operational, and as the spinning of the rotor may 
have an impact on the birds’ vision, it is difficu lt to distinguish between this influence and any 
impact of the noise. 
One study [Ref 22] indicated that birds passing  close to the wind turbines of a near-shore 
wind farm did collide significantly more often with wind turbines at night than during the day. It also points out that birds react more frequently with evasive movements if headwind prevails than during downwind. This difference in reaction could therefore be linked to a 
difference in acoustic sensitivity as well as to variation in the ability to manoeuvre at different 
speeds, which in turn are the consequences of tailwind and headwind situations respectively. 
Further study of the flight patterns, traces and evasive reactions of birds (e.g. flying just 
above the water surface while heading upwind and higher when heading downwind), in 
combination with investigation of the frequency distribution of wind direction at specific 
seasons, could provide us with new insights and recommendations for the placement and 
constellation of offshore wind farms in areas with high levels of bird movement and/or 
vulnerable species. 
A comprehensive assessment of noise effects as part of the EIA for Øresund led to the 
supposition that the noise caused by ramming did not have a detectable impact on the 
breeding birds in the study area (e.g. gulls, terns and waders). At Øresund moulting Greylag 
Geese, a species very sensitive to disturbance, showed a high degree of habituation to the constant and frequent banging construction noises. On the other hand the noise caused by 
ramming is expected to disturb Long-tailed Ducks, especially at first. However, the only effect 
expected from this disturbance is, that the species may leave the area earlier as usual [Ref 23]. A study at Tunø Knob [Ref 30] also concluded that neither the rotor noise and movement 
(established through on-off experiments), nor the standing towers had a negative effect on 
the abundance and the distribution of eiders. However, it was observed that eiders avoided flying and landing within 100m of the wind farm, which should decrease any risk of collision with towers (in good weather conditions) [Ref 34]. 
5.2.2.2 Marine mammals 
Marine mammals spend most or all of their lives  at sea, and spend the majority of that time 
submerged. Light is absorbed quickly in salt wa ter and in many marine habitats visibility is 
thus limited to a few metres. Sound, however, propagates efficiently through water and marine mammals use sound for a variety of purposes, such as finding prey, detecting 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 78
 predators, communication (often over long distance ranges) and probably also navigation. 
Any noise pollution in the water can therefore have a range of impacts on mammals in particular, and this topic accordingly requires detailed investigation. 
Marine mammals in general, and cetaceans in particular, are vulnerable to interference from 
underwater noise, as they rely on sound to communicate, sense food and understand their 
local environment. Water-borne noise and vibration transmitted from the moving blades, through the tower and into the water, has the potential to cause significant disturbance or 
harm to marine mammals, as introduced previously in Table 13. When assessing whether 
water-borne noise from a specific wind farm is likely to be problematic, a number of issues 
need to be addressed: 
• Whether there are cetaceans and/or other marine mammals in the area – if there 
are none, the effects of noise on marine mammals will not be an issue; 
• The sensitivity to noise of any receiving marine mammals; 
• Details of the noise emitted by the noise source; 
• The attenuation rate along the propagation path; and 
• Ambient noise levels near the marine mammals. 
Regarding the third point, the information currently available indicates that noise generated 
by offshore wind turbines lies in the same range of frequencies as the noise generated by 
sources such as shipping, fishing vessels, wind and waves [Ref 14]. However, the crucial 
difference is that the noise caused by passing ships is temporary, whereas an operating wind farm is expected to run continuously, and he nce the emitted noise will be of continuous 
character. As such the long-term effects of exposure to such noise need to be investigated in 
more detail. 
There is a large volume of data available regarding the second bullet point – see [Ref 16]. 
Also Ref 17 refers to audiograms, characteristic frequencies of vocalisations and hearing 
sensitivity of marine mammals such as harbour  seal, grey seal, baleen whales and toothed 
whales. In addition, exposure to loud sounds can lead to temporary or permanent threshold shifts as well as potentially fatal non-auditory tissue damage. Experiments to induce 
threshold shifts have been conducted and are described in Ref 17. 
The behavioural and physiological effects of noise on a particular species depend on its 
intensity, frequency bandwidth and duration [Ref 19]. Seals are known to be sensitive to low frequencies (mainly <1kHz), whereas small (toothed)  cetaceans are relatively insensitive to 
low frequencies [Ref 17]. 
The behaviour of cetaceans in response to offs hore wind farms is as yet totally unknown. 
However, what is known of the impacts on common and grey seals seem to indicate that 
they are not significantly disturbed by the presence of offshore wind turbines. Investigations 
near to the shore have shown no negative effects of wind turbines on common and grey seals and in the vicinity of the Tunø Knob wind farm, for instance, a group of 10 seals 
regularly haul themselves out [Ref 18]. The EIA for the offshore wind farm at Horns Rev 
showed that the strongest effects were observed in connection with the pile-driving operations during the construction of foundations. Harbour porpoises left the construction area when pile-driving began, but returned again a few hours after the end of each pile-
driving operation. Safety protocols were  employed to reduce the sound exposure to 
porpoises and seals in the area during pile-driving operations: these involved either a gradual 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 79
 ramping up of impact energy or the underwater deployment of acoustic pingers and seal-
scarers. Nevertheless, the effects were not restricted to the wind farm area – pronounced effects were also observed in the control areas. Fewer animals were observed foraging close to the construction site (up to a few kilometres away) on days when there were pile-driving 
operations [Ref 25]. 
Another survey of seals at Horns Rev found that some animals spent periods in the reef 
area, presumably foraging, both before and during construction. There seems no reason to 
believe that construction – even the highly noisy ramming of monopiles into the seabed – 
had any large-scale influence on the seals in the area. The reef seems to be a central corridor for movements between foraging areas and haul-out banks, but in itself is less 
important as a foraging area than had previous ly been expected. The limited extent of the 
wind farm there in comparison to the entire reef makes it unlikely that it will function as a barrier to movement. However, in the case of future extensions of the Horns Rev wind farm or other constructions in the area, the possibility of barrier effects would have to be 
considered [Ref 33]. The latter also highlights the need to focus further research activities on 
the enlargement of existing offshore wind farms, as well as on the selection of new areas.  
An annual status report on the effects on harbour porpoises at Horns Reef [Ref 25] states the 
following: 
Data from acoustic data loggers (T-PODs) and visual surveys conducted from ships 
confirmed the presence of harbour porpoises inside the wind farm area during all peri-
ods investigated. Comparison with baseline data from 1999–2001 and with control ar-
eas outside the wind farm did not show a statistical significant change in sighting rates inside the wind farm area in the first year following construction relative to baseline. T-POD data showed a pronounced effect of the construction of the wind farm on the indi-cators encounter duration (number of minutes between two silent periods longer than 
10 minutes) and waiting time (number of minutes in a silent period lasting more than 10 
minutes). Both parameters seem to indicate higher levels of porpoise activity during construction. Encounter duration went up fr om baseline to construction and fell again to 
post construction phase, whereas waiting time went down during construction and up again during post construction. A partial return to baseline levels was seen for these 
two indicators in 2003 (wind farm was constructed in 2002 and opened in December 
2002). Both changes are consistent with a relative increased porpoise activity inside the wind farm area during construction. This is contrary to what was anticipated in the EIA [Ref 29] and also the low number of animals observed inside the wind farm area on 
surveys conducted during construction peri od [Ref 28]. It was expected that echoloca-
tion activity would decline during the construction period and then increase to an inter-mediate level during the post construction period. This apparent increase in porpoise activity during construction can be expl ained by an increase in porpoise abundance 
caused by a genuine attraction of animals to the wind farm area caused by the con-
struction. Alternatively, it can be explained by changes in one or more unknown biotic 
or abiotic (like salinity) factors controlling the overall distribution of porpoises in the en-tire reef area [Ref 25]. 
Calculations and field experiments indicate that harbour porpoises may be able to hear 
individual turbines at distances of up to a few hundred metres [Ref 26 and that short-term behavioural changes (avoidance) can be expected at distances closer than 180 metres [Ref 
27 Little is known about long-term effects and w hat level of habituation to the noise can be 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 80
 expected. Harbour porpoises seem to use a variety of signals with frequencies spanning 
around 47Hz to above 130kHz and their highest sensitivity has been found to be between 8kHz and 30kHz (below 50 dB re 1 µPa) [Ref 37]. Wind turbines, in contrast, are expected to 
generate noise above ambient levels only at frequencies below 1–2kHz [Ref 38]. 
Another crucial impact concerns pregnant common porpoises, which need shallow and calm 
water to bear their offspring. During this time they are more strictly dependent on certain biotic and abiotic circumstances and hence they are not able to move away from any 
disrupting source of noise. The dams are rat her sensitive during this period and hence it is 
necessary, if considering offshore activities in  the vicinity of common porpoises, to ensure 
that the porpoises are single rather than comprising a dam-calf-group [Ref 19]. 
5.2.2.3 Fish 
Operational effects may occur for 20 years or more and can be seen as long-term. This could 
result in fish moving from an area permanently , which could have a major impact on larval 
survival, for example. Moreover, most planned offshore wind farms will eventually consist of 
a few hundred turbines each, according to current plans. Assuming that the turbines have to 
be checked at least once a year for regular maintenance and that extra visits will be 
necessary to deal with technical management, there could be more or less daily transport activities within the wind farm area. Acce ss activities associated with the maintenance and 
technical management of the turbines may thus create more disruption than the operating 
turbines themselves [Ref 14]. 
If noise is generated at low frequency, as is likely according to the information available, it 
may be audible to many fish species. The navigation and behaviour of the fish could as a 
result be affected. The extent to which fish are affected will be highly dependent upon the 
frequency, intensity and duration of the noise. Only a small amount of research has been conducted into the effect of noise on fish behaviour [Ref 14]. One study indicates that fish 
typically respond strongly to low-frequency hydr odynamic/acoustic fields (below ca. 50Hz). 
Significant noise emissions in this frequency range are expected to be confined to the immediate vicinity of the wind turbines, wi thin a radius of no more than a few hundred 
metres. Moreover, fish will perceive them ve ry differently to the low-frequency fields 
generated by other animals. A fish swimming through the hydrodynamic field created by 
another animal experiences a rapid change in water flow in terms of both strength and direction. The low-frequency fields generated by wind turbines are much larger than those of 
swimming animals, meaning that fish passing th rough them will not experience rapid current 
changes. Therefore, the ability of the fish to detect predators and prey and interpret the fields from other sources (i.e. wind turbines or animals) may exist. Furthermore, the continuous 
nature of wind turbine noise will probably mean that the fish become habituated to it.  
In addition to the low-frequency fields, noise is also radiated in the frequency range 0.05–2 
kHz with source levels up to 74 dB re 1 µPa. Fish respond only slightly to these frequencies, 
and the influence of wind turbines over this range compared to the level of marine 
anthropogenic noise in general is probably minor. Wind turbines produce no noise above 
2kHz,  and this frequency range is therefore of no concern. As a whole the effect of wind turbine noise is presumed to be negligible [Ref 37]. 
In spite of the expectation that noise and vibration might scare fish, the Bio-Wind study 
showed that the bridge pillars and monopiles ac tually attract fish, especially two-spotted 
goby. Common gobies are also found at the base of the pillars [Ref 24]. Research on the 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 81
 effects of noise transmitted through water on fish at Vindeby also showed that the fish 
appeared undisturbed by the noise and accumulated in the area [Ref 31]. 
5.2.2.4 Benthic (benthos) 
There has been very little research to assess noise or vibration effects on benthic communities, even though any effects on benthic communities could have a knock-on effect 
on any species higher up the food chain and as such could be important. What is more, there 
are large differences between the vibrational behaviour of concrete and steel-monopile foundations, which make it difficult or even impossible to transfer knowledge. However, unless the turbine tower vibration causes changes in the physical composition of the seabed 
(e.g. liquefaction) little or no remarkable effect on benthic communities is expected [Ref 14]. 
At Horns Rev changes in the community structure of the benthic infauna and the sediment 
occurred both before and after the wind farm was established, and were observed both 
inside and outside the wind farm area. This indicates that the changes were the results of 
natural variation, rather than impacts due to the wind farm [Ref 46]. 
However, hard bottom substrate monitoring at Horns Rev [Ref 47] , detailed in the 2003 
annual report, found that the faunal communities on the introduced hard substrates are 
completely different to the faunal community found in the wind farm area prior to the erection of the wind turbines and the establishment of the scour protection. At this time, no large hard structures existed in the area and the fauna inside the wind farm area consisted mainly of 
infaunal species typical of sandbanks in the North Sea. After construction of the wind farm, it 
was noticed that the introduced hard substrates began to be used as hatchery or nursery grounds for several species. The introduction of epifouling communities has increased the 
general biodiversity in the wind farm area. It is estimated that the availability of food for fish 
(mainly consisting of benthos) has increased by a factor of eight, after the introduction of the hard substratum, compared to the normal soft seabed fauna in the wind farm area. Thus, 
even if noise and vibration do prove to have an effect on the benthos, the benefits still seem 
to outweigh the disadvantages in terms of providing hard substrates, on which specific benthos species can settle. 
5.2.2.5 Conclusion 
There is a need for more experimental measur ement of noise generated by offshore wind 
farms (frequency, sound power level and propagation) and its impacts on the marine 
environment would, as it should be noted that on some of the above mentioned areas insufficient information is available. Further study could even be conducted as part of the EIA process. However, reliable data on long-term impacts will only become available in the next 
five years, as more EIAs on operational and planned wind farms are completed. 
Again, it is worth mentioning that some relevant information on noise may be found in 
research conducted in connection with other disciplines such as offshore oil and gas 
engineering. Many stages of the oil extraction  process, for example, produce potentially 
disturbing or even damaging sound pressure levels. Exploration entails seismic surveys, which produce intense low-frequency impulse noise; extraction involves drilling, increased 
vessel traffic, pipeline laying and further seismic site surveys as well as decommissioning of 
structures by means of explosive [Ref 17]. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 82
 A list is given in Appendix D of reports or papers, which, although not evaluated here, may 
contain further relevant information on the potential impacts of noise on the marine environment.  
Wherever possible, the findings of these reports mentioned above should be applied to 
specific situations within the field of o ffshore wind energy engineering. The development of 
synergies by this means could reduce the need to perform new studies. 
Fig. 26 illustrates the key interactions influencing the effects of offshore wind farms on 
marine wildlife and indicates where the uncertainties and gaps in knowledge lie. The top row 
of the table contains those factors expected to have a direct impact on marine wildlife, while the left hand column contains those physical characteristics, which may determine the 
nature/extent of these key factors. The extent of the interaction (major interaction, minor 
interaction, no direct interaction or uncertain interaction) is shown by the symbol in the lower left of each cell. For example, turbine size has a major interaction with vibration, noise production and noise transmission. The right hand column contains different components of 
the marine wildlife: colonising organisms, benthos, plankton, fish, etc. The interaction of the 
key factors on each component of marine wildlife is represented by the symbol in the upper 
right of each cell. For example, noise transmi ssion from wind farms is expected to have a 
minor interaction with plankton and an uncertain interaction with local fish populations. 
Fig. 26: Vibration, noise and other key interactions influencing the effects of offshore wind 
farms on marine wildlife.
 
 
 


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 83
 6 Strategies to develop the offshore wind energy sector 
6.1 Measures relating to power transmission, grid connection and grid integration 
For environmental, technical and economic reasons  the combining of the cable systems of 
single wind farm projects to a common grid connection is desirable. This solution would 
require a high-capacity cable, leading from land to a central point between several offshore 
wind farm projects. This cable should be an HVDC system with the maximum available 
capacity, and a common converter system. The connection between the offshore wind farms 
and the offshore grid connection point could be a medium- or high-voltage AC system. 
In an area such as the German Bight, where numerous offshore wind farms are planned (see 
chapter 3.1) this strategy could be extended to the construction of several of these central connection points. If this approach were pursued to its logical conclusion, the interconnection 
of these network extensions at sea could lead to a genuine extension of the onshore 
interconnected network into an offshore interconnected network. An even more challenging vision is presented in [Ref 50], which presents an outline of a trans-European network, 
connecting wind farms from the Atlantic Ocean to the Baltic Sea with the main areas in 
Europe (see Fig. 27). The likelihood of realising this vision is unclear, as it would be enormously costly. On the other hand wind energy is one of the very few energy sources 
whose cost is likely to remain stable or decreas e in the future. As it is very likely that the 
costs of fossil-fuel and nuclear energy will increase significantly in the future, the 
opportunities to achieve a larger proportion of renewable energy in Europe, including offshore wind energy, will also increase. If project developers are unable to develop a 
common approach to grid connection or an offshore grid, than government intervention may 
be the best means to realise these goals. 
 
   
 
    
 
  Fig. 27: Vision of a new high voltage 
‘super grid’ to transmit wind power 
through Europe. See [Ref 50].
 


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 84
 The development of renewable energies has to be seen in the context of the rising cost of all 
conventional energy sources. The price for crude oil as the major world wide energy source influences the price of all other energy sources that are traded. During 2004, consumers in European countries experienced a sharp increase in gas prices as a consequence of the 
rising price of crude oil. The uncertain political and security situation in the main oil-producing 
region in the world, the Middle East, increases uncertainty over the price of oil.  
Besides the obvious increase in petrol prices, the price of electricity has risen steadily over 
the last few years (for example, in Germany in 2004 the price of natural gas rose for the 
domestic consumer by 8% on average, while the price of electricity rose by 4.4% for domestic consumers and 4% for industry). By contrast, the price of wind energy is not 
determined by external factors such as political instability in producing regions or rising 
energy demands elsewhere in the world. This is the background against which the likelihood of increased economical viability of renewable energy sources must be seen. While the price of fossil-fuel energy will very likely continue to ri se in the future, the costs of wind energy will 
decrease. This prediction has actually been enshrined in law in the country, which currently 
has the highest installed wind energy capacity in the world, Germany. The purchase price for produced energy set by the German Renewable Energy Law, which is a tariff compensation 
system rather than a quota system, decreases each year for new wind farms. For existing 
wind farms, the price will not rise in parallel wi th the conventional energy market; rather it is 
fixed for the operational period of the wind farm at two levels: between five and 20 years after 
installation the price will drop from the initial level by approximately 30–40% for the remaining 
operating period, depending on the specific wind conditions of the site. Moreover, the price does not rise with inflation, so in real terms it will continue to fall.  
6.2 Political measures  
The main existing obstacles to the implementation of offshore wind farms lie in the area of 
grid connection. The submarine cables will have to cross shipping routes and possibly  
marine protected areas. If the parties involved cannot agree on cable routes, the offshore grid connection will need to be secured by political measures. In the German Bight, for example, approvals will soon be given for the installation of a small number of submarine 
cable routes, having capacities of 150 – 250 MW. On the one hand these approvals are 
required to promote the installation of the first offshore wind farms in this area of the North Sea. On the other hand there is a danger latent in the approval of a number of small-capacity 
cables – namely that the parties involved in the approval process, such as shipping and 
nature preserve authorities, may obstruct further installations so as to prevent too large a number of cables from being laid.  
The solution to this problem could be a development plan either for installation of a combined 
offshore interconnected network to which different wind farms could connect, or for the approval of large-capacity cable routes, around which proposed wind farms would have to be concentrated.  
A related problem is that the installation of large-capacity offshore cable routes requires 
planning security. Often wind farm development com panies are not in a position to give this 
planning security, as they are too small to insure against potential losses on large 
investments. A potential investor for large-capacity offshore transmissions will need the 
security, that all wind farms that are propos ed to connect to his system will be build and 
operated. As long as this is not guaranteed, the planning situation is too insecure to attract 
possible investors in submarine cable projects. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 85
 One solution to this situation would be a state guarantee to enable the installation of an 
offshore grid extension without the need for wi nd farm projects to have finalised approvals 
and finance. With the certainty that an offshore grid connection point would be provided, project development companies would have a secu re basis on which to construct their wind 
farms. For example a number of smaller wind farms, each of 100–200MW, could focus on a 
common connection to a 0.8GW or 1GW cable system.  
6.3 Programmes, networks and incentives 
Programmes, co-operative networks and initiatives are increasingly developing on a European level, comprising bodies from several European countries and representing a 
range of specialist disciplines. These activiti es offer important opportunities to share 
knowledge, to discuss problems and generate solutions, besides forming a basis for lobbying and pressure groups, which can represent a common point of view. In most cases useful 
synergies can be achieved. Such activities are of special importance in terms of increasing 
public acceptance by communicating the facts about offshore wind energy. Some examples of recent activities are given below: 
Pushing Offshore Wind Energy Regions (POWER), an EU Project in Interreg III B 
Programme – North Sea Region (2004–07)18 
By establishing a common platform for discussion, exchange and transnational initiatives, 
POWER aims at helping the North Sea regions  to develop offshore wind energy‘s economic 
and technological potentials. For example, the work package ‘Planning and Participation’ will 
“cover improved integration of the different planning systems of the Member States bordering 
the North Sea. Its aim is to harmonise planning and information strategies for offshore wind farms in compliance with existing government legislation, in particular environment and 
nature protection legislation. 
The second work package aims to encourage the offshore wind industry to establish and 
develop the offshore wind supply chain. A network of centres of excellence in the sector will 
be created. Experiences in the offshore oil and gas industry, as well as the onshore wind energy sector in the North Sea region, will be useful. 
The third work package will cover the needs of the offshore wind sector as regards 
qualification and further training of specialised personnel and skilled workers within the 
complete supply chain. The work package will develop employment opportunities in the 
offshore wind industry and its suppliers in structurally weak regions
. 
The fourth work package aims to support the exchange of best practice examples and the 
transfer of know-how both between project partners and with other actors in the North Sea 
region. Brochures, a website and a travelling exhibition will inform the general public .” 
 
Concerted Action for Offshore Wind Energy Deployment (COD) (2003–05)19 
“The objective of the COD initiative is to speed up the implementation of offshore wind 
energy in the EU by early identification and possible removal of non-technical barriers 
involving legal, administrative, policy, environmental and electrical infrastructure issues. COD 
                                                 
18 http://www.kopenmunt.nl/documents/kopenmunt/news/bis-windpowerflyer.pdf  at 10/02/2005 
19 http://www.offshorewindenergy.org/  at 10/02/2005 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 86
 aims to provide a harmonised European process for EIA, permission procedures, 
deployment and grid integration of offshore wind energy farms. 
COD is steered by a Ministerial Committee, with members from the Energy Ministries of the 
United Kingdom, Ireland, Sweden, Denmark, Germany, Poland, and the Netherlands. The 
Chairman is Michel Verhagen (Netherlands Ministry of Economic Affairs).  
COD work is carried out by a Working Group that is co-ordinated by Ruud de Bruijne 
(Netherlands Agency for Energy and the Environment). Assistance is provided both to the 
Ministerial Committee and to the Working Group by an Advisory Board consisting of 
representatives from industry and NGOs. 
The COD Working Group gathers all available information on environmental impacts, legal 
issues and conflicts of interests with other se a users. This information is made accessible via 
the Internet. Throughout 2004 and 2005, the Working Group is analysing this information and 
using it for benchmarking and to produce guidelines. ” 
COD began on 1 January 2003 and will end in 2005. The COD database may be 
downloaded from www.offshorewindenergy.org/ (10/02/2005). 
 
Structural and Economic Optimisation of Bo ttom-Mounted Offshore Wind Energy Converters 
(Opti-OWECS) (granted 1996–97)20 
“The Wind Energy Section of the Faculty of Civil Engineering at Delft University of 
Technology, the leading institution of higher technical education in the Netherlands, co-
ordinated the Opti-OWECS programme. Two groups co-operate closely in the field of offshore wind energy: the Wind Energy Section (SWE, formerly Institute for Wind Energy) 
and the Offshore Technology Workgroup (WOT). The extent of the collaboration has grown 
and the two groups have worked closely together within the JOULE III project “Opti-OWECS JOR3-CT95-0087”. Within the proposed project both groups will act as one contractor, denoted Delft University of Technology, under the lead of the SWE. The SWE has been 
involved in wind energy research and education since 1976 and has experimental facilities in 
an open jet wind tunnel as well as an open-air test facility. The theoretical research is focused on integrated offshore wind farm design, aerofoil and rotor aerodynamics, turbulent 
wind field description and structural dynamics. 
Since 1992, offshore wind energy has been an increasingly important research subject for 
the SWE, leading to the development of a design tool for offshore wind turbines: DUWECS. 
Recently, the application of this code to actual offshore wind turbines has been demonstrated 
in the first Dutch offshore wind farm at Lely. Moreover, previous and ongoing research covers operation and maintenance as well as structural and economic optimisation of offshore wind turbines. The SWE has ample experience in both theoretical and experimental 
research and project coordination gained through a number of European R&D projects within 
the framework of JOULE, including the Opti-OWECS (co-ordinator), OWTES (principal 
contractor), OWEE (co-ordinator) and NewGust (co-ordinator) projects
.” 
 
Concerted Action on Offshore Wind Energy in Europe (CA-OWEE) (1999–2001)21 
                                                 
20 http://www.offshorewindenergy.org/txt2html.php?textfile =ca-owee/indexpages/info/Project_Partners.txt - 1  at 10/02/2005 
21 http://www.offshorewindenergy.org/  at 10/02/2005 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 87
 “The objectives of this project were to define the current state of the art of offshore wind 
energy in Europe through gathering and evaluation of information from across the continent, 
and to disseminate the resulting knowledge to all interested, in order to help stimulate the development of the industry. The project was funded by the European Commission and was completed at the end of 2001
.” The knowledge gathered is freely available on the Internet at 
www.offshorewindenergy.org/. 
The project divided offshore wind energy into five subject clusters: 
1) Technology of wind turbines and support structures 2) Grid integration, energy supply and financing 3) Resources and economics 
4) Activities and prospects 
5) Social acceptance, environmental impact and politics. 
Conclusions from these surveys were us ed to develop recommendations for the RTD 
strategy for Europe.  
The project's 17 partners came from 13 countries active in offshore wind energy, thus 
covering the majority of the European Community's coastline. The partners covered a wide range of expertise and included developers, utilities, consultants, research institutes and universities. 
 
Wind Energi ё op Zee / Wind Energy at Sea (We@Sea) (2004–08)
22 
The consortium We@Sea has planned and proposed a research and development 
programme, ‘Large-scale wind power generation offshore: towards an innovative and sustainable business’, within the framework of the Dutch subsidy programme Bsik (Besluit 
subsidies investeringen kennisinfrastructuur). The main objective of the consortium is to 
increase knowledge and to improve and accelerate  large-scale development of offshore wind 
energy in the North Sea, thereby contributing to the Dutch Government’s ambitious target to 
install 6GW of wind power capacity offshore by 2020. 
“
The research and development programme consists of seven parts: 
1. Integration and scenarios  
2. Offshore wind energy technology  
3. Layout planning and environmental aspects  
4. Energy transport and distribution  5. Energy market and finance  6. Construction, use, maintenance and teardown  
7. Education, training and passing through knowledge  
 Concrete outputs of the knowledge programme are: 
                                                 
22 http://www.we-at-sea.org/  at 10/02/2005 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 88
 • Cost-effective scenario(s) for installation, and for operation and maintenance 
• A site atlas containing all relevant, site-specific information 
• Cost models and models for decision support during daily operation 
• A decision support tool for site selection 
• Validated design tools and design tool benchmarks 
• Recommendations for the application of standards and guidelines 
• Specifications of new, potentially better concepts 
• Tools for optimal wind power station design and control 
• Concepts for an optimal interconnection electricity grid offshore to onshore and 
insight in transient behaviour 
• A concept describing the required port capabilities and facilities, including costs and a 
plan of action 
• Life cycle analysis of wind power plants 
• Environmental impact assessment .” 
 
Wind Energy R&D Network (December 2001 – May 2005)23 
“The Wind Energy R&D Network is a European Commission funded project, coordinated by 
the European Wind Energy Association (EWEA), with the overall aim of ensuring that EU-
funded wind energy RD&D meets the needs of the European wind industry to maintain and 
increase its competitiveness in EU and external markets. 
The Wind Energy R&D Network comprises strategy discussion groups, which meet on a 
regular basis for workshops. Further discussion and dissemination of information is carried 
out on the network’s dedicated website. Crucially, these discussions enable direct exchange 
of information and views among actors from across the industry. Participants may choose to join one of the four groups: End Users and Utilities; Financiers and Insurers; Turbine and Component Manufactures: and Research and Testing Centres. 
At present the wind energy R&D community has no detailed common strategy. International 
co-operation among research institutes, manufacturing industry, financial institutions and end users – through the Wind Energy Network – ident ifies the key barriers facing wind energy 
development, and specifies R&D actions to overcome these. 
Further R&D is required to achieve the levels of wind penetration outlined in EWEA’s 
Windforce 12 – A Blueprint to Achieve 12% of the World’s Electricity by 2020. Continued 
European dominance of the global market can only be achieved with increased R&D into 
new technology, policy support options, and markets. 
The objectives of the Wind Energy R&D Network are as follows: 
1. To optimise EU-funded industry research, to formulate requirements for European policy 
and to formulate innovation in the European policy. 
2. Facilitate exchange of information between the European Commission and the wind 
industry. 
                                                 
23http://www.ewea.org/06projects_events/proj_WE_RD.htm  at 01/03/2005 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 89
 3. Formulate a cross-industry strategy, to minimise redundancy through replicated efforts. 
4. Reduce the costs of onshore and offshore generation .” 
 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 90
 In the following appendices information is provid ed by title, author, publisher and publication 
date wherever possible. In most cases, key words and objectives are given. Though, de-
pending on accessibility some of these information may not be provided at present. Most of the following information originates directly – sometimes as a quote – from the corresponding report, even if not especially marked as such. Hence copyrights for the most part belong to 
the author(s) and/or publisher listed. 
 
Appendix A 
- Reports on EIA and documentation referring directly to impacts of offshore wind en-
ergy matters onto the marine environment - 
 
1 The potential effects of EM fields generated by cabling between offshore wind 
turbines upon Elasmobranch  
Authors: Gill, A.B., Taylor, H. 
Publisher / Date: Countryside Council for Wales CCW / 2001-09-00  
Keyword(s): fish, EMF, Elasmobranch 
This report assesses the potential effects of electromagnetic fields generated by cabling 
between offshore wind turbines upon Elasmobranch  fishes. The report contains four main 
sections: 
1. A review of the literature relating to electro-reception in Elasmobranchs and relevant 
literature on offshore wind farm developments. 
2. A review of the current situation regarding offshore wind developments focussing on 
their environmental impacts with particular implications for British elasmo-
branches.  
3. A summary of the current status and extent  of relevant biological knowledge of British 
Elasmobranchs .  
4. A pilot study which experimentally de monstrates the response of the benthic Elasmo-
branch , the dogfish scyliorhinus Canicula , to two electric fields, one simulating 
prey and the other the maximum potential output from unburied undersea cables.  
Finally, the report provides recommendations for future research considerations.  
 
2 Utgrunden offshore wind farm - measurements of underwater noise 
Author(s): Lidell, H. 
Publisher / Date: Ingemansson Technology AB / 2003-06-17  
Keywords: noise, vibration 
This project was initiated in order to achieve a better understanding on how offshore based 
wind farms affect the underwater noise. The main reason is to gain knowledge on how 
marine wildlife could be affected by this kind of installation. The measurements were 
performed at Utgrunden wind farm that is situated at the reef Utgrunden on the Swedish southeast coast. The farm consists of seven 1.5 MW turbines. Three hydrophones registered 
the underwater sound and four accelerometers the tower vibrations. The measurement 
campaign was conducted during a period from November 2002 to February 2003.  

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 91
 The objectives within this project were to answer the following issues: 
1. What is the character of sound from a single power station? 
2. What are the sound generating mechanisms in the turbine? 3. How does the sound attenuate with increasing distance at different frequencies? 4. How does the sound pressure level vary with increasing wind speed? 5. How does sound from different power stations interfere with each other and influence 
the over all sound image? 
6. How is a passing ship influencing the sound level in the farm? 
 
Suggestions were provided for further activities. Activities mentioned regard to: 
• Particle acceleration measurements/calculation 
• Interference measurements 
• Noise reduction measures 
The represented picture origins from the report itself. 
 
3 The effects of marine wind farms on the distribution of fish, shellfish and marine 
mammals in the Horns Rev area 
Author(s): Hoffmann, E., Astrup, J., Larsen, F., Munch-Petersen, S., Strottrup, J. 
Publisher / Date: Institute for Fisheries Research  / 2000-00-00 
Keywords: fish, shellfish, marine mammals  
In relation to the proposed establishment of an experimental marine wind turbine park at 
Horns Rev, ELSAMPROJEKT conducted an Environmental Impact Assessment. As a contribution to this EIA, the Danish Institute for Fisheries Research (DIFRES) has been 
contracted by ELSAMPROJEKT to provide a quantitative description of the fish and shellfish 
fauna in the area and to evaluate the effects of the wind turbine park on fish, shellfish and marine mammals. 
The purpose of the report is: 
• to give a quantitative description of the abundance of the fish and shellfish in the area 
surrounding the wind turbine area and to evaluate the effects of the physically 
presence of the wind turbines on the abundance of fish and shellfish in the area 
• to evaluate the artificial reef effect in the wind turbine area 
• to evaluate the effects of noise and electromagnetic fields on the abundance of fish 
and marine mammals 
The description of the fish fauna in the Horns Rev area is based on eleven years trawl 
surveys. The most common species are dab, plaice, hooknose, whiting, dragonet and grey 
gurnard. A total of 42 different fish species are listed. The relative abundance of the ten most common species is given for three different areas within and outside the wind turbine area. 
These mean figures indicate some systematic differences among the three areas for species 
like plaice, hooknose, whiting and gobies. However, there have been large fluctuations from year to year in the abundance of the species. 
The effects on fish, shellfish and marine mammals are within the report divided into: 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 92
 • Effects of the physically presence of the wind turbines 
• Artificial reef effects 
• Effects of noise 
• Effects of magnetic fields 
Each of these topics is divided into sub-chapters, closing with concluding remarks each. 
 
4 Assessment of the effects of offshore wind farms on birds 
Authors: Percival, S.M. 
Publisher / Date: Ecology Consulting - DTI / 2001-00-00 
Keywords: bird collision risks, barrier effects 
This report seeks to review current knowledge of the effects that offshore wind farms have on 
birds and to identify sensitive offshore locations where bird conservation interests and wind 
energy development may conflict. It seeks to provide information for all stakeholders in the 
development of offshore wind farms. The specific objectives of the project were to 
(i) produce a review of all available reports, data and information relating to the effects of 
offshore wind farms on birds, 
(ii) establish the locations of offshore si tes and areas that hold important birds popula-
tions, 
(iii) identify the bird migratory routes that may encroach upon prime offshore wind energy 
development areas, 
(iv) identify gaps and uncertainties in the existing knowledge and recommended further 
studies that are needed to address these, 
(v) provide an inventory of planned and ongoing studies, 
thereby focusing in specific on the national situation within the UK. 
 
5 Offshore Wind Energy and Noise Monitoring 
Authors: Verhoef, J.P., Westra, C.A., Nijdam. R.J., Korterink, H., Eecen, P. J. 
Publisher / Date: ECN - research Centre of the Netherlands / 2003-04-00  Keyword(s): bird collision risks 
This report focuses on demonstrating the appropriate and target oriented operation of the 
automatic bird collision registration system  (WT-BIRD) that has been developed by ECN. 
This is an important investigation, as an inventory on bird’s detection systems and methods shows a lack of appropriate methodologies to study bird victims caused by wind turbines. 
The system must be relatively inexpensive,  robust and applicable for offshore conditions. 
The system identifies bird im pacts by noise measurements and a camera identifies the 
specific species. The system can also distinguish between turbine specific sounds and a 
collision of a bird against tower, nacelle and ro tor. The ECN bird collision registration system 
is proven to be a very promising way to det ect and record bird collisions against wind 
turbines. The first experimental results are good. This way of detecting the collisions of birds 
can be very useful for the future implementation of offshore wind farms. An inventory on 
bird’s detection systems and methods shows a lack of appropriate methodologies to study bird victims caused by wind turbines [Ref 6]. That's one of the reasons why ECN started the development of an automatic bird collision detecting system called WT-Bird [Ref 7]. [Ref 8] 
The photo origins from the report itself. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 93
 6 Assessment of the effects of noise and vibration from offshore windfarms on 
marine wildlife 
Author(s): Velly, G., Rushforth, I., Mason, E., Hough, A., England, R., Styles, P., Holt, T., 
Thorne, P. Publisher / Date: Department of Trade and Industry –DTI
 / 2001-00-00 
Keywords: noise, vibration 
Key focus of this study was to assess the effect of noise and vibration from offshore wind 
farms on marine wildlife. The key aims being to review relevant studies, reports and other 
available information, identify any gaps and uncertainties in the current data and make recommendations, while outlining methodologies, to address these gaps. 
To determine and investigate the environmental effects of offshore wind farm development, a 
range of generic impacts on marine wildlife are addressed in this report, which are: 
• Characterisation of noise and vibration generated by offshore turbine operation and 
construction activities 
• Propagation and attenuation of noise and vibration above and below the surface 
• Prediction of noise levels at the shoreline and impacts on marine wildlife 
• Likely range of background noise above and below the surface 
• Identification of the range of noise sensitive marine species most at risk to noise and 
vibration impacts related to UK offshore wind farms 
• The effects of noise and vibration on marine species 
• The extend to which offshore wind turbines may provide physical protection and new 
habitat opportunities 
The conclusion and recommendations can be outlines as follows: 
On the basis of the available data, pinniüeds (seals) and odontocetes (toothed whales) are 
likely to show initial avoidance to wind farms, followed by habituation and possibly attraction 
to wind farms as feeding grounds. The reaction of mysticetes (baleen whales) is unknown in 
the absence of data regarding their audible sensitivity. However, it is possible that they will show a behavioural response to the low frequency sound wind farms are likely to produce. 
The significance of this response will depend upon the proximity of wind farms to whale 
migratory routes. 
From the information available for operating offshore wind farms and other noisy offshore 
structures such as oil and gas platforms, it is expected that effects on fish population 
dynamics will be determined by immigration/attraction of fish to wind farms following constructions. No adverse impacts on marine invertebrates are expected by the noise and 
vibration generated by turbines. 
However, the full effects of offshore wind farms on marine wildlife, particularly mammal, fish 
and migratory fish behaviour and ecology can only be useful determined through further monitoring. Additional studies into the effects of offshore wind farms on marine species are 
therefore recommended. 
 
7 Visual and radar observations of birds in relation to collision risk at the Horns 
Rev offshore wind farm 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 94
 Authors: Christensen, T.K., Clausager, I., Petersen, I.K . Hounisen, J. P. 
Publisher / Date: NERI / 2004-00-00 
Keyword(s): Birds, IEA 
The aim of the project is to assess the collision risk between birds and wind turbines at the 
Horns Rev wind farm. In 2003 the studies focused on describing bird movements in relation 
to the wind farm and to identify the species-specific behavioural responses towards the wind 
turbines shown by migrating and staging species. The Horns Rev area lies in a region known to be important for substantial water bird migration as well as holding internationally important numbers of several wintering and staging water bird species. Theoretically, birds 
approaching the wind farm may: 
• pass through the wind farm 
• increase flying altitude and pass above the wind farm 
• change direction and pass around the wind farm 
The present study is restricted to the period after the construction of the wind farm. For 
practical reasons, data from the pre-construction period was not collected. Consequently, no base-line studies of bird movements in the area prior to establishment of the wind farm are available to which the present data can be compared. 
 
8 Ökologische Begleitforschung zur Windenergienutzung im Offshore-Bereich auf 
Forschungsplattformen in der Nord- und Ostsee - BEOFINO 
Authors: Dr. Knust, R., Dr. Heuers, J. 
Publisher / expected Date: Alfred-Wegener-Institut, Bremerhaven / expected 2005 Keyword(s): birds, collision, bent hic community, emf, electro-magnetic 
The main focus of the project is to investigate possible impacts of future offshore 
windturbines on the marine environment and to develop methods and criteria for the evaluation of such impacts. The following compartments will be taken into account: 
• Impact of the wind turbines on birds migrat ion and collision risk of birds with the tur-
bines 
• Impact of the wind turbines on the benthic community near the piles 
• Impact of electro-magnetic fields on marine organisms 
 
9 MINOS - Marine Warmblüter in Nord- und Ostsee: Grundlagen zur Bewertung von 
Windkraftanlagen im Offshore-Bereich – Marine mammals in the North and 
Baltic Sea: Fundamentals for evaluation of wind energy converters in off-shore applications 
Authors: Eskildsen, K:, Adelung, D., Benke, H., Dehnhardt, G., Garthe, S. Kellermann, A., 
Lucke, K., Scheidat, M., Siebert, U., Verfuß, U., Wilson, R. Publisher / Date: Landesamt für den Nationalpark Schleswig-Holsteinisches Wattenmeer / 2004-
00-00  
Keyword(s): birds, mammals, Harbour Porpoise 
Phocoena phocoena , Common Seal Phoca 
vitulina , Grey Seal Halichoerus grypus 
The erection of high power wind turbines in the offshore area will lead to additional impact on 
the marine ecosystem. The construction of offshore wind parks and the assessment of their effects on the environment are new territory for all concerned. The results of investigations 
from other countries can not always be applied to the conditions prevailing in German coastal 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 95
 waters. The basic information needed for a comprehensive evaluation of the impact of wind 
parks is not yet available. The most clearly formulated objection to offshore wind parks is the effects they might have on bird life and marine mammals. The Harbour Porpoise (Phocoena phocoena), Common Seal (Phoca vitulina), Grey Seal (Halichoerus grypus) and the birds 
roosting in the offshore area are thus at the center of the investigations in the interdisciplinary 
“MINOS” project. The project will supply info rmation on the populations of birds and marine 
mammals in the offshore area including:  
I. their population size 
II. their temporal-spatial pattern of utilisation 
III. their reactions to the effects of noise pollution.  
The information gathered during the project will  fill essential gaps in our knowledge and will 
form the basis for the evaluation of the impac t of wind turbines on the marine environment in 
the offshore area. 
Within the project there are several relevant sub projects being conducted. For each the sub-
ject of research and the project leader(s) shall be given below. In the most cases there does 
not exist a final report by the time being as the projects still are of an ongoing: 
1. Effects of acoustical emissions of offshore wind turbines onto marine mam-
mals in the German North Sea and East Sea 
¾ PD Dr. Guido Dehnhardt, Fakultät für Biologie, Allgemeine Zoologie und 
Neurobiologie, Ruhr-Universität Bochum 
2. Assessment of the density and distribution of harbour porpoise ( Phocoena 
phocoena ) in the German North Sea and East Sea 
¾ Dr. Ursula Siebert, Forschungs- und Technologiezentrum der Christian-
Albrechts-Universität Kiel 
¾ PD Dr. Karl-Hermann Kock, Bundesforschungsanstalt für Fischerei, Institut 
für Seefischerei 
3. Investigation into the special distribution by harbour porpoise in the North Sea 
and East Sea by aid of acoustical methods (POD’s) 
¾ Dr. Harald Benke, Deutsches Meeresmuseum Stralsund 
4. Inter-calibration of different methods to assess the occurrence of harbour por-
poise within the nature reservation area National Park of the Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea 
¾ Dr. Ursula Siebert, Forschungs- und Technologiezentrum der Christian-
Albrechts-Universität Kiel 
5. Offshore wind farm utilisation and the occurrence of migratory birds in German 
waters: Analysis of the conflict potential at the example of the Eastern German Bay (North Sea) and the Pommersche Bay (East Sea) 
¾ Dr. Stefan Garthe, Forschungs- und Technologiezentrum der Christian-
Albrechts-Universität Kiel 
6. Investigation into the special and tidal utilisation of the Schleswig-Holstein 
Wadden Sea and the bordering areas by common seals ( Phoca vitulina 
vitulina ) and grey seal (Halocoerus grypus) 
¾ Dr. Rory Wilson, Institut für Meereskunde 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 96
 7. Coordination and combination of data 
¾ Dr. Adolf Kellermann, Landesamt für den Nationalpark Schleswig-
Holsteinisches Wattenmeer 
 
10 2nd Status for the project entitled: Investigations on the artificial reef effect on 
fish from marine wind turbine park at Horns Reef 
Authors: Unknown 
Publisher / Date: Danish Institute for Fisheries Research / 2002-01-00  Keyword(s): fish, plaice, whiting, sandeel 
The objectives of this investigation are: 
• to study fish attraction relative to single wind turbine structures and to the wind tur-
bine park  
• to study the potential fish production enhancement of single wind turbine structures 
and of the wind turbine park.  
The first project year is the baseline study and will be based on data from 2 fishing surveys, 
an early spring and late summer survey. 
 
11 Monitoring effects of offshore windfarms on harbour porpoises using PODs 
(porpoise detectors) 
Authors: Teilmann, J., Damsgaard Henri ksen, O., Carstensen, J., Skov H. 
Publisher / Date: Ministry of Environment and Energy / 2002-02-00  Keyword(s): harbour porpoises, porpoises detection system, POD 
The study was conducted with the aim of giving the best advise on usability, data collection, 
statistical methods and experimental design when using PODs 
The aim of this report is to summarise the present experience with PODs under controlled 
conditions and in the wind farm areas. The data collected under controlled conditions will be 
used to evaluate variations in the sensit ivity between and within PODs as well as 
documenting how selective T-PODs are in recording harbour porpoise sounds. The POD data collected in the field are compared with visual surveys to see if changing animal density 
is correlated with echolocation activity. The collected POD data is also used to select 
indicators and the most appropriate statistical model. Finally a design for a monitoring program is discussed as well as recommendations for future work with PODs. 
Specific aims of the study are: 
• to test the reliability of recorded T-POD-data in controlled conditions with and without 
captive animals 
• to test the directionality and inter-differences between T-PODs using artificial and re-
corded harbour porpoise echolocation signals 
• to compare visual observations with T-POD data to document whether echolocation 
activity reflects the density of animals 
• to develop statistical methods for analysing POD data 
• to develop a robust monitoring design for det ecting effects of offshore wind farms on 
harbour porpoises 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 97
 • to document the present knowledge of POD research during an international work-
shop 
 
12 Use of the North Sea by Harbour Seal with special emphasis on the Horns Reef 
area 
Authors: Tougaard,S., Tougaard, J. 
Publisher / Date: Fisheries and Maritime Museum, Esbjerg / 2004-04-00  Keyword(s): harbour seal GPS, GSM 
This report addresses the test of prototype GPS/GSM-transmitter on harbour seals in the 
Sealarium, Esbjerg. Therefore a combined GPS-receiver and GSM mobile phone transmitter designed for deployment on wild seals was tested on a captive harbour seal. The unit has been under development in recent years and cons ists of a GPS-unit for positioning and a 
GSM mobile phone unit for transmission of logged positions to land. The test took place in 
the Sealarium at the Fisheries and Maritime Museum, Esbjerg. The unit was glued onto the 
fur on the head of the seal, where it stayed on for 13 days. Only one position was acquired by the unit and it failed to connect to the GSM-net during the test. Technical information from the constructor of the unit is not available and it is thus not possible to conclude on the rea-sons why the unit did not function as intended. The behaviour of the seal can however, be ruled out, as close observation and registration of the seals dive behaviour during the first 
days of deployment showed that the unit was free of the water for sufficiently long periods for 
positions to be acquired.  
13 Sandeels in the wind farm area at Horns Reef 
Authors: Jensen,H., Kristensen, P. S., Hoffmann, E. 
Publisher / Date: Danish Institute for Fisheries Research / 2004-08-00  
Keyword(s): sandeels, A. tobianus, H. lanceolatus, A. marinus 
This report summarises preliminary results from a survey carried out in the Horns Reef area 
in March 2004 and contrast these results to those from a previous survey carried out in 
February/March 2002. The surveys were designed to analyse the effect, if any, of the 
construction of a wind farm on sandeels in the area. The 2002 survey was done prior to construction of the wind turbines and the 2004 survey was done after the construction of the 
wind turbines. There are no indications that the construction of the wind farm has had any 
effect on the sediment composition in the im pact area (the wind farm area). Especially there 
was no indication that the content of the finest particles, the Wentworth sediment classes silt/clay and very fine sand, has increased in the impact area from 2002 to 2004. In this 
respect the construction of the wind farm is not likely to have had any effect on sandeels in 
the area of the wind farm. The effect of the wind farm on sandeels was evaluated on the basis of changes in distribution and densities of all species of sandeels combined, as there is 
no information available to suggest that the possible effects, if any, on sandeels of the 
construction of a wind farm is dependent on the species. 
 
14 Sandeels and clams (Spisula sp.) in the wind turbine park at Horns Reef 
Authors: Jensen,H., Kristensen, P. S., Hoffmann, E. 
Publisher / Date: Danish Institute for Fisheries Research / 2003-04-00  
Keyword(s): sandeels, clams,  Spisula sp.,  A. tobianus, H. lanceolatus, A. marinus 
In order to investigate the impact, if any, of the construction of the wind turbine park on 
sandeels and shellfish in the area of the wind turbine park the following field programme has 
been suggested by DIFRES:  

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 98
 • a survey before the construction of the wind turbine park 
• a survey 1 year after the construction of the wind turbine park 
• a survey 2 and/or 3 years after the construction of the wind turbine park. 
During the surveys the relative densities of sandeels in the seabed should be measured at 
fixed sample locations in the area of the wind turbine park and in a control area in the region 
of the wind turbine park outside the impact ar ea. The sediment composition at the sample 
locations should be determined from analyses of sediment samples collected at the same locations as where sandeels and shellfish densities are measured. 
The purpose of this report is to evaluate the re sults of the survey carried out in February and 
March 2002 before the wind turbine park was constructed and hence also may serves as 
base line survey of the EIA. 
  


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 99
   
 
15 Infauna Monitoring Horns Rev Offshore Wind Farm Annual Status Report 2003 
Authors: Bech, M., Leonhard, S.B., Pedersen, J. 
Publisher / Date: Bio/Consult A/S / 2004-05-13 
Keyword(s): benthic fauna, indicator organisms  
The monitoring programme of the benthic fauna was carried out in September 2003 after the 
wind farm had become operational. Baseline surveys for the present monitoring programme were conducted in the wind farm area on three occasions prior to the construction of the offshore wind farm: spring 1999, spring 2001 and September 2001. In designated reference 
areas, surveys were conducted in spring 1999 and September 2001. The reference areas in 
1999 and September 2001 were placed at two different geographical locations because the survey in September 2001 was planned to be  a part of a fish-monitoring programme. 
Assessment of possible impacts of the establishment of the wind farm was mainly done by 
comparing results from September 2003 with t he results from the baseline study conducted 
in September 2001. The survey in September  2003 included collection of bottom fauna at 6 
turbine sites, a total of 18 stations in the wind farm, and at 6 stations in a designated 
reference area outside the wind farm area. The stations in the wind farm were situated respectively 5, 25 and 100 meters in a leeward direction from the scour protection of the wind turbine towers at each turbine site. Scuba divers collected the bottom samples. Additional 
samples were collected for sediment analysis. 
In 2001, results revealed that the following species could be used as indicator organisms of 
environmental changes in the wind farm area due to relative uniformity in dominance 
relations: 
Pisione remota , Goodallia triangularis , Goniadella bobretzkii, Ophelia borealis, 
Orbinia sertulata and Nephtys longosetosa . The character species Spisula solida , although 
dominant in biomass, showed a more aggregat ed distribution in 2001. In September 2003, 
the surveyed areas were characterised by t he presence of character species such as the 


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 100
 
bristle worm Goniadella bobretzkii and the mussels Spisula solida and Goodallia triangularis , 
because they were the most important species in respect of abundance or biomass. Other character and appointed indicator species such as 
Ophelia borealis and Nephtys 
longosetosa were less common or absent compared with previous surveys. The main 
difference between the survey in 2001 and in 2003 was the decline of the Pisione remota 
population and an increase in the population of Goodallia triangularis. Presence of new 
species to the infauna community at Horns Rev, the bristle worms Euzonus flabelligerus and 
Polygordius appendiculatus , typically associated with coarse sand, might be a result of 
changes in sediment characteristics towards coarser sediments. 
 
16 Satellite tracking of Harbour Seals on Horns Reef - Use of the Horns Reef wind 
farm area and the North Sea 
Authors: Tougaard,S., Ebbesen, I., Tougaard, J., Jensen, T., Teilmann, J. 
Publisher / Date: Fisheries and Maritime Museum, Esbjerg / 2003-03-00  
Keyword(s): harbour seal, Phoca vitulina , GPS, GSM  
Background for the studies is the construction of 
the Worlds largest off shore wind farm on Horns 
Reef. Based on previous studies using VHF-
transmitters, it was expected that the seals would spend considerable time on Horns Reef. 
The VHF-telemetry studies showed that the 
preferred direction for seals leaving the Danish Wadden Sea is NW from Grådyb tidal area outside Esbjerg, the direction directly toward s the wind farm area. The previously used VHF-
transmitters had a limited detection range and it was decided to equip a number of seals 
from the same area as before with satellite transmitters. This allows for positioning of the seals in the entire North Sea as well as providing dive summary information, as a transmitter 
with a depth transducer was chosen for the study.  
The image origins from the discussed report itself. 
 
17 Offshore-Windenergieanlagen und Vogelschutz 
Authors: Exo, K. M., Hüppop, O., Garthe, S. 
Publisher / Date: SEEVÖGEL, Zeitschrift Verein Jordsand, Hamburg Band 23, Heft 4 / 2002  Keyword(s): birds 
There are two internationally important areas for seabirds and coastal birds off the German 
North Sea coast: the Eastern German Bight and the sea stretch seawards off the East Frisian Islands. Important areas along the Baltic coast comprise sea inlets in Mecklenburg–
West Pomerania including the Szczecinski lagoon, Pomeranian Bay, as well as large parts of 
the Bight of Lübeck and Kiel Bay. Every year duri ng migration, tens of millions of birds cross 
the North Sea and the Baltic Sea on their way from breeding grounds to wintering areas and 
back. Both seas are part of global flyway systems. The erection of wind facilities offshore can 
have the following adverse affects on birds: (1) risk of collision with wind turbines; (2) short-term habitat loss during construction; (3) long-term habitat loss due to disturbance by wind 
turbines including disturbances from sailing ac tivities in connection with maintenance; (4) 
formation of barriers on migratory routes; and (5) disconnection of ecological units, such as roosting and feeding sites of local birds. To evaluate conflict potentials of individual parameters, we should know the distribution of birds at proposed wind plant locations and 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 101
 details of their behaviour, in particular flight altitudes above sea level, perceptibility of wind 
turbines and species-specific sensitivities. To analyse the latter, elaborate behavioural investigations should be carried out on pilot wind power facilities. 
 
18 Bird numbers and distribution in the Horns Rev offshore wind farm area 
Authors: Christensen, T.K., Clausager, I., Petersen, I.K . 
Publisher / Date: NERI / 2004-00-00  
Keyword(s): birds 
Main focus of the report lies on the utilisation of the Horns Rev wind farm area and 
surroundings by birds, pre- and post construction of wind turbines. This report presents data 
from six aerial surveys of birds in the Horns Rev wind farm area in 2003. Including 16 surveys conducted before construction of the wind farm started and three during the 
construction phase, a total of 25 surveys have been performed in the area since August 
1999. The operational phase of the wind farm commenced in 2002. Hence the six surveys from 2003 are all considered post-construction data sets. A preliminary evaluation of the 
potential impact of the wind turbines on bird distributions has been carried out by comparison 
of these data to those from the 16 pre-construction surveys. 
The installation of wind turbines was finished in autumn 2002. Hence, the annual status 
reports for 2003 merely represent data from one year during the initial operational phase of 
the wind farms. Thus, natural variation between years, seasons, species and sites and the 
possible habituation effects during the operational phase could not be considered. Therefore, it must be emphasized that the tendencies, suggested by the results are to be considered as 
preliminary, and must await further compilation of data, before firm conclusions can be drawn 
with respect to impact on birds. The final env ironmental impact assessment is planned to be 
undertaken upon termination of the environm ental monitoring programmes in 2006. 
 
19 Hard Bottom Substrate Monitoring Horns Rev Offshore Wind Farm 2004 
Authors: Frederiksen, R. 
Publisher / Date: Bio/consult A/S / 2004-05-30 
Keyword(s): Hard Bottom Substrate, Jassa marmorata , Mytilus edulis , Telmatogeton japoni-
cus 
In connection with the implementation of the monitoring programme concerning the 
ecological implication of the effect of the introduction of hard substrate related to the Horns 
Rev Wind Farm, the third survey was carried out in the period 24–31 March 2004. The survey covered collection of fauna and flora samples from the scour protection and at the 
wind turbine towers at six turbine sites. Video recordings were planned at different sites to 
provide documentation, but due to poor visibility the video recordings were postponed. On request from Elsam Engineering A/S video inspecti ons on technical installations were made 
at turbine `84 and 95. This report covers a short description of the methodology, sampling 
activities and site description. 
 
20 Harbour Porpoises on Horns Reef - Effects of the Horns Reef Wind Farm 
Authors: Tougaard, J., Carstensen, J., Henriksen, O. D., Teilmann, J. 
Publisher / Date: NERI Technical Report / 2004-06-00  
Keyword(s): harbour porpoise, Phocoena phocoena, noise 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 102
 Occurrence and distribution of harbour porpoises (Phocoena phocoena) in and around the 
off-shore wind farm on Horns Reef, Denmark, was investigated. This report describes data collected in 2003 as part of an ongoing monitoring program, covering a period before construction of the wind farm (baseline), the construction period in 2002 and one year 
following construction of the wind farm. Data from acoustic data loggers (T-PODs) and visual 
surveys conducted from ships confirmed the presence of harbour porpoises inside the wind farm area during all periods investigated. Comparison with baseline data from 1999-2001 
and with control areas outside the wind farm did not show a statistical significant change in 
sighting rates inside the wind farm area in the first year following construction relative to baseline. T-POD data showed a pronounced effect of the construction of the wind farm on 
the indicators “encounter duration” (measure of how long porpoises remain close to the 
POD) and “waiting time” (measure of time interval between porpoise encounters. Both 
parameters seem to indicate higher levels of porpoise activity during construction (encounter duration went up, waiting time went down) compared to baseline. A partial return to baseline 
levels was seen for these two indicators in 2003. Effects expected especially by wind farm 
operation were  
• changes in habitat  
• noise from wind turbines  
• noise from maintenance activities 
Hence within the study a closed look was laid onto these topics. 
 
21 Short-term effects of the construction of wind turbines on harbour porpoises at 
Horns Reef 
Authors: Tougaard, J., Carstensen, J., Henriksen, O.D., Skov, H. and Teilmann, J. 
Publisher / Date: Hedeselskabet, Roskilde / 2003-04-00  
Keyword(s): harbour porpoise, Phocoena phocoena, noise 
Ship based visual surveys and long-term deploy ment of acoustic dataloggers (PODs) were 
used to assess short term effects of construction on behaviour and abundance of harbour 
porpoises (Phocoena phocoena). Most focus was put on mounting of steel mono-pile 
foundations for the turbines, as they were rammed into the seabed. This type of operation is known to generate very loud underwater sound levels. Combined evidence from animal 
densities obtained from visual surveys, be havioural observations during surveys and 
acoustic activity data in and outside the construction area demonstrated effects on the behaviour and abundance of animals on both short-term (hours) and long term (entire construction period) scales. Acoustic activity by the porpoises decreased dramatically on the 
entire Horns Reef at the onset of ramming operations and returned to higher levels a few 
hours after each ramming operation was completed. A reduction in abundance close to ramming operations was anticipated, as deterring devices (pingers and seal scarers) were 
deployed prior to each ramming operation to deter marine mammals from the area and thus 
protect them from exposure to the loud sound levels generated by the ramming procedure. The changes in abundance and behaviour over large distances are unlikely to be explained 
by the deterring sounds, which have comparably lower intensities than the ramming sounds 
and these effects must be attributed to the ramming.  
A general effect on the behaviour of animals was seen during the construction period and at 
distances of up to 10-15 kilometres from the construction site. Compared to observations 
before and after construction there was a decrease in non-directional swimming, a behaviour 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 103
 assumed to correlate with feeding activity. Animal density estimates indicates that there were 
fewer animals present on the entire Horns Reef during the construction period compared to observations before and after the construction phase. Whether these changes are attributable to the construction activities or are related to overall temporal variation cannot be 
determined without further observations in the post-construction period. 
 
22 Environmental impact assessment of an offshore wind park at Rødsand: Tech-
nical report on birds 
Authors: Kahlert, J., Desholm, M., Clausager, I., Krag Petersen I. 
& Ib Krag Petersen Publisher / Date: National Environmental Research Institute (NERI) / 2000-00-00  Keyword(s): EIA, birds 
This report presents the technical background to the ornithological environmental impact 
assessment for the construction of an offshore wind park at Rødsand ca 10 km southwest of Gedser. Denmark is centrally placed on the Ea st Atlantic flyway and is annually passed by 
large numbers of migrating birds. Furthermore, Danish waters hold very high concentrations 
of staging, moulting and wintering waterfowl. In total at least 5-7 million birds of more than 30 species of waterfowl winter in Danish waters and even more individuals stage for shorter or longer periods during migration. As a consequence, Denmark has obligations under both the 
Ramsar and the Bonn Conventions, and the EU Birds Directive, to protect and maintain 
these populations. For this reason, it is pointed out in the environmental impact assessment should give special attention to bird life. Possible effects on birds of the wind park may relate 
to the following three categories, which is dealt with within the report: 
• Collision risk 
• Physical changes of the habitat 
• Disturbance effects 
 
23 Base-line investigations of birds in relation to an offshore wind farm at Rød-
sand: results and conclusions, 2000 
Authors: Kahlert, J., Desholm, M., Clausager, I., Krag Petersen I. 
& Ib Krag Petersen Publisher / Date: National Environmental Research Institute (NERI) / 2001-00-00  
Keyword(s): EIA, birds, base line study 
This report presents data from the initial phase of the base-line investigations of birds in 
relation to the proposed construction of an offshore wind farm at Rødsand. The study area at 
Rødsand is important for birds migrating between their breeding and wintering localities. 
 
24 Base-line investigations of birds in relation to an offshore wind farm at Rød-
sand: Results and conclusions, 2001 
Authors: Kahlert, J., Desholm, M., Clausager, I., Krag Petersen I. 
& Ib Krag Petersen 
Publisher / Date: National Environmental Research Institute (NERI) / 2002-00-00  Keyword(s): EIA, birds, base line study 
This report presents data from the base-line investigations of birds, which were carried out 
during 2001 in relation to the proposed construction of an offshore wind farm at Rødsand. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 104
 Mapping of migration routes was carried out by use of radar day and night. The mapping of 
migration routes was combined with identificatio n during daytime of migrating bird species by 
use of telescope. Waterfowl, which included staging migrants, wintering or wing moulting birds in the study area at the wind farm area, we re monitored by aerial surveys. On the basis 
of the mapping of migratory birds a GIS-database of migration tracks was created. Subsets 
of data were derived from the database to establish a base-line, which describes migration routes before wind turbines are erected. These base-line data will be used for comparisons 
with similar data obtained during a monitoring programme carried out in a period after start of 
operation of the wind farm. Three key variables are presented in this report: 
1. the orientation of autumn migration routes for waterfowl and terrestrial bird species; 
the variable is used to measure future avoidance response to individual wind tur-bines, 
2. the probability that waterfowl will pass through the wind farm area during autumn and 
spring; the variable is used to measure their response to the entire wind farm, 
3. the migration intensity measured as the number of flocks, which passed the eastern 
and northern edge of the wind farm area; the variable is used to measure the ef-fect of their avoidance responses to the volume of migration in the wind farm 
area. 
 
25 Base-line investigation of Birds in relation to an offshore wind farm at Rødsand, 
2002 
Author(s): Desholm, Mark, Petersen, Ib Krag, Kahlert, Johhny and Ib Clausager 
Publisher / Date: NERI, DK / 2003-09-00  
Keywords: birds 
This report presents data from the base-line investigations of birds, which were carried out 
during 2002 in relation to the Nysted/Rødsand offshore wind farm. Mapping of migration 
routes was carried out by use of radar day and night. The mapping of migration routes was 
combined with species identification during daytime by use of telescope. Waterfowl, which included staging migrants, wintering or wing moulting birds in the study area at the wind farm 
area, were monitored by aerial surveys. 
The baseline study has shown the waterfowl tracks registered by radar pass the eastern 
border of the wind farm area during spring and autumn. All migration tracks were entered into 
a GIS (Geographical Information System) database; subsets of data were selected for 
description of migration routes before the wind turbines are erected. These base-line data will be used for comparisons with similar data obtained during a monitoring programme carried out in a period after the wind farm has started to operate. Three key-variables are 
presented in this report: 
1. orientation of autumn migration routes for waterfowl and terrestrial bird species; the 
variable is to be used to measure potential avoidance response to individual wind turbines, 
2. the probability that waterfowl will pass through the wind farm area during autumn and 
spring; the variable is to be used to measure the waterfowl response to the entire wind farm, 
3. migration intensity measured as the number of bird flocks that pass the eastern and 
northern edge of the wind farm area; the variable is to be used to measure the ef-fect of the avoidance responses to the volume of migration in the wind farm area. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 105
 Comparisons of key variables between individual base-line years were undertaken while 
controlling for various factors such as weather conditions, season and time of day, mainly by 
use of multi-factorial ANOVA or regression analyses. 
The potential effects of the wind farm on birds were considered with aspect to three main 
headings: 
5. disturbance effects (displacement, habitat loss), 
6. physical changes due to construction (bottom fauna changes and new resting facili-
ties), 
7. risk of collision (mortality). 
 
Discussion of the results took place within the chapters: 
• Patterns of migration 
• Lateral change in migration routes 
• Probability of passing the wind farm area 
• Migration intensity in the wind farm area 
• Staging, moulting and wintering birds 
 
26 Offshore Aquaculture Project 
Authors: Buck, B., Spahic, S., Smetacek, V. 
Publisher / Date: Alfred-Wegener-Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung / 0000-00-00  
Keyword(s): mussel, oysters, plankton 
In cooperation with the Research Center Terramare (FTZ Wilhelmshaven), all marine areas, 
where wind farms were planned, were equipped with  mooring systems to test the settlement 
and/or growth of candidate species in January 2003. These mooring systems were equipped with two culture testing facilities, so called "LAM"-frames, in a depth of 4-6 m below the water surface. The top frame had a holding unit for the culture of 
Laminaria saccharina and oysters 
(Ostrea edulis, Crassostrea gigas ); at the lower frame mussel larval collectors and juveniles 
of Mytilus edulis  were installed. On monthly expediti ons all these moorings are visited and 
samples are taken, such as plankton loads, growth parameters, oceanographic data, etc. 
The outcomes of this project will provide an expertise for the feasibility of offshore wind farm 
areas for the extensive culture of bivalves and seaweed. 
 
27 Impact assessment of an off-shore wind park on sea ducks 
Authors: Guillemette, M., Kyed Larsen, J., Clausager, I. 
Publisher / Date: Ministry of Environment and Energy National Environmental Research Insi-tute (Neri) / 1998-03-00  
Keyword(s): birds, sea ducks, offshore wind park, impact assessment, BACI 
As part of the plan of the Danish government to expand off-shore wind energy production, 
The Ministry od Environment and Energy, in collaboration with ELSAM (an energy 
consortium), initiated a three-year study of the potential conflict between the Tuno Knob off-
shore wind park and aquatic birds in 1994-1997. Danish costal waters support very large, internationally important concentrations of moulting, migrating and wintering sea ducks, 
which depend on shallow water areas as major feeding habitats. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 106
 Two general approaches were adopted for the investigation: 
• the before-after-control-impact (BACI) and 
• after studies conducted around the wind park 
The aim of the BACI studies was to compare bird abundance and distribution before and 
after the construction of the wind park and between the area presumably affected by the 
development and a control area. This was carried out on three spatial scales. 
The after experiments were conducted around the wind park with the aim of controlling the 
confounding effect of food supply and to establish 
1. the short-term possible effects of noise and rotor movements generated by the tur-
bines on the distribution and abundance of sea ducks and 
the long-term scaring effect of the wind park (the impact of revolving rotors and the presence 
of the standing towers) 
 
28 Assessing the impact of the Tunø Knob wind park on sea ducks: the influence 
of food resources 
Authors: Guillemette, M., Kyed Larsen, J., Clausager, I. 
Publisher / Date: Ministry of Environment and Energy National Environmental Research Insi-tute (Neri) / 1999-02-00  Keyword(s): birds, seaducks, offshore wind park, EIA, BACI, food resources, 
Melanitta nigra, 
Somateria mollissima 
This study deals with the influence of benthos abundance when assessing the potential 
impact of a small wind park on wintering sea ducks. Using the Before-After-Control-Impact 
design, it was suggested in a elated study that the wind park provoked a decline in the abundance and a change in the distribution of common eiders 
Somateria mollissima and 
common scoters Melanitta nigra . However, the observed decline in sea duck abundance 
occurred concomitantly with a decline of benthi c food supplies. It was measured concomitant 
food and common eider abundance for a fourth year at Tunø Knob to test the hypothesis that, if food abundance increases again, also an increase in duck abundance should be 
observed. 
 
29 Forschungsplattformen in Nord- und Ostsee (FINO)  
Authors: Rakebrandt-Gräßner, P. Germanischer Lloyd WindEnergie GmbH 
Publisher / Date: Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Technologie / -  
Keyword(s): marine mammals, noise, birds, vibrations, seabed 
The Germanischer Lloyd WindEnergie (GL-Wind) has been contracted by the German 
Ministry for Economy and Technology to co-ordinate the design, construction, installation and 
operation of research platforms. Basic technical, biological and ecological data shall be 
gathered for the use in design, installation and operation of offshore wind farms. The platforms shall be installed adjacent to future wind farms and will be used for the 
determination of data for design, approval, erection, operation and environmental impact. 
Data will be collected before, during and after installation of wind farms. A mast up to 101 m above sea level is to be installed on the platforms. Furthermore, consoles for measurement sensors and equipment are to be installed on the platform structure. Measuring equipment, 
living/working space (emergency accommodation) and a diesel/generator set with batteries 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 107
 and radar equipment are to be housed in four containers. A crane will be used to take 
seabed samples. The platforms are to be operated without personnel and without supervision. The platforms will be monitored centra lly from shore. As t he platform will have a 
helicopter pad they are to be reached by ship  or helicopter. The platforms will be built 
according to the rules for offshore installations of a certification company. The data collected 
will be transferred onshore by radio beams or vi a satellite and are available publicly after 
validation by the measuring institute. 
 
30 Auswirkungen von Offshore-Windkraftanlagen auf die Fischfauna 
Authors: Dr. Ehrich, S. 
Publisher / Date: Bundesforschungsanstalt für Fi scherei, Institut für Seefischerei / 2000-00-
00 Keyword(s): fish, seabed; EMF, substrate, noise, warming of the sea bed near cables 
Within the project was tried to demonstrate results concerning the investigation on impacts of 
offshore wind turbines on the fish fauna beyond the 12 sea miles. The following influencing 
variables onto the fish fauna were incorporated: 
1. Changes in turbidity and sediment during the phase of wind turbine erection 
2. Changes in biotope by seabed insertion through foundations 3. Increased noise level during the operation of the wind turbines 4. Magnetic and electric fields around the cables 5. Warming of the seabed and the circumfluent water in direct surrounding of the 
cable 
Based on this results and long monitoring experiences in the North Sea the author dares to 
make an evaluation on probable impacts of these variables onto the fish fauna on meso- and 
macro-scale. Subsequently recommendations are given on which sorts fish are suitable as 
monitoring objects and how to representatively ca tch them in order to provide stochastically 
evidence on possible impacts of offshore wind farms on the fish fauna. 
 
31 Untersuchung der Wirkung von Offshor e-Windenergie-Parks auf die Meers-
strömung 
Authors: Mittendorf, K., Zielke, W. 
Publisher / Date: Institut für Strömungsmechanik und Elektron, Universität Hannover / 2002 Keyword(s): sedimentation, seabed, ocean current 
Within this report the question shall be investigated whether offshore wind farms do have an 
impact on the ocean currents and if so, how this can be quantified and assessed. Especially 
it focuses onto reduction of ocean current in a large area within and around the wind farm, resulting from a higher flow resistance of the wind farm. 
 
32 EIA - Investigation of marine mammals in relation to the establishment of a ma-
rine wind farm on Horns Reef 
Authors: FSM Esbjerg - Ornis Consult A/S - Copenhagen Zoological Museum 
Publisher / Date: Fisheries and Maritime Museum, Esbjerg / 2000-02-00  Keyword(s): marine mammals, porpoise, 
Phocoena phocoena, seal, Phoca vitulina . 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 108
 The environment impact assessment focuses on the evaluation of the possible effects on 
harbour porpoise and common seal. The investigation constitutes the first phase of a before-
after-control-impact (BACI) analysis of the occurrence of harbour porpoise before, during and 
after the construction of the wind farm.  
Especially concerning porpoises was targeted on the assessment of effects born by: 
• Reaction on physical structure 
• Reaction on boat and helicopter traffic 
• Habitat loss 
• Total effects 
• Mitigation 
• Monitoring needs 
Concerning seals an assessment on their distribution and distance to the haul out sites on 
land has shown, that it is unlikely that the seals are getting disturbed or lose their habitat. 
 
33 Horns Rev Wind Power Plant EIA of Hydrography 
Authors: Edelvang, K., Møller, A.L., Steenberg,  C.M., Zorn, R., Hansen, E.A., Mangor, K. 
Publisher / Date: Danish Hydraulic Institute / 1999-12-22  Keyword(s): EIA, hydrography, geomorphology 
Establishing a wind power plant at Horns Rev has a potential impact on the local 
hydrography and thus potentially on local and regional coastal morphology. In order to assess these options, investigations of the impact of the foundation on currents and waves 
has been carried out locally in the area where the wind power plant is to be erected as well 
as the nearby region. Furthermore, in connection with establishing the single foundations, sediment spill may influence the water quality in sensitive areas and spill simulations have 
thus been carried out. This investigation is to be part of an overall EIA of the setting up of the 
wind power plant at Horns Rev. The following aspects will be addressed in this document: 
• Hydrography 
• Costal morphology 
• Sediment transport 
 
34 Horns Rev Offshore Wind Power Farm Environmental Impact Assessment on 
Water Quality 
Authors: Andersen, P. 
Publisher / Date: Bio/Consult A/S / 2000-05-04 
Keyword(s): EIA, water quality, primary production, plankton 
Only local and minor changes are anticipated in connection with the currents, sediments and 
wave conditions during the production phase. These will occur in the immediate vicinity of the 
individual foundations. For these reasons, no changes are expected in the water quality. This also includes also the pelagic primary production and the occurrence of plankton in the area. 
Increased local copper contamination of phy toplankton and zooplankton may be expected 
during the production phase, as a result of the total annual discharge of 206 kg copper from the slip-rings in the wind turbines. The contamination will potentially result in a local reduction 
of the pelagic primary production and changes in the species composition of the plankton. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 109
 The wind turbines will be sandblasted and painted once during their lifetime, as part of the 
routine maintenance. The sandblasting and painting will lead to a temporary spill of paint, paint waste and sand. The impacts on water quality and plankton production are unknown. It is recommended that factors such as the toxicity of the paint be investigated, and that spills 
and the impact of waste be reduced as much as possible. The water quality and the plankton 
in the wind farm area and along the cable line's passage to shore through the international protected area will only be affected in a minor way during the construction phase. The 
impacts will be from sediment spill and re-sus pension, caused by the construction of the 
wind-turbine foundations and water jetting the cable into the sediment. On the basis of the expected impact from the establishment of the wind farm, it is not deemed necessary to carry 
out special programmes during the construction phase for monitoring of the water quality and 
plankton. A monitoring and control programme is recommended during the production phase in order to follow the impact of increased copper concentration on the pelagic primary 
production and the qualitative and quantitative composition of the plankton. The alternative is 
to initiate recovery or elimination of the copper-laden waste. 
 
35 Horns Rev Offshore Wind Farm EIA of Sea Bottom and Marine Biology 
Authors: Leonhard, S. B. 
Publisher / Date: Bio/Consult A/S / 2000-03-01 
Keyword(s): EIA, Ophelia borealis,  sediments, vegetation, benthic fauna 
The study forms part of a total EIA of the planned offshore wind farm. This EIA study has 
been drawn up in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the Ministry of Environment 
and Energy in the publication, “Guidelines for preparation of EIA studies for offshore wind 
farms.” 
The fauna in the wind farm area has similarities to fauna recorded on other sandbanks in the 
North Sea and is best characterised as an Ophelia borealis  community, so-named after one 
of the characteristic and important marine bristle worms in the area. Such sand banks are characterised by a lower number of species and individuals, and a lower biomass than 
adjoining areas where the bottom is less unstable and has a higher content of fine sand and 
organic matter. 
These studies and this report are part of a total EIA for the construction and production 
phases of the wind farm at Horns Rev. In accordance with the requirements the following 
subjects will be dealt with: 
• Sediments 
• Vegetation 
• Benthic fauna 
 
36 Horns Rev Offshore Wind Farm Introducing Hard Bottom Substrate Sea Bottom 
and Marine Biology - Status Report 2001 and Data Report 2001 
Authors: Leonhard, S. B., Pedersen, J. 
Publisher / Date: Bio/Consult A/S / 2002-08-00 
Keyword(s): EIA, hard bottom substrate, base line study  
A baseline description of the benthos was carried out in spring and autumn 2001 prior to the 
construction of an offshore wind farm at Horns Rev. The surveys have been conducted as 
part of an environmental monitoring programme for the introduction of hard bottom 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 110
 substrates in the North Sea. The establishment of a monitoring programme is required 
according to some environmental guidelines set up by the Danish Energy Agency for offshore wind farms. Because no environmental criteria existed for benthic communities in connection with the construction activities, no pow er analysis was made prior to the design of 
the monitoring programme. The monitoring programme established for the benthic infauna is 
thus somewhat limited and only major changes in the community structure are expected to be detectable. The baseline description for the benthic infauna can also be used for 
comparison of the stomach contents of fish in a comparative programme. A newly defined 
reference area may be introduced for the fish programme why sampling in this area was carried out in the autumn 2001. The data report 2001 presents the data of the baseline 
environmental survey of the seabed in the wind farm site and in the proposed reference site 
and a brief description of the weather conditions at the time of sampling. 
37 Hard Bottom Substrate Monitoring Horns Rev Offshore Wind Farm Annual 
Status Report 2003 
Authors: Leonhard, S. B., Pedersen, J. 
Publisher / Date: Bio/Consult A/S / 2004-05-14 
Keyword(s): EIA, hard bottom substrate, annual report 2003 
This report describes the first year results of surveys on hard substrate after the completion 
of the offshore wind farm at Horns Rev. The expected impact of the wind farm will primarily 
be an alternation of habitats due to the introduction of hard bottom substrates as wind turbine towers and scour protections. A continuous development in the epifouling communities will be expected together with an introduction of new or alien species in the area. The indigenous 
benthic community in the area of Horns Rev can be characterised by infauna species 
belonging to the 
Goniadella-Spisula community. This community is typical of sandbanks in 
the North Sea area, although communities in such areas are very variable and site-specific. 
Character species used as indicators for environmental changes in the Horns Rev area are 
the bristle worms Goniadella bobretzkii , Ophelia borealis , Psione remota and Orbinia 
sertulata and the mussels Goodallia triangularis and Spisula solida . In connection with the 
implementation of the monitoring programme concerning the ecological impact of the 
introduction of hard substrate related to the Horns Rev Wind Farm, surveys on hard bottom substrate was conducted in March 2003 and in September 2003. 
Surveys were performed at six turbine sites concerning the horizontal distribution of 
epifouling  assemblages on scour protections, whereas the vertical distribution of epifouling 
assemblages was only performed at three turbine towers. Epifouling communities exposed to 
different current regimes were studied both on the turbine towers and at the scour protection. 
The diameter of the monopile foundation of the turbines is 4 m. The scour protection with a 
diameter of approximately 20 m consists of ston es up to 40 cm in diameter. At the outer edge 
of the scour protections, zones of up to 4 m in diameter were observed, consisting of smaller 
stones 10 cm in diameter. 
In March, additional observations on specific  faunal assemblages revealed the existence of 
the giant midge Telmatogeton japonicus , not previously recorded in Denmark, inhabiting and 
feeding on the dense mats of filamentous green algae growth in the splash/wash zone at the 
turbine towers. 
38 The effects of offshore windfarms on birds 
Authors: Dirksen, S., Tulp, I., and Winden, van der J., Schekkerman, H. 
Publisher / Date: Bureau Waardenburg, Culemborg, NL / 0000-00-00 
Keyword(s): bird collision, barrier effects 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 111
 
This project deals with two studies aiming at filling some of the gaps in knowledge still 
existing concerning offshore wind energy  impacts on the marine environment: 
1. a study on flight behaviour of sea ducks approaching a semi-offshore windfarm 
2. a study on flight behaviour of sea ducks at an offshore windfarm. 
Based on these studies the report ends with recommendations for further research 
 
39 Investigations of harbour porpoises at the planned site for wind turbines at 
Horns Reef 
Authors: Skov, H., Carstensen, J., Teilmann, J. & Henriksen, O.D. 
Publisher / Date: Ornis Consult A/S / 2002-07-00 Keyword(s): harbour porpoises, 
Phocoena phocoena 
This report deals with the results of the investigations on harbour porpoises on Horns Reef 
during the period from January 2001 to December 2001. These investigations involve a 
range of new field and analysis techniques, 
which have never been applied in studies of the impact of human activities at sea on harbour porpoises. The successful implementation of the 
investigations has been possible by drawing on 
a broad range of experience from Ornis Consult, National Environmental Research Institute, The 
Danish Fisheries Research Institute, Centre for 
Sound Communication at the University of Southern Denmark, The Zoological Museum in 
Copenhagen and the Fisheries and Maritime 
Museum in Esbjerg. The work has been commissioned by Tech-wise A/S, the advisory branch of Elsam, and the main part of the field and analyses work has been carried out by Ornis Consult A/S and the National Environmental Research Institute.  
During the report period the visual surveys were supplemented by new acoustic methods 
and hydrographic monitoring. Stationary acoustic data-loggers (so-called T-PODs, porpoise click detectors) were applied and the use of the T-POD as a means to collect acoustic survey 
data was also tested during the period. In order to increase the statistical power of harbour 
porpoise data collected by the stationary T-PODs two CTD-stations (measures salinity and temperature) were launched during 2001. 
The embedded picture originates from the mentioned report. 
 
40 Effects on birds of an offshore wind park at Horns Rev. Environmental impact 
assessment 
Authors: Noer, H., Christensen, T.K., Clausager, I., Petersen, I.K . 
Publisher / Date: NERI / 2000-00-00  
Keyword(s): birds 
This report presents the technical background to the ornithological environmental impact 
assessment for the construction of an offshore windpark at Horns Rev, 14 km west-south-
west of Blåvandshuk, Denmark. Construction of the park is planned to commence in 2001. 
The park will consist of c. 80 wind turbines, eac h of at least 1.8 MW, and cover an area of 
27.5 km2 (including the 200 m exclusion zone around the park). The inner Danish waters 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 112
 and the eastern part of the North Sea constitute major staging and wintering grounds for 
huge numbers of water- and seabirds. The present gross estimate, to be regarded as a minimum estimate, is that 5-7 million birds of  more than 30 species winter in these areas, 
and that even larger numbers stage or pass through on migration. 
Impacts on birds resulting from construction wo rk are expected to be temporary and limited. 
The effect of laying the cable to land is also considered to be temporary and minimal in two proposed scenarios. Potential permanent impacts on seabirds resulting from the long-term 
operation of the wind park are identified under three main headings:  
a) physical changes of the habitat 
i. the loss of the bottom area which supports the turbine foundations 
ii. the provision of new underwater substrate for the settlement of larvae 
of marine invertebrates 
iii. the provision of platforms for birds to sit or perch on 
b) disturbance effects resulting from avoidance of the turbines, equivalent to the loss of 
potential to exploit the otherwise available habitat 
c) collision risk 
 
41 Base-line investigations of birds in relation to an offshore wind farm at Horns 
Rev, and results from the year of construction 
Authors: Christensen, T.K., Clausager, I., Petersen 
Publisher / Date: NERI / 2003-04-00 Keyword(s): Birds, IEA; base line investigation 
The present report presents the base-line investigations of birds conducted during August 
1999-April 2001 in relation to construction of an offshore wind farm at Horns Rev in the 
Danish North Sea. The report also presents data collected during the period September 2001-April 2002, when construction of the wind farm was in progress. Detailed distributions 
of birds in the area around and at Horns Rev were virtually unknown until initiation of this 
project. Previous bird counts in this area hav e been carried out almost exclusively from the 
coast and detailed knowledge exists concerning the numbers of roosting at and migrating birds from the westernmost point of Jutland, Blåvandshuk. To describe the numbers and 
distributions of birds staging and wintering in the Horns Rev area, bird investigations were 
initiated in 1999 by using standardised transect counts from aircraft. Up to April 2002, 18 aerial counts have been carried out over an area of c. 1’700 km² cantered on the Horns Rev 
project area. 
 
42 Rechnerische Bewertung von Fundamenten von Offshore Windenergieanlage 
bei Kollisionen mit Schiffen - Simulation of ship collision with foundation types of wind energy constructions 
Authors: Prof. Lehmann, E., Biehl, F. 
Publisher / Date: Arbeitsbereiche Schiffbau der Technischen Universität Hamburg-Harburg /  
2004-10-22  
Keyword(s): collision, risk analysis, hazard analysis 
This present paper gives a short introduction to the principle questions on calculation of 
collisions between ships and offshore wind energy converters. Numerical simulations, based 
on the non-linear finite element method for different situations, will be prepared.  

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 113
 Aim of the project is the investigation of collision incidents between ships and offshore wind 
turbines based on numerical conducted crash tests. Based on the achieved results procedures shall be developed to detect during the licensing procedure for offshore wind turbines the collision behaviour of offshore wind turbines with ships concerning prevention of 
lose of substances harmful to the marine environment. The assessment procedure within this 
project shall exemplary be applied onto three wind turbine constructions and certain ship types. 
 
 
Fig. 28: Different dynamic responses due to different foundations and forces. Picture taken 
out of the report 
 
43 Untersuchungen zur Vermeidung und Verminderung von Belastungen der Mee-
resumwelt durch Offshore-Windenergieanlagen im küstenfernen Bereich 
der Nord- und Ostsee (OffshoreWEA) 
Authors: Dr. Knust, R., Dr. Heuers, J., Alfred-Wegener-Institut, Bremerhaven 
Publisher / Date: Alfred-Wegener-Institut / Umweltbundesamt Texte / 2003-00-00 Keyword(s): biocoenosis, birds, mammals, ship collision, benthos 
Possible impacts of offshore wind farms on the marine environment in the North Sea and the 
Baltic Sea are investigated by means of literature studies, the analysis of existing data, the interrogation of experts and some complementary field studies. Suggestions for prevention and reduction of possible impacts are made. The biotic compartments benthos and fish 
communities, marine mammals, resting and migrating birds as well as the collision risk of 
ships with offshore wind turbines are taken into account. The project therefore is divided into a number of sub-projects concerning: 
• Reporting the degree of knowledge about possibly impacts on the marine environ-
ment by offshore wind turbines (erection, operation, decommissioning) under 
consideration of the benthos and fish biocoenosis, (migratory) birds as well as 
marine mammals 
• Development of methodical basis for investigation and evaluation of potential stress 
onto the marine environment due to offshore wind energy converter 
• Estimation of the risk potential concerning ship collision and possible consequences 
• Formulation of methods for prevention and reduction of the strains of offshore wind 
turbines on the marine environment 
• Appointing gaps on research and gaps in knowledge necessary to be closed, in order 
to support evaluation of the possible impacts on the marine environment 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 114
 
 
  
Fig. 29: Shipping traffic in the German Bay as important parameter during risk assessment 
and calculation 
 
44 Status report of seabird surveys at Horns Rev, 2000-2001 
Authors: Christensen, T.K., Clausager, I., Petersen, I.K. 
Publisher / Date: NERI / 2002-00-00 Keyword(s): birds 
The report presents the results of three bird surveys conducted in the Horns Rev area during 
the second half of 2001. The surveys are part of the 
base-line investigations of birds 
performed in relation to the proposed construction of an offshore wind farm at Horns Rev in the Danish part of the North Sea. Based on the distribution of the most abundant bird species 
recorded during 16 aerial surveys performed during August 1999 - January 2002, there were 
no indications that the wind farm area was of any particular importance to the birds’ exploitation of the Horns Rev area.  
Preference analyses of bird exploitation of the Horns Rev area showed that if the birds 
completely avoid the wind farm area after erection of the wind turbines, this will affect less than 1% of the various species, except divers where 1.58% will be affected. If the birds avoid 
the wind farm area and an adjacent 4 km zone (worst case scenario), it is estimated to affect 
8-11% of the common scoter, 10% of the gannet, 7-9% of the divers, alcids and velvet scoter and 0-6% of the remaining species. 
45 A Baseline Assessment of Electromagnetic Fields Generated by Offshore Wind-
farm Cables - An Investigation of EMF Generated by Subsea Windfarm 
Power Cables 
Author(s): CEMACS at University  of Liverpool & ECONNECT LTD 
Publisher / Date: COWRIE / 2003-07-00  Keywords: EMF, offshore power cable, electro-sensitive fish species, 
elasmobranchs 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 115
 The aims and objectives of this desk-based study were to calculate the strength, frequencies 
and wavelengths of the electromagnetic fields produced by both 33 kV (EPR) and 132 kV (XLPE) cables in association with offshore wind farms (both between turbines and the full length of cabling to the grid connection on land). The study also calculated the effects of 
burial and/or shielding (at various depths, strata, sediment type and thickness) on 
electromagnetic fields. 
Moreover investigation was contracted to assess the following items: 
• The likely EMF emitted from a sub-sea power cable, 
• A suggested method to measure EMF in the field, which could be applied by wind 
farm developers or in future projects 
• Guidance on mitigation measures to reduce EMF 
• Consideration of the results for the next stage of investigation into the effects of EMF 
on electro-sensitive species 
An assessment of existing publications and dire ct communications regarding EMF emitted by 
undersea power cables suggested that the current state of knowledge is too variable and 
inconclusive to make an informed assessment of any possible environmental impact of EMF 
in the range of values likely to be detected by organisms sensitive to  electric and magnetic 
fields. Therefore modelling and direct meas urement of the electric and magnetic field 
components of EMF was undertaken. 
The results of the model simulations showed that a cable with perfect shielding i.e. where 
conductor sheathes are grounded, does not generate an electric field directly. However, a magnetic field is generated in the local environment  by the alternating current in the cable. 
This in turn, generates an induced electric field close to the cable within the range detectable 
by electro-sensitive fish species. 
In terms of the potential significance of the modelled results to electro-sensitive fish the 
following conclusions were made: 
• EMF emitted by an industry standard three-core  power cable will induce electric fields 
• In the case modelled, this resulted in a predicted electric field of approximately 
91ìV/m (=0.9 ìV/cm) in seawater above a cable buried to 1m. This level of electric 
field is on the boundary of electric field emissions that are expected to attract and those that repel 
Elasmobranchs (the most widespread electro-sensitive fish group 
of UK coastal waters). 
• In addition, the induced electric fields calc ulated from the magnetic fields measured in 
situ were also within the lower range of detection by Elasmobranchs. 
• The options for mitigation using either changes  in permeability or conductivity indicate 
that the induced electric field can be effectively reduced. However, unless highly 
specialised materials and manufacturing process are used with high permeability 
values, the electric field will still remain within the lower range of detection of El-asmobranchs. Hence any reduction in electr ic field emission using existing mate-
rials could minimise the potential for an avoidance reaction by a fish if it encoun-
tered the field but may still result in an attraction response. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 116
 • Another important consideration is the re lationship between the amount of cable, ei-
ther buried or unburied, producing induced electric fields and the available habitat of an electro-sensitive species. 
• There is also a need to determine if the power cable operating frequency (50Hz) and 
associated sub-harmonic frequencies have any effect on the EMFs that are de-
tectable by UK electro sensitive fishes. 
Subsequently recommendations concerning the need for further studies were given, divided 
into an electro-technical and a biological column. 
 
46 Open Ocean Aquaculture and Offshore Windparks. Eine Machbarkeitsstudie 
über die multifunktionale Nutzung von Offshore-Windparks und Offshore-Marikultur im Raum Nordsee 
Authors: Buck, B. H. 
Publisher / Date: Alfred-Wegener-Institut / 0000-00-00 
Keyword(s): Aquaculture, mussel ( Mytilus Edulis ), pacific oyster ( Crassoestrea gigas ), EEZ 
The feasibility study deals, on theoretical basis, with the potential multifunctional use of 
planned offshore windfarms with commercial marine aquaculture (open ocean aquaculture) 
in the North Sea are. Exclusively, literature data from existing international experiences are 
reviewed here, as well as the output of several discussions with experts. The study closes with a final evaluation of all factors, which are critical for the development of a commercial 
offshore aquaculture in combination with the planned wind farms in the North Sea region. 
 For several European offshore wind energy research projects no report was assessable by 
the time being. Amongst other reasons one reason may be that the projects are of ongoing 
and/or confidential character, so that no (final) report has been published (yet). Projects of this type are represented in Table 14 below: 
Project title Contact Specification of the project Status / out-
put 
47 MINOS plus: Research 
on seabirds and marine mammals for evaluation of offshore wind turbines  National Park 
Office of the Schleswig-Holstein Wad-den Sea Proceeding of MINOS-project. Ac-
companying effect monitoring during construction and operation of planed wind farms in the German Exclusive Economic Zone. Ongoing 
Project 
48 Specious related levels 
of impact to migrating 
birds for the area of the 
south west Baltic Sea and hazard to bird mi-gration caused by off-shore wind turbines Institute for Ap-
plied Ecology 
Ltd Quantification of migration rates and 
calculation of a specious related 
collision risk. Modelling of the popu-
lation dynamics of migratory bird in the Baltic sea. Determination of spe-cious related levels of impact to mi-grating birds. Project in 
preparation 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 117
 49 Consideration of effects 
on the marine environ-
ment within the licens-ing procedure of wind parks in the German 
EEZ: Discussion of meth-
ods and practical advise 
for the drafting and quality assurance of EIA studies and Habitats Assessment studies  TU Berlin, Insti-
tute for Land-scape Architec-ture and Envi-ronmental Plan-ning The project comprises two work 
packages: 
• Preparation of the present 
scientific results making them 
more usable for decision procedures and for required environmental planning in-
struments. 
• Development of advice for 
the good professional prac-
tice and quality assurance of the required EIA and Habi-tats Assessment studies. Ongoing 
work (until May 2006) 
50 Development of Generic 
Guidance for Sediment 
Transport Monitoring Programmes in Re-sponse to Construction of Offshore Wind farms Paul Leonard: 
Defra (Depart-
ment for Food and Rural Af-fairs, UK) Sediment transport, sea bed. In 2004, pro-
gress will be 
reported in the “State of the Seas Re-port” 
51 Assessment of the Sig-
nificance of Changes to 
the Inshore Wave Re-
gime as a Consequence of an Offshore Wind Ar-ray Paul Leonard: 
Defra (Depart-
ment for Food 
and Rural Af-fairs, UK) Hydrography. In 2004, pro-
gress will be 
reported in 
the “State of the Seas Re-port” 
52 Environmental Monitor-
ing at Scroby Sands 
Offshore Wind Farm 
Site - Generic Coastal 
Process issues and how they fit into the legislation  Jon Rees: Cen-
tre for Environ-
ment, Fisheries 
and Aquaculture Science, UK Sediment transport, morphology. The last ma-
jor field work 
campaign 
should have been taken place in summer 2004
53 Potential impact of elec-
tromagnetic fields on 
fish from the cabling 
associated with wind farms COWRIE and 
Centre for Ma-
rine and Coastal 
Studies, Liver-pool University Electromagnetic fields, modelling, 
ground truthing. Completion 
date: July 
2003 
54 Displacement of com-
mon scoter ( Melanitta 
nigra ) from benthic 
feeding areas COWRIE and 
School of Ocean Sci-ences, Bangor 
University • Modelling effects due to habi-
tat loss and change. 
• Link non-breeding distribution 
with environmental variables. 
• Identify characteristics of re-
ferred feeding areas. Completion 
date: June 2005 
55 Comparison of bird sur-
vey methodologies COWRIE and 
NIOZ 
 • Comparisons of variety of 
techniques. 
• Design standardised meth-
odologies incl. recording pa-
rameters and correction fac-tors. Completion 
date: Decem-ber 2003 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 118
 56 Impacts of subsea noise 
and vibration on marine life as a result of the turbines from construc-tion through to opera-tion COWRIE and 
Subacoustech Ltd. • Desk based study and site 
measurements. 
• Determine hearing spectra 
and sensitivity to noise and 
vibration. 
• Determine sound pressure 
level and frequency spectrum 
during phases of wind farm project. Not known 
57 Bio-Wind Torleif Malm: 
Department of 
Botany, Univer-sity of Stock-holm • Possible changes of commu-
nity structure and species 
composition due to artificial 
structures. 
• Necessary design of windtur-
bines to favour establishment 
of perennial macro algae. Completion 
date: May 
2005 
58 Assessment of the sig-
nificance of changes to the inshore wave re-gime as a consequence 
of an offshore wind ar-
ray CEFAS (The 
Centre for Envi-ronment, Fisheries and 
Aquaculture 
Science) Coastal processes: 
• Construction. 
Acceleration of currents around tur-
bines: 
• Re-suspension of sediments. 
• Scour pits. Completion 
date: March 2005 
59 Development of generic 
guidance for sediment transport monitoring programmes in re-sponse to construction 
of offshore wind farms CEFAS (The 
Centre for Envi-ronment, Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Science) • Scour pits exacerbated by 
waves Environmental and 
engineering consequences. 
• Geomorphologic changes to 
coastline. Completion 
date: March 2005 
60 Forschungsprojekt GI-
GAWIND - Bau- und um-
welttechnische Aspekte von Offshore Windener-gieanlagen. Abschlussbe-richt 2000-2004  Zielke, W.: Insti-
tut für Strö-
mungsmecha-nik, Universität Hannover Civil engineering aspect and envi-
ronmental aspect of offshore wind 
energy converters. 2004 
61 Aktuelle Studie zur 
Wärmeausbreitung im 
Seeboden infolge See-kabelanbindung OWT Offshore 
Wind Technolo-
gie GmbH, Leer Stationary and transient calculations 
on temperature and temperature 
development within the environ-mental compartments as well as modelling and derivation of design parameters, transmission losses and 
economics. General 
presentation 
of a confiden-tial project: December, 2004 
62 Messungen der Schall-
immissionen während
der Bauphase – Measu-
rements of Noise Immissi -
on During the BuldingPhase  Gabriel J., Dr. 
Neumann, T. 
Deutsches Windenergie-Institut (DEWI), Wilhelmshaven Schallimmissionen (noise immis-
sions). 2003 
63 Development of an envi-
ronmental strategy for 
the use of wind energy 
onshore and offshore Hannover Uni-
versity, Institute 
of Geography Development of an environmental 
strategy for the wind energy use 
onshore and offshore, particularly 
with regard to environmental effects, grid connection, licensing proce-dures and repowering. Ongoing pro-
ject 
 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 119
 64 Strategic Environmental 
Assessment and strate-gic monitoring for off-shore wind farms University of 
Lüneburg Development of planning methods 
under methodical, technical and formal aspects for Strategic Envi-ronmental Assessment (SEA) in the marine area. Project in 
preparation 
 
Table 14: Research projects in Europe with no evaluation performed on the report 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 120
 Appendix B 
- Precedent studies and fundamental research with relevance to raise basic principles 
and knowledge - 
 
65 Standardverfahren zur Ermittlung und Bewertung der Belastung der Meeresum-
welt durch die Schallimmission von Offshore WEA - Noise emission and hearing 
abilities 
Authors: Bollmann, Gerasch, Curt-Risch-Institut (CRI Hannover), Dr. Neumann, (DEWI Wil-
helmshaven), Dr. Schultz-von Glahn (itap Oldenburg) Publisher / Date: Curt-Risch-Institut für Dynamik, Schall- und Messtechnik, Uni Hannover / completion in work 
Keyword(s): noise propagation, offshore wind energy 
The goal of the project is the development and supply of standard techniques for 
determination and evaluation of noise immissi ons of offshore wind energy plants (WEP). 
Over an extensive measuring threshold the necessary data are received which are 
necessary for the definition of values for the noise entry of a construction in the sea. The project is accomplished in coordination with sea biologists. The project is divided into the 
following sections: measurement of the acousti c load that is observed in the North Sea, 
measurements of the noise pollution of the sea inhabitants in the building period of offshore WEP, measurement of the operating noise of existing WEP in the sea, computation of sound 
propagation in the water, detail investigations to the sound entry in the water of research 
platforms. The acoustic effect ranges of WEPs are derived from the test results. The acoustic disturbance potential for the sea fauna will be evaluated taking into consideration the source strengths of the plants and the constant noise in the water. On the basis of these data in 
cooperation with sea biologists threshold values for the noise entry of WEPs will be 
developed. 
 
66 High Level Environmental Screening Study for Offshore Wind Farm Develop-
ments – Marine Habitats and Species Project 
Author(s): Hiscock, K., Tyler-Walters, H. & Jones, H. 
Publisher / Date: Marine Biological Association to DTI / 2002-06-00 
Keywords: noise, vibration 
This report provides an awareness of the envir onmental issues related to marine habitats 
and species for developers and regulators of offshore wind farms. The information is also 
relevant to other offshore renewable energy developments. 
The marine habitats and species considered are those associated with the seabed, seabirds, 
and sea mammals. The report concludes that the following key ecological issues should be 
considered in the environmental assessment  of offshore wind farm developments: 
• likely changes in benthic communities within the affected area and resultant indirect 
impacts on fish, populations and their predators such as seabirds and sea mammals 
• potential changes to the hydrography and wave climate over a wide area, and poten-
tial changes to coastal processes and the ecology of the region 
• likely effects on spawning or nursery areas of commercially important fish and shell-
fish species 
• likely effects on mating and social behaviour in sea mammals, including migration 
routes 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 121
 • likely effects on feeding water birds, seal pupping sites and damage of sensitive or 
important intertidal sites where cables come onshore 
• potential displacement of fish, seabird and sea mammals from preferred habitats 
• potential effects on species and habitats of marine natural heritage importance 
• potential cumulative effects on seabirds, due to displacement of flight paths, and any 
mortality from bird strike, especially in sensitive rare or scarce species 
• possible effects of electromagnetic fields on feeding behaviour and migration, espe-
cially in sharks 
• potential marine conservation and biodiversity benefits of offshore wind farm devel-
opments as artificial 
The report provides an especially detailed assess ment of likely sensitivity of seabed species 
and habitats in the proposed development areas. Although sensitive to some of the factors created by wind farm developments, they mainly have a high recovery potential. 
 
67 Umweltverträglichkeitsprüfung (UVP), FFH-Verträglichkeitsprüfung und Strategi-
sche Umweltprüfung (SUP), für Offshore-Windparks in der Ausschließlichen Wirtschaftszone (AWZ) der deutschen Nord- und Ostsee 
Authors: Köppel, J., Bruns, E., Langenheld, A., Peters, W., Wende, W.: TU Berlin; 
Kraetzschmer, D.: Planungsgruppe Ökologie+Umwelt Hannover Publisher / Date: TU Berlin Institut für Landschafts- und Umweltplanung / 2003-00-00 
Keyword(s): EIA, FFH, NATURA 2000, SEA, EEZ, offshore wind energy 
Forms of use of offshore resources in Germany have to be considered within the licensing 
procedure according to the “Offshore Installations Ordinance” applied in the “Exclusive 
Economic Zone” (EEZ). This project deals with the adoption of Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA), assessment required under Arti cle 6 of the Habitats Directive and future 
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) to th e special conditions existing in the EEZ. In 
current application procedures of pilot offshore wind farms a so-called “Standard Programme 
for environmental Examination” is applied as well as a comprehensive catalogue of possible effective. Furthermore it is necessary to take into account all requirements of the EIA 
procedure including the assessment of the environmental impacts. Due to the precautionary 
principle the environmental standard required by the EIA is stricter than the defined indicators of significance relating to the endangerment of the marine environment or the bird 
migration. The assessment required under Article 6 of the Habitats Directive has to be 
performed as soon as marine protection areas are identified to become “Natura 2000 areas”. Particularly for the identification of suitable areas for the use of wind energy the SEA is taken 
into consideration. 
 
68 Ableitung der fachlichen Kriterien zur Ermittlung von besonderen Schutzgebie-
ten nach Artikel 4 der Vogelschutzrichtlinie und Vorschlagsgebieten nach Artikel 4 der Fauna-Flora-Habitat-Richtlinie - Development of criteria to identify nature protection areas for birds 
Authors: Dr. Schreiber, M. (Schreiber Umweltplanung, Bramsche) 
Publisher / Date: Bundesministeriums für Umwelt, Naturschutz und Reaktorsicherheit ‚Natura 
2000 in der deutschen AWZ’ / 2003-10-02 
Keyword(s): SPA, Birds Directive, pSCI, EEZ 
Derivation of scientific criteria for selection of Special Protection Areas (SPA) according to 
article 4 of the Birds Directive and proposed Sites of Community Interest (pSCI) under article 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 122
 4 of the Habitats Directive To get legal certainty for planning and erecting wind farms in the 
German Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), prot ected areas under the Birds and the Habitats 
Directive of the European Union have to be designated. In a first step the legal and scientific criteria shall be derived for designation of SPA a nd pSCI. To find out cr iteria for designating 
sites in the German EEZ, the directives themselves, appropriate judgements of the European 
Court of Justice and examples of good practice from other countries and e.g. the NGOs will be analysed. This includes a list of bird species, habitats and species, which have to be 
protected under the Birds respectively under the H abitats Directive. Further investigations will 
deal with the definition of concentrations and how to draw boundaries, if there are no firm structures to be leaned on. All scientific result s shall be checked for their legal evidence. 
 
69 Naturschutzfachlichen Kriterien zur Abgrenzung besonderen Eignungsgebieten 
für Offshore Windparks 
Authors: Köppel, J., Peters, W., Steinhauer, I. 
Publisher / Date: Bundesamt für Naturschütz / 2004-00-00 Keyword(s): mammals, fish, EIA, SEA, Natura2000, birds, benthos, seabed life, accidents, 
pollution 
This report outlines the necessary process how to appoint specific areas for offshore wind 
energy utilisation within the German Exclusiv e Economic Zone. Thereby the focus lays on 
the compromise of pointing out areas that are not endangering the oceanic environment or 
limiting any NATURA 2000-Areas. Criteria are de veloped to derive an environmental relevant 
appraisal of different offshore areas in the context of suitability for offshore wind energy 
utilisation. This shall ensure a site selection approach for offshore wind energy utilisation that 
shows the lowest impact on nature and environment. The report therefore refers to mammals, bird migration, sea birds, fishes, benthos, hydrology and marine pollution by 
collision. 
 
70 Proposed UK Offshore Renewable Energy Installations (OREI) - Guidance on 
Navigational Safety Issues 
Publisher / Date: UK Maritime and Coastguard Agency / 2004-04-00 
Keyword(s): accidents, pollution 
The purpose of this guidance note is to highlight issues that need to be taken into 
consideration when assessing the impact on navigational safety from offshore renewable 
energy developments, proposed for United Kingdom waters. 
Key points are 
• The recommendations contained within this guidance note should be used, primarily, 
by offshore renewable energy installation developers, seeking consent to undertake 
marine works. 
• Specific annexes address issues covering:  
o site position, structures and safety zones 
o developments, navigation, colli sion avoidance and communications 
o examples of additional routing safety measures  
o search and rescue matters  
o Article 60 UNCLOS  
 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 123
 71 An assessment of the environmental effects of offshore windfarms 
Publisher / Date: Metoc / 2000-00-00  
Keyword(s): EIA, SEA, Natura2000 
This Report was commissioned to help highlight key research requirements to address 
identified key environmental issues. The objectives of the project therefore were as follows: 
(i) to identify the obligations on offshore wind farm developers to provide Environ-
mental Assessments under the consents process to the adopted for their devel-
opment 
(ii) to identify those issues that will or may need to be addressed in the Environ-
mental Assessment 
(iii) to determine whether there are suffici ent baseline data, scientific analysis and ex-
pertise on these issues top allow fill assessment of the likely effects 
(iv) to identify research needs and other requirements for further work on understand-
ing the potential environmental effects of offshore wind farms 
(v) to achieve a degree of consensus as high as possible on the environmental re-
quirements and issues to the benefit of industry, regulators and the public 
 
72 Potential effects of offshore wind developments on coastal processes 
Authors: Cooper, Bill; Beiboer, Frank 
Publisher / Date: ABP Marine, Metoc / 2002-00-00 Keyword(s): sediment, soil, hydrology 
The overall aim of the present study has been to identify, review and assess the potential 
effects on coastal processes related to the development of offshore wind farms around the UK coast. Thereby both, positive and negative effects on coastal processes shall be 
considered. Within the context of this study coastal processes are deemed to include the 
diffraction and focusing effects on waves and currents and their effect on long shore drift and erosion. From this work, the project outputs aim to provide generic guidance on these issues to stakeholders for use in the planning and consent stage prior to any development. 
The study has carefully considered the issues of coastal processes related to UK Interest 
Areas and compiled the emerging detail related to the first round of proposed offshore wind farm developments to define ‘reasonable worst case’ and ‘typical’ scenarios. 
The study recognises that, for a successful wind farm development, there needs to be a 
good understanding of the local coastal environmental in terms of: 
• Designing a scheme that can cope with the environmental conditions (e.g. seabed, 
wind, wave, and tidal regimes, etc.) by establishing appropriate design parameters. 
• Designing a scheme that the local environment can accommodate with minimum impact, by undertaking an Environmental Impact Assessment 
Noting that the principal effects are likely to be associated with localised scour in the 
immediate vicinity of the structures and that scour around the cables could happen if care is 
not taken to secure adequate protection during and after laying. 
 
73 Guidance note for EIA in respect of FEPA and CPA for Offshore Wind Farms 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 124
 Publisher / Date: CEFAS / 2003-09-00  
Keywords: sediment, soil, mammals, fish, EIA,  SEA, Natura2000, bird, benthos, seabed life, 
archaeology, maritime traffic, fishery 
The guidance is intended to supplement the Department of Trade and Industry's (DTI’s) 
guidance note "Offshore Wind Farm Consents Process" [http://www.dti.gov.uk/energy/leg_ 
and_reg/consents/guidance.pdf]. It is not definitive and it is therefore recommended that it be 
read in conjunction with the legislation and the other sources to which it refers. It replaces the November 2001 document of the same name. 
Its purpose is to assist the offshore wind farm industry and their consultants; the primary aim 
being to provide scientific guidance to those involved with the gathering, interpretation and 
presentation of data within an Environmental Impact Assessment as part of the consents application process in England and Wales. 
Within the documentation is dealt with regulations concerning  
• Requirement for Environmental Impact Assessment 
• Coastal & Sedimentary Processes  
• Benthos 
• Fish Resources 
• Commercial Fisheries 
• Marine Mammals 
• Birds 
• Designated Sites and other Nature Conservation Interests 
• Cumulative impacts 
• Decommissioning 
 
74 Offshore wind energy in the North Sea - Technical possibilities and ecological 
considerations 
Authors: Söker, Holger 
Publisher / Date: DEWI / 2000-10-00 Keyword(s): International policy, EIA, SEA, Natura2000 
This report focuses on many aspects of offshore wind energy. Therefore also disturbances to 
items during the construction phase incl. grid connection and the operation phase are considered. 
Concerning the construction phase and grid connection is dealt with the following points: 
• Structure of soil and seabed 
• Water 
• Benthos 
• Fish 
• Sea mammals 
• Birds 
• Archaeological sites 
Concerning normal operation is dealt with the following points: 
• Disturbance of water 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 125
 • Disturbance of the seabed 
• Poisoning of the ecosystem by material 
• Impact by electric fields and heat generated from the cable links 
• Disturbance of benthos, fish and sea mammals 
• Collisions of birds on the turbines 
• Wind turbines as barriers 
• Ousting birds off their traditional feeding grounds 
• Impact on landscape 
Subsequently a ‘Recommended Practice’ for conduc tion of EIA is provided, which is a 
compromise out of limiting the environmental effects and the accessibility and available of 
knowledge. 
 
75 Aerial Surveys of Birds in Proposed Areas for Offshore Windfarm Development; 
preliminary report 
Author(s): Cranswick, Peter, Hall, Colette, Smith, Lucy 
Publisher / Date: The Wildfowl & Wetlands Trust, UK / 2003-06-00 Keywords: birds 
To provide contextual information for the proposed strategic areas for the second round of 
offshore wind farm development, a programme of bird survey was funded by DTI. This report provides preliminary results from the aerial surveys in the Greater Wash strategic area, 
undertaken by WWT in early 2003. It has been produced at this time to help inform the 
decision making process for Round 2 which was taking place in June 2003. 
To assist with the environmental assessment of the UK’s offshore wind farm development, 
these aerial surveys were undertaken to collect data on bird numbers and distributions. A 
series of transects were flown at 2 km intervals over the strategic area, and observers 
recorded the number of birds encountered. Combined with data from a Global Positioning System, used to record the flight path of the plane, their location could be calculated to a 
high degree of accuracy. A series of maps shows the distribution of the key bird species 
groups in 4 x 4 km cells, calculated as the number of birds encountered corrected for survey effort. 
Subsequently recommendations for future work fields are given, highlighting subjects as 
inter-annual changes, intra-annual changes, grid size refinement and distribution patterns of terns around breeding colonies. 
 
76 Recommendations for project-related studies of possible impacts of marine wind 
farms during construction and operation on birds 
Authors: Hüppop, O., K.-M. Exo, S. Garthe 
Publisher / Date: Institut für Vogelforschung „Vogelwarte Helgoland“ / 2002-00-00 
Keyword(s): marine wind energy, seabirds, bird migration, conservation, radar, EIA 
For roughly a quarter of the area of Germany’s Exclusive Economic Zone there are plans to 
erect offshore windfarms. Several international conventions as well as national laws 
necessitate environmental impac t assessment studies. Within the report the authors suggest 
methods for standardised investigations on the distribution, movements and flight behaviour 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 126
 of birds at sea. They include visual, acousti c and radar- based techniques and observations 
in order to investigate on topics as: 
• Collision 
• Barrier effects 
• Short-term loss of habitats  
• Long-term loss of habitats 
• Loss or change of feeding grounds 
 
77 Background Information on Marine Mammals relevant to SEA2 
Authors: Hammond, P.S.; Gordon, J.C.D.; Grelier, K. 
Publisher / Date: SMRU / 2001-08-00  
Keyword(s): mammals, noise, vibration, EIA, SEA, Natura2000, accidents, pollution 
Within this report attention is given to provide background information on the impacts of 
disturbance, contamination and diseases on marine mammals. Therefore topics are 
addressed which also may play a role concerning the offshore wind energy development like 
• noise 
• contaminants 
• oil spills  
• ship collisions.  
The report especially focuses on SEA2 areas in  the Eastern of the UK and emphasises spe-
cies living within these areas. 
 
78 Maßnahmen zur Vermeidung und Verminderung negativer ökologischer Auswir-
kungen bei der Netzanbindung und -integration von Offshore- Windenergieparks 
Authors: Dr. Rehfeldt, K. (Deutsche WindGuard GmbH, Varel), Dr. Schreiber, M. (Schreiber 
Umweltplanung, Bramsche) 
Publisher / Date: Bundesministeriums für Umwelt, Naturschutz und Reaktorsicherheit / 2003-15-05 Keyword(s): HHF, grid connection offshore, Natura 2000 Gebiete 
In Germany wind energy use on land is growing since 1990. Any studies about future 
development of wind energy use in the next decades shows a big potential of offshore wind farms. Therefore a political strategy exists to develop 20 to 25 GW of offshore wind farms in 
the German sea until 2030. That means wind energy contribution of 21 % to the electricity 
supply in Germany. But a problem will be the grid connection of these wind capacity and the transport of the electrical energy to the consumer. That’s why a general strategy is necessary for the grid connection of total offshore wind capacity and the reinforcement of the grid. 
Within the scope of the presented project an analysis of the effects on ecology by connecting 
offshore wind capacity to the grid and by the reinforcement of the grid has to be made. Therefore technical solution of grid connection and reinforcement will be analysed and 
measures to reduce effects on ecology will be proposed. 
 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 127
 79 Prognose des Schalldruckpegels im Meerwas ser während der Bau- und Betrieb-
sphase – Prognosis of the Sound Pressure Level in Salt-Water During Building 
and Operation Phase 
Authors: Gerasch, W.-J., Uhl, A. 
Publisher / Date: Curt-Risch-Institut für Dynam ik, Schall- und Messtechnik, Universität Han-
nover / 2000-00-00 
Keyword(s): Schallimmissionen (noise immissions) 
 
80 Offshore Wind Farms: Guidance Note for Environmental Impact Assessment in 
Respect of FEPA and CPA Requirements 
Authors: Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS) 
Publisher / Date: Crown / Version 2 - June 2004 
Keyword(s): EIA, SEA 
The purpose of this Guidance Note is to assist the offshore wind farm industry and their 
consultants. Primary aim is to provide scientific guidance to those involved with the 
gathering, interpretation and presentation of data within an Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) as part of the consents app lication process in England and Wales. The 
guidance is intended to supplement the Department of Trade and Industry's (DTI’s) guidance 
"Offshore Wind Farm Consents Process". It is no t definitive and it is therefore recommended 
that it be read in conjunction with the legislation and the other sources to which it refers. It replaces the November 2001 document of the same name. 
 
81 Standards for Environmental Impact Assessments Impacts of offshore wind tur-
bines on the marine environment 
Authors: Issued by Bundesamt für See schifffahrt und Hydrographie (BSH) and others 
Publisher / Date: Federal Maritime and Hydrographic Agency (BSH) / 2003-2-25 Keyword(s): EIA, SEA,  
Within the framework of the approval procedur e for offshore wind farms in the Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ), potential adverse impacts of the projected facilities on the marine en-
vironment have to be assessed. Besides, following the amendment to the 
Seeanlagen-
verordnung  (effective 5 April 2002), an Environmental Impact Assessment according to Art. 
2a Seeanlagenverordnung, is now mandatory for most projects. In the Standards for Envi-ronmental Impact Assessments, information is provided to applicants on the scope of inves-
tigations required by the approval authority, with all relevant details and explanations. The 
Standards for Environmental Impact Assessments constitute a framework of the thematic 
and technical minimum requirements for marine environmental surveys and monitoring in order to assess compliance with Art. 3 Seeanlagenverordnung.  
Apart from the general increase in knowledge,  experience from the German Marine Monitor-
ing programme in the North Sea and Baltic Sea, the Helsinki Convention on the Protection of 
the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Ar ea, and the OSPAR Convention for the Protec-
tion of the North Sea and North-East Atlantic has been taken into account as well for estab-lishment of this standard. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 128
 
Appendix C 
- Further documentation on studies and research projects with direct link to impacts 
on birds through onshore wind energy or to environmental impacts of offshore wind 
energy projects represented in non-reviewed studies - 
 
82 Impacts on biodiversity of exploitation of renewable energy sources: the exam-
ple of birds and bats – facts, gaps in knowledge, demands for further research, and ornithological guidelines for the development of renewable energy exploita-tion / Auswirkungen regenerativer Energiegewinnung auf die biologische Vielfalt am Beispiel der Vögel und der Fledermäuse – Fakten, Wissenslücken, Anfor-derungen an die Forschung, ornithologische Kriterien zum Ausbau von regen-
erativen Energiegewinnungsformen 
Authors: Dr. Hötker, H., Thomsen, K.-M., Köster, H. 
Publisher / Date: Michael-Otto-Institut im NABU/ 2004-12-00 Keyword(s): Birds, Bats, Collision, Barrier Effects, Population Dynamics 
The purpose of this report is to compile and to evaluate the available information on the im-
pacts of exploitation of renewable energy sources on birds and bats. The focus is on wind 
energy as there is only little information on th e impact on birds and bats of other sources of 
renewable energy. The report aims at better understanding the size of the impact, the poten-tial effects of re-powering (exchanging small old wind turbines by new big turbines), and pos-
sible measures to reduce the negative impact on  birds by wind turbines. In addition the need 
for further research is highlighted. The evaluation is based on 
127 single studies  (wind 
farms) in ten countries , most of them in Germany as 
reflected by the right image. Most studies were brief (not more than two years) und did not include the pre-
construction period. Before-After Control Impact studies 
that combine data collection before and after, in this case construction of a wind farm, on both the proposed development site and at least one reference site were rare. In few cases only, the design of the study and the length of 
the study period would theoretically allow to find 
statistically significant effects of wind farms on birds and bats at all. Assessments of impacts, 
therefore, are usually based on few studies only. The lower image describes the frequency that studies were performed before, during or after start-of-operation of the wind farm and 
whether an untouched reference control area has been investigated or not. This report in-
cludes all studies readily available to the aut hors, independently of the length of the study 
period and the quality of the study design. The references and studies out of which basic data for this study were derived can be found below in Table 15.In order to base the as-


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 129
 sessments on as many independent samples as possible even rather unsystematic observa-
tions were included. The information of the data was reduced to a level that justified the ap-
plication of sign tests. The compilation of many different single studies gave following results: 
The main potential hazards to birds and bats from wind farms are disturbance leading to dis-
placement or exclusion and collision mortalit y. Although there is a high degree of agreement 
among experts that wind farms may have negative impacts on bird populations no statisti-
cally significant evidence of  negative impacts on populations of breeding birds could be 
found. There was a tendency for open nesting waders to be displaced by wind farms. Some passerines obviously profited from wind farm s. They probably were affected by secondary 
effects, e.g. changes in land management or abandonment from agricultural use next to the 
wind plants.  
The impact of wind farms on non-breeding birds was stronger. Wind farms had significantly 
negative effects on local populations of geese, Wigeons, Golden Plovers and Lapwings.  
With the exceptions of Lapwings, Black-tailed Godwits and Redshanks most bird species 
used the space close to wind plants during the breeding season. The minimal distances be-
tween observed birds and pylons rarely exceeded 100 m during the breeding season. Some passerines showed a tendency to settle closer to bigger than to smaller wind plants. 
During the non-breeding season many bird species of open landscapes avoided approaching 
wind parks closer than a few hundred metres. This particularly held true for geese and wad-
ers. In accordance to published information disturbance of geese may occur at least up to 
500 m from wind turbines. In most species during the non-breeding season, the distances in which disturbance could be noted increased with the size of the wind plants. In Lapwings this relationship was statistically significant. 
There was no evidence that birds generally „habituated“ to wind farms in the years after their 
construction. The results of the few studies lasting longer than one season revealed about as many cases of birds occurring closer to wind farms (indications for the existence of habitua-tion) in the course of the years as of birds occurring farer away from wind farms (indications for the lack of habituation). 
The question whether wind farms act as barriers to movement of birds has received relatively 
little systematic scientific attention yet. Wind farms are thought to be barriers when birds ap-proaching them change their flight direction, both on migration or during other regular flights. There is evidence for the occurrence of a barrier effect in 81 bird species. Geese, Common 
Cranes, waders and small passerines were affected in particular. It remains unknown, how-
ever, to what extend the disturbances by wind farms of migrating or flying birds influences the energy budgets or the timing of migration of birds. 
Collision rates (annual number of killed individuals per turbine) have only rarely been studied 
with appropriate methods (e. g. with controls of scarvenger activities). Particularly in Ger-
many such studies are missing. Collision rates varied between 0 and more than 50 for both 
birds and bats. Obviously the habitat influenced the number of collisions. Birds were in high risks at wind farms close to wetlands where gu lls were the most common victims and in wind 
farms on mountain ridges (USA, Spain) where m any raptors were killed. Wind farms in or 
close to forests posed high collision risks on bats. For both, birds and bats, the collision risk 
increased with increasing size of the wind plant. The relationship, however, was not statisti-cally significant. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 130
 Among powerful methods to reduce the negative impacts on birds and bats of wind energy 
use are: 
• choice of the right site for wind farms (avoidance of wetands, woodlands, important 
sites for sensitive non-breeding birds and mountain ridges with high numbers of 
raptors and vultures), 
• measures to reduce the attractiveness of wind farm sites for potential collision vic-
tims, 
• configuration of turbines within wind farms (placement of turbines parallel to and not 
across the main migration or flight directions of birds), 
• construction of wind turbines: replacement of lattice towers, wire-cables and over-
head power lines.  
Measures to increase the visibility of wind turbines and to reduce the effects of illumination 
remain to be studied. 
Finally a review is given on needs for further research activities. Especially the need for ap-
propriate techniques and methodologies concerning research of interactions of birds and bats with wind turbines is highlighted in this context, as well as the need for long-term stud-
ies, to for example also investigate the potential of adaptive behaviour. Special attention 
should also be addressed to the most suffering species. Mortality and population dynamics need to be investigated in order to quantify the relevant impacts on the ability of reproduc-tion.  
AHLÉN, I. (2002). Fladdermöss och fåglar dödade av vindkraftverk. Fauna och Flora 97, 14-21. 
ALBOUY, S., CLÉMENT, D., JONARD, A., MASSÉ,  P., PAGÈS, J.-M. & N EAU, P. (1997). Suivi 
ornithologique du parc éolien de Porte-la-Nouvelle (Aude) - Rapport final. ABIES, LPO, Gardouch. 
ALBOUY, S., DUBOIS, Y. & PICQ, H. (2001). Suivi ornithologique des parcs éoliens du plateau de 
Garrigue Haute (Aude) - Rapport final. ABIES, LPO, Gardouch. 
ANDERSON, R. L., STRICKLAND, M. D., TOM, J., NEUMANN, N., ERICKSON, W. P., CLECKLER, J., 
MAYORGA, G., NUHN, G., LEUDERS, A., SCHNEIDER , J., BACKUS, L., BECKE R, P. & FLAGG, N. 
(2000b). Avian Monotoring and Risk Assessment at Tehachapi Pass and San Gorgonio Pass Wind 
Resource Areas, California. In Pr oceedings of National Avian - Wi nd Power Planning Meeting III (ed. 
PNAWPPM-III), pp. 31-46. Prepared for the Avian Subcommittee of the National Wind Coordinating 
Committee by LGL Ltd., King City, Ont., San Diego, California. 
BACH, L. (2001). Fledermäuse und Windenerg ienutzung - reale Probleme oder Einbildung? 
Vogelkundliche Berichte aus Niedersachsen 33, 119-124. 
BACH, L. (2002). Auswirkungen von Windenergieanl agen auf das Verhalten von Fledermäusen am 
Beispiel des Windparks „Hohe Geest“, Midlum. Bericht der Arbeitsgemeinschaft zur Förderung 
angewandter biologischer Forschung im Auftrag der KW Midlum GmbH & Co. KG, Freiburg, 
Niederelbe. 
BACH, L., HANDKE, K. & SINNING, F. (1999). Einf luss von Windenergieanlagen auf die Verteilung von 
Brut- und Rastvögeln in Nordwest-Deutschland. Br emer Beiträge für Naturkunde und Naturschutz 4, 
107-122. 
BARRIOS, L. & RODRIGUEZ, A. (2004). Behavioural  and environmental correlates of soaring bird 
mortality at on-shore wind turbines. Journal of Applied Ecology 41, 72-81. 
BERGEN, F. (2001a). Untersuchungen zum Einfluss der Errichtung und des Betriebs von Windenergieanlagen auf Vögel im Binnenland. Ph D thesis thesis, Ruhr Universität.  

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 131
 BERGEN, F.  2001b). Windkraftanlagen und Frühjahr sdurchzug des Kiebitz (Vanellus vanellus): eine 
Vorher/Nacher-Studie an einem traditionellen Rast platz in Nordrhein-Westfalen. Vogelkundliche 
Berichte aus Niedersachsen 33, 89-96.  
BERGEN, F. (2002a). Einfluss von Windenergieanl agen auf die Raum-Zeitnutzung von Greifvögeln. In 
Windenergie und Vögel - Ausmaß und Bewältigung eines  Konfliktes (ed. H. Ohlenburg), pp. 86-96. 
Technische Universi tät Berlin, Berlin. 
BERGEN, F. (2002b). Windkraftanlagen und Frühja hrsdurchzug des Kiebitz (Vanellus vanellus): eine 
Vorher-Nachher-Studie an einem traditionellen Rastpl atz in Nordrhein- Westfalen. In Windenergie und 
Vögel - Ausmaß und Bewältigung eines Konfliktes (ed. H. Ohlenburg), pp. 77-85. Technische 
Universität Berlin, Berlin. 
BERGH, L. M. J. V. D., SPAANS, A. L. & SWELM, N. D. V. (2002). Lijnopstellingen van windturbines 
geen barrière voor voedselvluchten van meeuwens en sterns in de broedtijd. Limosa 75, 25-32. 
BOONE, D. (2003). Bat kill at We st Virginia windplant, Maryland. 
BÖTTGER, M., CLEMENS, T., GROTE, G., HART MANN, G., HARTWIG, E., LAMMEN, C., VAUK-
HENTZELT, E. & VAUK, G. (1990). Biologisch- Ökologische Begleituntersuchungen zum Bau und 
Betrieb von Windkraftanalgen. In NNA-Berichte 3, Sonderheft. NNA. 
BRAUNEIS, W. (1999). Der Einfluss von Windkra ftanlagen auf die Avifauna am Beispiel der „Solzer 
Höhe“ bei Bebra-Solz im Landkreis Hersfeld-Rotenburg - Untersuchung im Auftrag des Bundes für Umwelt und Naturschutz (B UND) Landesverband Hessen e.V. - Ortsverband 
Alheim-Rotenburg-Bebra, pp. 1-91, Bebra. 
BRAUNEIS, W. (2000). Der Einfluss von Windkraft anlagen (WKA) auf die Avifuna, dargestellt insb. am 
Beispiel des Kranichs Grus grus. Ornithologische Mitteilungen 52, 410-415. 
CLEMENS, T. & LAMMEN, C. (1995). Windkra ftanlagen und Rastplätze von Küstenvögeln - ein 
Nutzungskonflikt. Seevögel 16, 34-38. 
DE LUCAS, M., JANSS, G. F. E. & FERRER, M. (2004). The effects of a wind farm on birds in a 
migration point: the Strait of Gibraltar.  Biodiversity and Conservation 13, 395-407. 
DULAS ENGINEERING LTD. (1995). The Mynydd y Cemmaes windfarm impact study. Vol. IID - 
Ecological impact - final report. ETSU report: W/13/00300/REP2D. 
EAS. (1997). Ovenden Moor Ornitholog ical Monitoring. Report to Yorkshire Windpower. Keighly: 
Ecological Advisory Service. 
ERICKSON, W., KRONNER, K. & GRITSKI, B. ( 2003). Nine Canyon Wind Power Project. Avian and 
Bat Monitoring Report. September 2002 - August 2003. Prepared for Nine Canyon Technical Advisory 
Committee by West, Inc., Cheyenne. 
EVERAERT, J. (2003). Collision victims on 3 wind fa rms in Flanders (Belgium) in 2002. Instituut voor 
Naturbeheer, Brussel. 
EVERAERT, J., DEVOS, K. & KUIJKEN, E. (2002). Windturbines en  vogels in Vlaanderen. Instituut 
voor Natuurbehoud, Brussels. 
FÖRSTER, F. (2003). Windkraft und Fledermausschut z in der Oberlausitz. In Kommen die Vögel und 
Fledermäuse unter die (Wind)rä der?, Dresden, 17.-18.11.2003. 
GERJETS, D. (1999). Annäherung wi esenbrütender Vögel an Windkraftanalagen - Ergebnisse einer 
Brutvogeluntersuchung im Nahbereich des Windparks  Drochtersen. Bremer Beiträge für Naturkunde 
und Naturschutz 4, 49-52. 
GHARADJEDAGHI, B. & EHRLINGER, M. (2001). Au swirkungen des Windparks bei Nitzschka (Lkr. 
Altenburger Land) auf die Vogelfauna. Landschafts pflege und Naturschutz in Thüringen 38, 73-83. 
GUILLEMETTE, M. & LARSEN, J. K. (2002). Post development experiments to detect anthropogenic 
disturbances: the case of sea ducks and wind parks. Ecological 
Applications 12, 868-877.  
GUILLEMETTE, M., LARSEN, J. K. & CLAUSANGER,  I. (1999). Assessing the impact of the Tunø 
Knob wind park on sea ducks: the influence of the food ressources. National Environmental Research 
Institute, Denmark. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 132
 HALL, L. S. & RICHARDS, G. C. (1962). Notes on Tadarida australis (Chiroptera: molossidae). 
Australian Mammology 1, 46. 
HORMANN, M. (2000). Schwarzstorch - Ciconia nigra.  In Avifauna von Hessen, 4.  Lieferung (ed. H. G. 
f. O. u. Naturschutz). 
HYDRO TASMANIA. Bird and bat monitoring. Hydro Tasmania. 
ISSELBÄCHER, K. & ISSELBÄCHER, T.  (2001). Vogelschutz und Windene rgie in Rheinland-Pfalz. In 
Naturschutz und Landschaftspflege, pp. 1-183, Oppenheim. 
JANSS, G. (2000). Bird Behaviour In and Near a Wind Farm at Tarifa, Spain: Management 
Considerations. In Proc eedings of National Avian - Wind Po wer Planning Meeting III (ed. PNAWPPM-
III), pp. 110-114. Prepared for the Avian Subcommittee of the Natio nal Wind Coordinating Committee 
by LGL Ltd., King City, Ont., San Diego, California. 
JOHNSON, G. D. (2002). What is known and not know n about impacts on bats? In Proceedings of the 
Avian Interactions with Wind Power Structures, October 16-17, 2002 (in press), Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
JOHNSON, G. D., ERICKSON, W. P., STRICKLAND, D. M., SHEPHERD, M. F., SHEPHERD, D. A. & 
SARAPPO, S. A. (2003). Mortality of Bats at a Large- scale Wind Power Development at Buffalo Ridge, 
Minnesota. Am. Midl. Nat. 150, 332-342.  
JOHNSON, G. D., YOUNG, D. P., ERICKSON, W. P., DERBY, C. E., STRICKLAND, M. D. & GOOD, 
R. E. 73 Auswirkungen regenerativer Energiegewinnung auf die biologische Vielfalt am Beispiel der 
Vögel (2000). Wildlife monitoring studies Sea We st Windpower Project, Carbon County, Wyoming. 
Western EcoSystems Technology, Inc., Cheyenne. 
KAATZ, J. (2000). Untersuchungen zur Avifauna im Be reich des Windparks Badeleben im Bördekreis - 
Standort- und zeitbezogene Habitatnutzung von Brut- und Rastvögeln im Prä-Post-Test-Verfahren, pp. 
1-38. IHU Geologie und Analyt ik, Neuruppin. KAATZ, J.  
(2002). Artenzusammensetzung und Dominanzver hältnisse einer Heckenbütergemeinschaft im 
Windfeld Nackel. In Windenergie und Vögel - Au smaß und Bewältigung eines Konfliktes (ed. H. 
Ohlenburg), pp. 113-124. Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin. 
KERLINGER, P. (2000). An Assessment of the Im pacts of Green Mountain Power Corporation’s 
Searsburg, Vermont, Wind Power Facility on Breeding and Migrating Birds. In Proceedings of National Avian - Wind Po wer Planning Meeting III (ed. PNAWPPM-III), pp. 90-
96. Prepared for the Avian Subcommittee of the Na tional Wind Coordinating Committee by LGL Ltd., 
King City, Ont., San Diego, California. 
KETZENBERG, C., EXO, K.-M., REICHENBACH, M. & CASTOR, M. (2002). Einfluss von 
Windenergieanlagen auf brütende Wiesenvögel. Natur und Landschaft 77, 144-153. 
KOOP, B. (1997). Vogelzug und Windenergieplanung. Beispiele für Auswirkungen aus dem Kreis Plön 
(Schlewsig-Holstein). Naturschutz und Landschaftsplanung 29, 202-207. 
KOOP, B. (1999). Windkraftanlagen und Vogelzug im Kr eis Plön. Bremer Beiträge für Naturkunde und 
Naturschutz 4, 25-32. 
KORN, M. & SCHERNER, R. (2000). Raumnutzung von Feldlerchen (Alauda arvensis) in einem 
Windpark. Natur und Landschaft 75, 74-75. 
KOWALLIK, C. & BORBACH-JAENE, J. (2001). Wi ndräder als Vogelscheuchen? - Über den Einfluss 
der Windkraftnutzung in Gänserastgebieten an de r nordwestdeutchen Küste. Vogelkundliche Berichte 
aus Niedersachsen 33, 97-102. 
KRUCKENBERG, H. & BORBACH-JAENE, J. ( 2001). Auswirkungen eines Windparks auf die 
Raumnutzung nahrungssuchender Blessgänse - Ergebnisse aus einem Monitoringprojekt mit Hinweisen auf ökoethologischen Forschungsbedarf. V ogelkundliche Berichte aus Niedersachsen 33, 
103-109. 
KRUCKENBERG, H. & JAENE, J. ( 1999). Zum Einfluss eines Windparks auf die Verteilung weidender 
Bläßgänse im Rheiderland (Landkreis Leer, Niedersachsen). Natur und Landschaft 74, 420-427. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 133
 LEDDY, K. L., HIGGINS, K. F. & NAUGLE, D. E. (1999). Effects of wind turbines on upland nesting 
birds in Conservation Reserve Program grasslands. Wilson Bulletin 111, 100-104. 
LEKUONA, J. M. (2001). Uso del espacio por la  avifauna y control de la mortalidad de aves y 
murciélagos en los parques eólicos de Navarra durante un  ciclo anual. Direccion General de Medio Ambiente, Gobierno de Navarra, Pamplona. 
MEEK, E. R., RIBBANDS, J. B., CHRISTER, W. G ., DAVEY, P. R. & HIGGINSON, I. (1993). The 
effects of aero-generators on moorland bird populations  in the Orkney Islands, Scotland. Bird Study 40, 
140-143. 
MENZEL, C. (2002). Rebhuhn und Rabenkrähe  im Bereich von Windkraftanlagen im 
niedersächsischen Binnenland. In Windenergie und Vögel - Ausmaß und Bewältigung eines Konfliktes 
(ed. H. Ohlenburg), pp. 97-112. Tec hnische Universität Berlin, Berlin. 
MENZEL, C. & POHLMEIER, K. (1999). Indi rekter Raumnutzungsnachweis verschiedener 
Niederwildarten mit Hilfe von Losungsstangen („dropp ing marker“) in Gebieten mit Winkraftanlagen. Z. 
Jagdwiss. 45, 223-229. 
MUSTERS, C. J. M., NOORDERVLIET, M. A. W. & KE URS, W. J. T. (1996). Bird casualities caused by 
a wind energy project in an estuary. Bird Study 43, 124-126. 
ORLOFF, S. & FLANNERY, A. (1996). A continued exam ination of avian mortality in the Altamont Pass 
Wind Ressource Area. California Energy Commission,  Sacramento; Bio-Systems Analysis, Inc., Santa 
Cruz, California. 
OSBORN, R. G., HIGGINS, K. F., DIETER, C. D. & US GAARD, R. E. (1996). Bat collisions with wind 
turbines in Southwest Minnesota. Bat Research News 37, 105-108. 
PEDERSEN, M. B. & POULSEN, E. (1991a). Impact of  a 90m/2 MW wind turbine on birds. Avian 
responses to the implementation of the Tjaerebor g Wind Turbine at the Danish Wadden Sea. Dansk 
Vildtundersogelser Kalø 47. 
PERCIVAL, S. M. (2000). Birds and wind turbin es in Britain. British Wildlife 12, 8-15. 
PHILLIPS, J. F. (1994). The effects of a windfarm on the upland breeding bird communities of Bryn Titli, 
Mid Wales: 1993-1994. Royal Society for the Protecti on of Birds, the Welsh Office, Bryn Aderyn, The 
Bank, Newtown, Powys. 
REICHENBACH, M. (2002). Windenergie und Wiesenv ögel - wie empfindlich sind die Offenlandbrüter? 
In Windenergie und Vögel - Ausmaß und Bewältigung eines Konfliktes (ed. H. Ohlenburg), pp. 52-76. 
Technische Universi tät Berlin, Berlin. 
REICHENBACH, M. (2003). Auswirkungen v on Windenergieanlagen auf Vögel - Ausmaß und 
planerische Bewältigung, Technische Universität Berlin. 
REICHENBACH, M. & SCHADEK, U. (2003). Langzeituntersuchungen zum Konfliktthema „Windkraft 
und Vögel“. 2. Zwischenbericht. Unveröffentlichtes Gutachten im Auftrag des Bundesverbandes Windenergie. 
REICHENBACH, M. & SINNING, F. (2003). Empf indlichkeiten ausgewählter Vogelarten gegenüber 
Windenergieanlagen - Ausmaß und planerische Bewältigung. In Kommen die Vögel und Fledermäuse unter die (Wind)räder?, Dresden, 17.-18.11.2003. 
SACHSLEHNER, L. & KOLLAR, H. P. (1997). Vogelsc hutz und Windkraftanlagen in Wien. Stadt Wien, 
Wien. 
SCHERNER, E. R. (1999a). Wi ndkraftanlagen und „wertgebende V ogelbestände“ bei Bremerhaven: 
Realität oder Realsatire? Beiträge zu r Naturkunde Niedersachsens 52, 121-156. 
SCHMIDT, E., PIAGGIO, A. J., BOCK, C. E. & AR MSTRONG, D. M. (2003). National Wind Technology 
Center Site Environmental Assessment: Bird and Bat Use and Fatalities - Final Report; Period of Perfomance: April 23, 2001 - December 31, 2002. NREL/SR-500- 32981. 
SCHREIBER, M. (1992). Rastvögel und deren Habi tatwahl im Bereich „Westermarsch“ (Landkreis 
Aurich) im Jahr 1992. Unveröff. Gutachten im Auftrag der Ingenieu rsgemeinschaft agwa. 
SCHREIBER, M. (1993a). Windkraftanlagen und Watvogel-Rastplätz. Naturschutz und 
Landschaftspflege 25, 133-139. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 134
 SCHREIBER, M. (1993c). Zum Einfluß von Stör ungen auf die Rastplatzwahl von Watvögeln. 
Informationsd. Natursch. Nieders. 13, 161-169. 
SCHREIBER, M. (1999). Windkraftanalagen als Stör ungsquelle für Gastvögel am Beispiel von 
Blessgans (Anser albifrons) und Lachmöwe (Larus  ridibundus). Bremer Beiträge für Naturkunde und 
Naturschutz 4, 39-48.  
SCHREIBER, M. (2002). Einfluss von Windener gieanlagen auf Rastvögel und Konsequenzen für EU-
Vogelschutzgebiete. In Windenergie und Vögel - Ausmaß und Bewältigung eines Konfliktes (ed. H. 
Ohlenburg), pp. 134-156. Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin 
SEO, S. E. D. O. (1995). Effects of wind tu rbine power plants on the Avifauna in the Campo de 
Gibraltar region. Sociedad Espanola de Ornitologia SEO. 
SGS ENVIRONMENT. (1994). Haverigg windfarm orni thological monitoring programme. Report to 
Windcluster LTD.  
SINNING, F. (1999). Ergebnisse von Brut- und Rastvogeluntersuchungen im Bereich des Jade-Windparks und DEWI-Testfelds in Wilhelmshaven. Brem er Beiträge für Naturkunde und Naturschutz 4, 
61-70. 
SINNING, F. & GERJETS, D. (1999). Untersuchungen  zu Annäherung rastender Vögel in Windparks in 
Nordwestdeutschland. Bremer Beiträge für Naturkunde und Naturschutz 4, 53-59. 
SMALLWOOD, K. S. & THELANDER, C. G. (2004). Deve loping methods to reduce bird mortality in the 
Altamont Pass Wind Ressource Area., pp. 1-363. Final report by BioResource Consultants to the 
California Energy Commission. 
SOMMERHAGE, M. (1997). Verhaltensweisen ausges uchter Vogelarten gegenüber Windkraftanlagen 
auf der Vaßbecker Hochfläche (Landkreis Waldeck-Frankenberg). Vogelkundliche Hefte Edertal 23, 104-109. 
STEIOF, K., BECKER, J. & RATHGEBER, J. (2002) . Ornithologische Stellungnahme zur Erweiterung 
der Windenergieanlage bei Mildenberg (Kreis Oberhavel, Land Brandenburg). Gutachten im Auftrag 
der Windenergie Wenger-Rosenau GmbH, Berlin. 
STILL, D., LITTLE, B. & LAWRENCE, E. S. (1996). T he effect of wind turbines on the bird population at 
Blyth Harbour, Northumberland. ETSU W/13/00394/REP. 
STRICKLAND, M. D., JOHNSON, G., ERICKSON, W. P. & KRONNER, K. (2001b). Avian Studies at 
Wind Plants Located at Buffalo Ridge, Minnesota and Vansycle Ridge, Oregon. In Proceedings of 
National Avian - Wind Power Planning Meeting IV  (ed. PNAWPPMIV), pp. 38-52. Prepared for the 
Avian Subcommittee of the National Wind Coordinat ing Committee by RESOLVE, Inc., Washington, 
D.C., Susan Savitt Schwartz, Carmel, California. 
STÜBING, S. & BOHLE, H. W. (2001). Unters uchungen zum Einfluss von Windenergieanalgen auf 
Brutvögel im Vogelsberg (Mittelhessen). Vogelkund liche Berichte aus Niedersachsen 33, 111-118. 
THELANDER, C. G. & RUGGE, L. (2000). Avian risk behavior and fatalities at the Altamont Wind 
Resource Area, March 1998 to February 1999. NREL/SR-500-27545.  
THELANDER, C. G., SMALLWOOD, K. S. & RUGGE, L. (2003). Bird risk behaviors and fatalities at the 
Altamont Pass Wind Resource Area. Period of performance: March 1998 - December 2000. NREL/SR-
500-33829. 
TRAPP, H., FABIAN, D., FÖRSTER, F. & ZINKE, O.  (2002). Fledermausverlus te in einem Windpark. 
Naturschutzarbeit in Sachsen 44, 53-56. 
VAN DER WINDEN, J., SPAANS, A. L. & DIRKSEN, S. (1999). Nocturnal collision risks of local 
wintering birds with wind turbines in wetlands. Bremer Beiträge für Naturkunde und Naturschutz 4, 33-38. 
VIERHAUS, H. (2000). Neues von unser en Fledermäusen. ABU Info 24, 58-60. 
WALTER, G. & BRUX, H. (1999). Erste Ergebnisse ei nes dreijährigen Brut- und Gastvogelmonitorings 
(1994-1997) im Einzugsbereich von zwei Windparks im Landkreis 
Cuxhaven. Bremer Beiträge für Na turkunde und Naturschutz 4, 81-106. 
WINKELMAN, J. E. (1989). Vogels in het windpar k nabij Urk (NOP): aanvaringsslachtoffers en 
verstoring van pleisternde eenden, ganzen en zwanen. RIN-rapport 89/15, Arnhem.  

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 135
 WINKELMAN, J. E. (1992a). De invloed van de Sepp roef Windcentrale te Oosterbierum (Fr.) op 
vogels. 1: aanvaringsslachtoffers, pp. 71. DLO In stituut voor Bos- en Natuuronderzoek (Hrsg.), 
Arnhem. 
WINKELMAN, J. E. (1992b). De invloed van de Sep-proef windcentrale te Oosterbierum (Fr.) op vogels, 
4: verstoring. RIN-rapport92/5, Arnhem. 
YOUNG, D. P., ERICKSON, W. P., GOOD, R. E., ST RICKLAND, M. D. & JOHNSON, G. D. (2003a). 
Avian and bat mortality associated with the initia l phase of the Foote Creek Rim Windpower project, 
Carbon County, Wyoming. Final report. Wester n EcoSystems Technology, Inc., Wyoming. 
YOUNG, D. P., ERICKSON, W. P., STRICKLAND, M. D., GOOD, R. E. & SERNKA, K. J. (2003b). 
Table 15: Sources of basic data revised, evaluated or incorporated within the NABU study 
 
 
83 Bremer Beiträge für Naturkunde und Naturschutz, Band 7 Themenheft “Vögel 
und Fledermäuse im Konflikt mid der Windenergie” / Contributions of the Federal State Bremen to Nature Study and Nature Conservation, Edition 7 Manual “Bird and Bats in Conflict with Wind Energy” 
Compilation: Dr. Handke, K., Dr. Kulp, H.-G., Rode, M., Dr. Schuchardt, B., Seitz, J. 
Publisher / Date: Bund für Umwelt und Naturschutz Deutschland (BUND) Landesverband Bremen e.V. / 2004-12-00 Keyword(s): Birds, Bats, Collision, Barrier Effects, Population Dynamics 
 
The most effective way of describing this comprehensive work is to draw a picture on the 
subjects and studies dealt with in this report: 
Birds and Bats in Conflict with Wind Energy - Insights concerning Sensitivity 
Reichenbach, M., Sprötge, M.: Birds and Bats in Conflict with Wind Energy - Insights 
concerning Sensitivity (orig.: Vögel und Fledermäuse im Konflikt mit der Windenergie - 
Erkenntnisse zur Empfindlichkeit) 
Case Studies 
Handke, K., Adena, J., Handke, P., Sprötge, M.: Spacial Division of selected Species of Brood 
Birds and Resting Birds in relation to a present Wind Energy Converters in an Area near to the Near Shore Krummhörn 
(orig.: Räumliche Verteilung ausgewählter Brut- und 
Rastvogelarten im Bezug auf vorhandene Windenergieanlagen in einem Bereich der 
küstennahem Krummhörn) 
Handke, K., Adena, J., Handke, P., Sprötge, M .: Influence of Wind Energy Converters on the 
Division of selected Species of Brood Birds and Resting Birds in an Area of the Krummhörn 
(Jennelt/Ostfriesland) (orig.: Einfluss von Windenergieanlagen auf die Verteilung 
ausgewählter Brut- und Rastvogelarten in einem Bereich der Krummhörn 
(Jennelt/Ostfriesland)) 
Handke, K., Adena, J., Handke, P., Sprötge, M.: Investigations on the Appearance of Lapwing 
(Vanellus vanellus) and Curlew (Numenius arquata) before and after Construction (orig.: 
Untersuchung zum Vorkommen von Kiebitz (Vanellus vanellus) und Großem Brachvogel 
(Numenius arquata) vor und nach Errichtung) 
Handke, K., Adena, J., Handke, P., Sprötge, M.: Investigations on selected Species of Brood 
Birds after Construction of a Wind Farm in the Area of Stader Geest (orig.: Untersuchung an 
ausgewählten Brutvogelarten nach Errichtung eines Windparks im Bereich der Stader Geest 
(Landkreis Rotenburg/Wümme und Stade)) 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 136
 Sinning, F., Sprötge, M., de Bruyn, U. : Change in the Fauna of Breeding and Resting Birds 
after Construction of the Wind Farm Abens-Nord (orig.: Veränderungen der Brut- und 
Rastvogelfauna nach Errichtung des Windparks Abens-Nord (Niedersachsen, LK Wittmund)) 
Sinning, F.: Development of the Existence and Occurrence of Lapwing (Vanellus vanellus), 
Partridge (Perdix perdix) and Quali (Coturnix coturnix) in the Wind Farm Lahn - Results of a 6 year lasting investigation 
(orig.: Bestandsentwicklung von Kiebitz (Vanellus vanellus), Rebhuh 
(Perdix perdix) und Wachtel (Coturnix coturnix) im Windpark Lahn (Niedersachsen, LK 
Emsland) - Ergebnisse einer 6-jährigen Untersuchung) 
Reichenbach, M.: Long Term Investigation concer ning Impacts of Wind Energy Converters on 
Birds in Open Terrain - First Interim Results after Three Years (orig.: Langzeituntersuchungen 
zu Auswirkungen auf Vögel des Offenlandes - erste Zwischenergebnisse nach drei Jahren) 
Reichenbach, M.: Results Regarding the Sensitiv ity of Endangered Species of Songbirds with 
Respect to Wind Energy Converters - Luscinia svecica, Acrocephalus schoenobaenus (orig.: 
Ergebnisse zur Empfindlichkeit bestandsgefährdeter Singvogelarten gegenüber 
Windenergieanlagen - Blaukehlchen (Luscinia sveci ca), Schilfrohrsänger (Acrocephalus 
schoenobaenus) 
Schoppenhorst, A.: Grey Heron and Wind Energy Converter - Results of a Field Study in the 
Ochtum-Lowland near Delmenhorst (orig.: Graureiher und Windenergieanlagen - Ergebnisse 
einer Feldstudie in der Ochtumniederung bei Delmenhorst) 
Sinnig, F., de Bruyn, U.: Spatial Usage of a Wind Farm Area through Birds during the 
Migration-Period - Results of a Survey on Migratory Bird in the Wind Farm Wehrder (orig.: 
Raumnutzung eines Windparks durch Vögel während der Zugzeit - Ergebnisse einer 
Zugvogel-Untersuchung im Windpark Wehrder (Niedrsachsen, LK Wesermarsch)) 
Stübling, S.: Reactions of Migratory Birds in Au tumn with Respect to Wind Energy Converters 
in the German Low Mountain Range - Results of a Study at the Vogelsberg (orig.: Reaktionen 
von Herbstdurchzüglern gegenüber Windenergieanlagen im Mittelgebirge - Ergebnisse einer 
Studie im Vogelsberg (Hessen)) 
Papers / Essay's 
Sinnig, F.: Short Contribution to the Occurrenc e of Grey Bunting (Miliarria calandar) and Other 
Selected Species in Brush-Woods in the Wind Farm Mallnow (orig.: Kurzbeitrag zum 
Vorkommen der Grauammer (Miliarria calandar) und weiterer ausgewählter Arten an 
Gehölzreihen im Windpark Mallnow (Brandenburg, LK Märkisch Oderland) 
Sinnig, F.: Short Contribution to the Occurrence of Stonechat (Saxicola torquata) and Other 
Selected Species in two North-German Wind Farms (orig.: Kurzbeitrag zum Vorkommen des 
Schwarzkehlchens (Saxicola torquata) und weiterer ausgewählter Arten in zwei 
norddeutschen Windparks (Niedersachsen, LK Ammerland, Leer und Stade) 
Kaatz, J.: Concerning the Behaviour of Em beriza hortulana in response to Wind Energy 
Converters (WEC) in Prignitz, Federal State Brandenburg (orig.: Zum Verhalten von 
Ortolanen (Emberiza hortulana) gegenüber Windkraftanlagen (WKY) in der Prignitz, Land 
Brandenburg) 
Overviews 
Reichenbach, M.: A Wider Perspective  - Inter national Studies Concerning the Impacts of 
Wind Energy Converter on Birds (orig.: Ein Blick über den Tellerrand - Internationale Studien 
zu Auswirkungen von Windenergieanlagen auf Vögel) 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 137
 Dürr, T.: Birds as Victims During Approaches of Wind Energy Converters - a View into the 
National Trove-File (orig.: Vögel als Anflugopfer an Windenergieanlagen in Deutschland - ein 
Einblick in die bundesweite Fundkartei) 
Reichenbach, M., Handke, K., Sinning, F.: Stand of Knowledge regarding the Sensitivity of 
Bird Species in Response to Disturbing Effects of Wind Energy Converters (orig.: Der Stand 
des Wissens zur Empfindlichkeit von Vogelarten gegenüber Störungswirkungen von Windenergieanlagen) 
 
 
Bats 
Bach, L., Rahmel, U.: Overview of Impacts of Wind Energy Converters on Bats - a Conflict 
Estimation (orig.: Überblick zu Auswirkungen von Windkraftanlagen auf Fledermäuse - eine 
Konfliktabschätzung) 
Dürr, T., Bach, L.: Bats as Blow-Victims of Wind Energy Converter - Status on the 
Experiences and a View into the National Trove-File (orig.: Fledermäuse als Schlagopfer von 
Windenergieanlagen - Stand der Erfahrungen mit Einblick in die bundesweite Fundkartei) 
Rahmel, U., Bach, L., Brinkmann, R., Limpens, H., Roschen, A.: Wind Energy Converters and 
Bats - Details on Registration Methodology and Aspects of Planning (orig.: 
Windenergieanlagen und Fledermäuse - Hinweise zur Erfassungsmethodik und zu 
planerischen Aspekten) 
Planning / In Progress 
Korn, M,. Strübling, S., Müller, A.: Protection of Huge Birds through across-the-board 
Regulations on Distances between Wind Energy Converters - Possibilities and Limitations 
(orig.: Schutz von Großvögeln durch Festlegung pauschaler Abstandsradien zu 
Windenergieanlagen - Möglichkeiten und Grenzen) 
Sprötge, M., Sinning, F., Reichenbach, M.: About a Professional Environmental Management 
of Birds and Bats for Wind Energy Planning (orig.: Zum naturschutzfachlichen Umgang mit 
Vögeln und Fledermäusen in der Windenergieplanung) 
 
84 Studying Wind Energy/Bird Interactions: A Guidance Document 
Authors: Anderson, R., Morrison, M., Sinclair, K., Strickland, D., Davis, H., Kendall, W. 
Publisher / Date: National Wind Coordinating Committee / 1999-12-00 Keyword(s): Birds, collision 
Bird mortality is a concern and wind power is a potential clean and green source of 
electricity, making study of wind energy/bird inte ractions essential. An important first step in 
understanding these interactions and assessing potential effects is to use the same 
terminology and conduct research that will produce credible and comparable results. This 
guidance document seeks to: 
1. Provide a reference document for use by  all stakeholders that will, if followed, 
produce a body of information adequate to:  
a. assess the suitability of a proposed wind plant site with regard to birds of 
concern  
b. assess the potential effects of a wind plant on birds of concern  
c. evaluate the potential effects of wind energy technology on birds  
2. Provide sufficiently detailed and clearly understandable methods, metrics, and 
definitions for use in the study of wind energy/bird interactions  

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 138
 3. Promote efficient, cost-effective study designs, methods, and metrics that will 
produce comparable data and reduce the overall need for some future studies  
4. Provide study designs and methods for the collection of information useful in 
reducing risk to birds in existing and future wind plants 
85 Windfarms and Birds: An analysis of the effects of windfarms on birds, and 
guidance on environmental assessment criteria and site selection issues 
Authors: Langston, R.H.W., Pullan, J.D. 
Publisher / Date: BirdLife / 2002-09-00 Keyword(s): bird collision risks, barrier effects, EIA, SEA, Natura2000 
Key objectives of the report are 
• to analyse the impact of wind farms on birds 
• establishing criteria for their environmental impact assessment 
• developing guidelines on precautions to be taken when selecting sites for wind farms 
Whereby these objectives have to be places in the context of 
• disturbance leading to displacement, including barriers to movement 
• collision mortality 
• direct loss of habitat to wind turbines and associated infrastructure 
The report hence serves as guidance for defining 
• criteria for EIA of wind farms on birds and 
• precautions to be taken when selecting sites for wind farm planning. 
 
86 Wind turbines and birds in Flanders: preliminary study results and 
recommendations 
Authors: Everaert, J. 
Publisher / Date: Instituut voor Natuurbehoud, Brussel / -  Keyword(s): Birds 
This article presents some preliminary results from a research on the impacts of three wind 
farms in Flanders (Belgium) on birds. The co llision numbers varied from 0 to 125 birds per 
wind turbine per year. The mean victim num bers of the wind farms in 2002 was 24, 35 and 
18 birds per wind turbine per year respectively. The number of collisions on the three studied 
locations seems to be dependent on the number of passing birds, and in less degree with the size of the wind turbine.  
Author’s intermezzo:  As only three wind farm sites have been considered within the above 
study, and as the areas are assumed to be of a bird rich kind, these numbers are not representative for general onshore situations. This also becomes clear if considering other 
mentioned reports as for example 82 and 83. Si tes with that high numbers in victims are 
mostly excluded from nowadays wind farm plannings due to more reasons: 
a. The latest allocations of protection areas in context with Directives and treaties as 
introduced in chapter 3.2 also have as aim to take account for preventing wind farm 
siting there, where the impacts on birds is assumed to be as high as stated in report 
86 above. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 139
 For example has one observed site been in imm ediate vicinity to a bird protection area 
following the European Directive on bird protection and its Appendix I-list 24. Grievances 
during the planning may not be excluded in this context. Also turbines may have been built in the mid 80
th already, which is roundabout 20 years ago25! That was a time when certain 
protective areas did not even exist.  
b. A better picture at the newer wind farm sites would have given a comparison of the 
situation before erection of the wind farm site and thereafter. Enhanced frequency of 
dead birds also can be an indicator showing solely that many birds are around, 
however dieing by other (perhaps natural) reasons. Hence the ratio of dead birds over total number of birds around for both cases (before and after erection) and 
classified into tracking birds, breading birds, etc. may give a more representative 
picture for this specific mentioned sites. 
If significantly many dead birds were counted, maybe not enough attention has been given to 
the site selection or searching for alternatives. 
87 Auswirkung elektrischer und magnetischer Felder auf Meeresfische in der Nor- 
und Ostsee 
Authors: Fricke, R. 
Publisher / Date: Staatliches Museum für Naturkunde, Stuttgart / 0000-00-00  Keyword(s): EMF, seabed, fish  
88 Abschätzung direkter und indirekter biologischer Wirkungen der elektrischen 
und magnetischen Felder des EuroKabel / Viking Cable HGÜ-Bipols auf 
Lebewesen der Nordsee und des Wattenmeeres 
Authors: Kullnick, U., Marhold, S. 
Publisher / Date: EuroKabel / Viking Cable / 1999-00-00  
Keyword(s): EMF, seabed, fish 
 
89 Vorläufige Ergebnisse von Felduntersuchungen an einer Elektrode in der Ostsee 
Authors: Debus, L., Winkler, H., Zettler, M.L. 
Publisher / Date: Institut für Ostseeforschung, Universität Rostock / 0000-00-00  Keyword(s): Ringelektrode, Meeresboden  
90 Incidencia de las plantas de aerogeneradores sobre la avifauna en la comarac 
del campo de gibraltar 
Authors: Barrios, L. and Aguilar, E. 
Publisher / Date: Sociedad Espanola de Ornitologia (SEO / BirdLife), Madrid / 1995-00-00 Keyword(s): ave, avifauna, birds 
91 Nocturnal collision risks with wind turbines in tidal and semi-offshore areas 
Authors: Dirksen, S., Spaans, A.L. and Winden, van der J.  Publisher / Date: 2
nd European and African Conference on Wind Engineering / 1997 
Keyword(s): birds, collision risk 
                                                 
24 www.mumm.ac.be/Common/Windmills/ SPE/4%20mer -spezeebrugge_bijlagef oto_scenarios.pdf at 
10/02/05 
25 www.vliz.be/Docs/ Groterede/p02_07.pdf  at 10/02/2005 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 140
 92 Review of the impacts of wind farms and other aerial structures upon birds 
Authors: Gill, J.P., Townsley, M. and Mudge, G.P. 
Publisher / Date: Scottish Natural Heritage Review 21 / 1996-00-00 Keyword(s): birds, collision risk  
93 A continued examination of avian mortality in the Altamont Pass Wind Resource 
Area. Report to California Energy Commission 
Authors: Orloff, S., and A. Flannery . 
Publisher / Date: California Energy Commission / 1996-00-00 Keyword(s): Birds  
94 Abschätzung von Verteilungsmustern und Definition von möglichen 
Schutzgebieten für die anadrome Wanderfischart Finte ( Alosa fallax ) in der 
Nordsee mittels nicht-linearer Geostatistik 
Authors: Stelzenmüller, V., Maynou, F., Ehrich, S., Zauke, G.-P. 
Publisher / Date: Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg / 2003-00-00 Keyword(s): fish, 
Alosa fallax 
 
95 Continuation of bird studies at Blyth Harbour wind farm and the implications for 
offshore wind farms 
Authors: Painter, A., Little, B. and Lawrence, S.  
Publisher / Date: DTI ETSU, report no W/13/00485/00/00  / 1999-00-00 
Keyword(s): birds 
 
96 Impact of a 90m/2MW wind turbine on birds: Avian response to the 
implementation of the Tjaereborg Wind Turbine at the Danish Wadden Sea 
Authors: Pedersen, M.B. and Poulsen, E. 
Publisher / Date: Danske Vlindtundersogelser Haefte 47 / 1991-00-00 
Keyword(s): birds 
97 The effect of wind turbines on the bird population at Blyth Harbour 
Authors: Still, D., Little, B. and Lawrence, S. 
Publisher / Date: Report to Border Wind Limited (UK) ETSU W/13/00394/REP / 1996-00-00 Keyword(s): birds 
 
98 Auswirkungen von Windenergieanlagen auf Vögel – Ausmaß und planerische 
Bewältigung 
Authors: Reichenbach, M. 
Publisher / Date: Technische Universität Berlin, Fakultät VII / 2002-12-13 
Keyword(s): birds 
 
99 Langzeituntersuchungen zum Konfliktthema „Windkraft und Vögel” 2. 
Zwischenbericht 
Authors: Reichenbach, M., Schadek, U., 
Publisher / Date: Bundesverband WindEnergie BWE Service GmbH / 2003-02-00 
Keyword(s): birds 
 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 141
 Appendix D 
- Non-evaluated reports or papers that may contain more relevant information on what 
the potentially impacts of noise on the marine environment could be - 
 
- Abbott, R. (2001). San Francisco – Oakland Bay Bridge East Span Seismic Safety 
Project, Pile Installation Demonstration Project, Fisheries Impact Assessment. Report 
PIDP EA 012081 on CalTrans Contract 04A014 8 
- Amundin, M. 1991. Sound production in odontocetes, with emphasis on the Harbour Porpoise, Phocoena phocoena. PhD-dissertation, University of Stockholm, 128 pp. + plates 
- Andersen, S. 1970. Auditory sensitivity of the harbour porpoise Phocoena phocoena. Invest. Cetacea 2:255-259 
- Andre, M., Kamminga, C., & Ketten, D. 1997 Are low-frequency sounds a marine hazard: a case study in the Canary Islands. In Underwater Bio-sonar and Bioacoustic 
Symposium, Vol. 19, pp. 77 - 84, Loughborough University 
- Balcomb, K C. & Claridge, D.E. 2001. A mass stranding of cetaceans caused by 
naval sonar in the Bahamas. Bahamas Journal of Science 8(2): 1-12. 
- Barger, J.E. & Hamblen, W.R. 1980. The air gun impulsive underwater transducer. J.Acoust.Soc.Am. 68(4): 1038-1045 
- Biasoni, N., Miller, P., J.,O., & Tyack, P. 2000 Preliminary results of the effects of SURTASS-LFA sonar on singing humpback whales. Woods Hole Oceanog. Inst. Terch Rept., 23. 
- Bohne, B.A., Bozzay, D.G., & Thomas, J.A. 1986 Evaluation of inner ear pathology in 
Weddell seals. Antarctic Journal of the United States, 21, 208. 
- Bohne, B.A., Thomas, J.A., Yohe, E.R., & Stone, S.H. 1985 Examination of potential 
hearing damage in Weddell Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli) in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. Antarctic Journal of the United States, 20, 174-176. 
- Bowles, A.E., Smultea, M., Würsig, B., DeMa ster D. P., and Palka, D. 1994. Relative 
abundance and behaviour of marine mammals exposed to transmissions from the 
Heard Island Feasibility Test. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 96(4):2469-2484. 
- Brundrit, G., Krige, L., Palmer, D., Forbes, A. & Metzger, K. 1994, Acoustic thermometry of ocean climate: Feasibility Ascension-Cape Town. Proc. 2nd 
European Conference on Underwater Acoustics, Vol. II, ed: Bjorno, L.. pp:1019-1024 
- Christian, E. A.(1973). The effects of underwater explosions on swimbladder fish. 
Naval Ordinance Laboratory, White Oak, Silver Spring MD. NOLTR 73-103, 33 pp. 
- Crum, L.A. & Mao, Y. 1996 Acoustically enhanced bubble growth at low frequencies and its implications for human diver and marine mammal safety. Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America, 99, 2898-2907. 
- Enger, P. S., Karlsen, H. E., Knudsen, F. R. & Sand, O. (1993): Detection and 
reaction of fish to infrasound. ICES mar. Sci. Symp. 196, pp. 108 - 112. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 142
 - Erbe C; Farmer DM (2000) (b) A software model to estimate zones of impact on 
marine mammals around anthropogenic noise. Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America 108 1327-1331 
- Evans, W.R. (2000) Applications of Acoustic Bird Monitoring for the Wind Power Industry. In PNAWPPM -III, p141-152. 
- Flaherty  C (1981) Apparent effects of boat traffic on harbour porpoises (Phocoena phocoena). P.35 In: Abstracts of the 4th Biennial Conference on the Biology of Marine Mammals. San Fransisco, CA, Dec. 1981 
- Flow Solutions Ltd (1993) Assessment and Prediction of Wind Turbine Noise. ETSU W/13/00284/REP 
- Flow Solutions Ltd (1993) Systematic Co mparison of Predictions and Experiment for 
Wind Turbine Aerodynamic Noise. ETSU W/13/00363/REP 
- Frantzis, A. 1998 Does acoustic testing strand whales? Nature, 392, 29. Gisiner, R.C. 1998. Workshop on the effects of anthropogenic noise on the marine environment. 
Marine Mammal Science Program Office of Naval Research. 
- Goertner, J.F. 1982. Prediction of underwater explosion safe ranges for sea 
mammals. NSWC/WOL TR-82-188, Rep. No. NTIS AD-A139823. Naval Surface Weap. Cent., White Oak Lab., Silver Spring, MD. 
- Goold, J.C. & Fish, P.J. 1998 Broadband spectra of seismic survey air-gun 
emissions, with reference to dolphin auditory  thresholds. Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America, 103, 2177-2184. 
- Goold, J.C. 1996 Acoustic assessment of populations of common dolphin Delphinus 
delphis in conjunction with seismic survey ing. Journal of the Marine Biological 
Association of the United Kingdom, 76, 811-820. 
- Gordon, J., Swift, R., Gillespie, D., Chappel. O , Lewis, T., & Belford, R. 2000 The 
role of Acoustic Monitoring in minimising the impact of Seismic Acquisition on Cetaceans. In EAGE, Glasgow. 
- Greene, C.R. 1987a. Acoustic studies of underwater noise and localization of whale 
cells. Sect. 2 In: Responses of bowhead whales to an offshore drilling operation in the 
Alaskan Beaufort Sea, autumn 1986. Rep. From LGL Ltd., King City, Ont., and Greeneridge Sciences Inc., Santa Barbara, CA, for Shell Western E & P Inc, Anchorage, AK. 128p. 
- Hall JD; Johnson CS (1972) Auditory thres holds of a killer whale Orcinus orca 
Linnaeus. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 51 515-517 
- Hanggi, E.B; Schusterman, R.J (1994) Underwater acoustic displays and individual variation in male harbor seals, Phoca vitulina. Animal Behaviour, 48 1275-1283 
- Hawkins AD; Myrberg AA (1983) Hearing and communication underwater. In Lewis B 
(Ed.) Bioacoustics a comparative approac h. Academic Press, Sydney 149-180 
- Hawkins, A.D (1986) Underwater sound and fish behaviour. In: Pitcher, T.J (ed), The 
Behaviour of Teleost Fish. Groom Helm Ltd., Kent 114-149 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 143
 - Hayes McKenzie Partnership, Hoare, Lea & Partners, Renewable Energy Systems 
Ltd. (1996) Objective and Subjective Rating of Tonal Noise Radiated From Uk Wind 
Farms. ETSU W/13/00354/44/REP 
- Hayes, M. and Stevenson, R (1996) The Mynydd Y Cemmaes Wind Farm Impact Study: Volume IIC Noise Impact: Final Report. ETSU W/13/00300/REP/2C  
- Hayes, M. D (1996) The Measurement of Noise from Wind Farms and Background Noise Levels. Proceedings of Internoise 96 471-478 
- Hill, S.H. (1978). A guide to the effects of underwater shock waves in arctic marine mammals and fish. Pacific Mar. Sci. Rep.78-26. Inst. Ocean Sciences, Patricia Bay, Sidney, B.C. 50 pp. 
- Hoare, Lea & Partners (1996) Objective and Subjective Rating of Tonal Noise Radiated from UK Wind Farms: Part 2. ETSU W/32/00228/55/REP 
- Houser DS, Helweg DA, Moore PW (1999) Classification of dolphin echolocation clicks by energy and frequency distributions. Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America 106 1579-1585 
- James Howden Group Technology (1993) The Influence of Noise of the Design of 
Horizontal Axis Wind Turbines. ETSU W/13/00190/REP 
- Johnson CS (1967) Sound detection thresholds in marine mammals. In: Travolga WN, (ed.), Marine bio-acoustics. Pergamon, Oxford 247-260 
- Kalmijn, A. J. (1988): Hydrodynamic and Acoustic Field Detection. In: Sensory Biology Of Aquatic Animals (eds. J. Atema, R.R. Fay, A.N. Popper, W.N. Tavolga) pp. 83-130. New York. Springer-Verlag.  
- Kalmijn, A. J. (1994): Near-field acoustic detection. I. Physical principles and 
biological relevance. Sensory Systems 8(3-4), pp. 202-209. 
- Kamminga C; Weirsma H (1981) Investigations on cetacean sonar II. Acoustical 
similarities and differences in odontocete sonar signals. Aquatica Mammalia 8 41-62  
- Karlsen HE (1992) Infrasound sensitivity in pl aice (Plueronectes platessa). Journal of 
Experimental Biology 171 173-187  
- Kastak D; Schusterman RJ (1995) Aerial and underwater hearing thresholds for 100Hz pure tones in two pinniped species. In: Kastelein RA; Thomas JA; Nachtigall PE (eds.), Sensory systems of aquatic mammals.. De Spil Publishers, Woerden, The Netherlands  
- Kastak, D. & Schusterman, R.J. 1996 Temporary threshold shift in a harbour seal (Phoca vitulina). Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 100, 1905-1908. 
- Kastak, D., Schusterman, R.J., Southall, B.L., & Reichmuth, C.J. 1999 Underwater temporary threshold shift induced by octave-band noise in three species of pinniped. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 106, 1142-1148. 
- Ketten, D.R. 1995. Estimates of blast injury and acoustic trauma zones for marine mammals from underwater explosions. In S ensory system of Aquatic Mammals (eds 
R.A. Kastelein, J.A. Thomas & P.E. Nachtigall), pp. 391 - 406. De Spil Publishers, Woerden, The Netherlands. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 144
 - Ketten DR (1994) Functional analysis of whale ears: Adaptations for underwater 
hearing. IEEE Proceedings of the Sympos ium on Underwater Acoustics 1 264-270  
- Ketten DR; Lien J; Todd S (1993) Blast injury in humpback whale ears: Evidence and 
implications. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 94 1849-1850  
- Ketten DR; Wartzog D (1990) Three dimensional reconstruction of the dolphin ear. 
P81-105. In: Kastelein RA; Thomas JA (eds) Sensory abilities of cetaceans/laboratory 
and field evidence.. Plenum, New York.  
- Kinsler, L. E., Frey, A. R., Coppens, A. B. and Sanders, J. V (2000) Fundamentals of Acoustics, 4th edition. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.  
- Knudsen FR; Enger PS; Sand O (1992) Awareness reactions and avoidance 
responses to sound in juvenile Atlantic salm on, Salmo salar L. Journal of Fish Biology 
40 523-534  
- Knudsen FR; Enger PS; Sand O (1994) Avoidance response to low frequency sound in downstream migrating Atlantic salmon smolt, Salmo salar. Journal of Fish Biology 
45 227-233 
- Lawson, M. V. and Fiddes, S. P (1994) Design Prediction Model for Wind Turbine 
Noise. ETSU W/13/00317/REP  
- Legerton, M. L (1996) Recommendations of the Working Group on Wind Turbine Noise. Proceedings of Internoise 96 2547-2552  
- Legerton, M. L., Manley, D. M. J. P., Sargent, J. W., Snow, D. J. and Styles, P (1996) Low Frequency Noise & Vibration Levels at  a Modern Wind Farm. Proceedings of 
Internoise 96 459-462 
- Lesage V; Barrette C; Kingsley MCS; Sjare B (1999) The effect of vessel noise on the 
vocal behaviour of belugas in the St. Lawrence Estuary, Canada. Marine Mammal 
Science 15 65-84 
- Lien, J., Todd, S., Stevick, P., Marques, F., and Ketten, D. 1993b. The reaction of humpback whales to underwater explosions: Orientation, movements, and behaviour. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 94(3, Pt. 2):1849. 
- Ljungblad DK; Scoggins PD; Gilmartin WG (19 82) Auditory thresholds of a captive 
eastern Pacific bottlenosed dolphin, Tursiops spp. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 72 1726-1729 
- Lowson, J. V (1996) A New Approach to Wind Turbine Noise Measurement. 
Proceedings of Internoise 96  143-148  
- Lowson, M. V (1996) Aerodynamic Noise of Wind Turbines. Proceedings of Internoise 
96  479-484  
- Malakoff D (2001) A roaring debate over ocean noise. Science 291 576-578  
- Malme, C.I., Miles, C.W., Clark, P., Tyack, P., & Bird, J.E. 1984. Investigations of the 
potential effects of underwater noise from petroleum industry activities on migrating 
gray whale behaviour/Phase II: January 1984 migration, Rep. No. BBN Rep. 5851, Cambridge, MA. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 145
 - Malme, C.I., Miles, P.R., Clark, C.W., Tyack, P., & Bird, J.E. 1983. Investigations of 
the potential effects of underwater noise from petroleum industry activities on 
migrating gray whale behavior., Rep. No. BBN Report 5366. Bolt Beranek & Newman Inc, Cambridge, MA. 
- Malme, C.I., Smith, P.W. & Miles, P. R. 1986. Characterisation of geophysical 
acoustic survey sounds. Mierals. Management Service, LA, California. Rep. 
OCS/MMS- 86/0032 
- Malme, C.I., Würsig, B., Bird, J.E., and Ty ack, P. 1988. Observations of feeding gray 
whale responses to controlled industrial noise exposure. P. 55-73 In: W.M. Sackinger et al. (eds), Port and ocean engineering under arctic conditions, vol. II. Geophys. 
Inst., Univ. Alaska, Fairbanks. 111p. 
- Maniwa Y (1976) Attraction of bony fish, squid and crab by sound. In: Schuijf A; 
Hawkins AD (eds.), Sound reception in fish. Elsevier, New York  271-283  
- Mann DA; Lu Z, Hastings MC, Popper AN (1998) Detection of ultrasonic tones and 
simulated dolphin echolocation clicks by a teleost fish, the American shad (Alosa 
sapidisima). Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 104 562-568  
- Mate B (1993) Experiments with acousti c harassment systems to limit seal 
movements. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 94 1828  
- Mate, B.R., Stafford, K.M., & Ljungblad, D.K. 1994 A change in sperm whale 
(Physeter macrocephalus) distribution correlated to seismic surveys in the Gulf of 
Mexico. In Proceedings of the 128th Meeting of the Acoustical Society of America, Vol. 96, pp. 3268-3269, Texas. 
- McCaulay, R.D. 1994. Seismic surveys. P.  19-121 In: J.M. Swan, J.M. Neff and P.C. 
Young (eds.), Environmental implications of offshore oil and gas developments in 
Australia/The findings of an independent scientific review. Austral. Petrol. Explor. Assoc., Sydney, N.S.W. 696p. 
- McCauley, R.D., Jenner, M.N., Jenner, C., McCabe, K.A., & Murdoch, J. 1998 The response of humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae) to offshore seismic survey: 
Preliminary results of observations about  a working seismic vessel and experimental 
exposures. APPEA Journal, 692-706. 
- McDonald, M.A., Hildebrand, J.A., & Webb, S.C. 1995 Blue and fin whales observed on a seafloor array in the Northeast Pacific. Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America, 98, 712-721. 
- McDonald, M.A., Hildebrand, J.A., Webb, S., Dorman, L., and Fox, C.G. 1993. 
Vocalizations of blue and fin whales during a midocean ridge airgun experiment. J.Acoust. Soc. Am. 94(3, Pt.2):1849. 
- Micheal J (1999) Sounding the Depths: Supertankers, Sonar and the rise of 
Undersea Noise. Natural Resources Defence Council Report. 
- Miller, P.J.O., Biassoni, N., Samuels, A ., & Tyack, P.L. 2000 Whale songs lengthen in 
response to sonar. Nature, 405, 903-903. 
- Mitson, R.B. (1995, ed.): Underwater Noise of Research Vessels. ICES Cooperative 
Research Report No. 209, Copenhagen 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 146
 - Mohl, B. 1981. Masking effects of Noise; their distribion in time and space. In The 
question of sound from icebreaker operations: Proceedings from a workshop (ed 
N.M. Peterson), pp. 259-266. Arctic Pilot Project, Calgary, Alberta  
- Moore, P.W.B and Schusterman, R.J. 1987. Audiometric assessment of northern fur 
seals, Callorhinus ursinus. Mar. Mamm. Sci. 3(1):31-53. 
- Møhl, B. 1968. Auditory sensitivity of the common seal in air and water. J. Aud. Res. 8(1):27-38. 
- Myrberg, A.A (1981) Sound Communication and Interception in Fish. In: Tavolga, A; Popper, A.N; Fay, R.R (eds), Hearing and Sound Communication in Fishes. Pringer-Verlag, New York  395-452.  
- Myrick, A.C., Cassano, E.R., & Oliver, C.W. 1990 Potential for physical injury, other than hearing damage, to dolphins from seal bombs used in the yellowfin tuna purse-seine fishery: Results from open-water tests, Admin. Rep. LJ-90-08. U.S. National Mar. Fish.Serv,. La Jolla, CA. 
- National Engineering Laboratory (1999) No ise Immission from Wind Turbines. ETSU 
W/13/00503/REP 
- Nedwell, J R and Turnpenny A W H. (1998a). The use of a generic weighted frequency scale in estimating environmental effect. Proceedings of the Workshop on Seismics and Marine Mammals, 23rd-25th June 1998, London. UK. 
- Nedwell, J R, Turnpenny, A W H , and Lambert, D (1998b). Guiding fish with sound, the acoustics of fish behavioural barrier design. 128th Annual Meeting of the American Fisheries Society Conference, Baltimore, USA August 1998. 
- Nedwell J. R., Needham K., Turnpenny A. W. H. and Thompson D (1999). 
Measurement of sound during a 3D seismic su rvey in blocks 14/14a of the North Sea. 
Subacoustech report to Texaco plc, reference 356R0108, 26 February 1999. Subacoustech Ltd, Chase Mill, Wincheste r Road, Bishop’s Waltham, Hampshire 
SO32 1AH, United Kingdom. 
- Nedwell, J.R, Turnpenny, A.W.H, Lovell, J, Langworthy, J, Howell, D. & Edwards, B. 
(2003) The effects of underwater noise from  coastal piling on salmon (Salmo salar) 
and brown trout (Salmo trutta). Subacoustech report to the Environment Agency, reference 576R0113. Dec. 2003. Subacoustech Ltd, Chase Mill, Winchester Road, Bishop’s Waltham, Hampshire SO32 1AH, United Kingdom. 
- Nedwell, J.R and Howell, D. M. (2004a) A review of offshore windfarm related noise sources. Subacoustech report to COWRIE, reference 544R0310. May 2004. Subacoustech Ltd, Chase Mill, Wincheste r Road, Bishop’s Waltham, Hampshire 
SO32 1AH, United Kingdom. 
- Nedwell J.R. , Edwards B. , Turnpenny A.W.H. and Gordon J. (2004b) Fish and 
Marine Mammal Audiograms: A summary of available information. Subacoustech 
report to Joint Industry Group, reference 534R0213. May 2004. Subacoustech Ltd, Chase Mill, Winchester Road, Bishop’s Waltham, Hampshire SO32 1AH, United Kingdom. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 147
 - Nestler JM; Ploskey GR; Pickens J; Menezes J; Schilt C (1992) Response of 
blueback herring to high frequency sound and implications for reducing entrainment 
at hydropower dams. North American Journal of Fish Management 12 667-683  
- NRC 2000 Marine Mammals and Low-Frequency Sound Progress Since 1994 
National Academic Press, Washington DC. 
- Offut. G.C (1970) Acoustic stimulus perception by the American Lobster Homarus americanus. Experentia 26 1276-1278  
- Olsen K; Angell J; Petterson F; Lovick A (1982) Observed fish reactions to a surveying vessel with special reference to herring, cod, capellin and polar cod. In: FAO 1982 Symposium on fisheries acoustics. FIRM/R300  131-138  
- Olsen K; Angell J; Petterson F; Lovick A (1982) Quantitative estimations of the influence of fish behaviour on acoustically determined fish abundance. In: FAO 1982 Symposium on fisheries acoustics. FIRM/R300  139-145  
- Packard A; Kalsen HE; Sand O (1990) Low frequency hearing in cephalopods. 
Journal of Comparative Physiology 166 501-505 
- Pearson WH; Skalski JR; Malme CI (1992) Ef fects of sound from geophysical survey 
device on behaviour of captive rockfish (Sebastes spp.). Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic science 49 1343-1356 
- Perry, E.A. & D. Renouf. 1988. Further studies of the role of harbour seal (P. vitulina) 
pup vocalizations in preventing the separation of mother-pup pairs. Can. J. Zool. 
66(4):934-938. 
- Popper AN (2000) Hair cell heterogeneity and ultrasonic hearing: recent advances in understanding fish hearing. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London Series B - Biological Sciences 355 1277-1280  
- Potter, J. and Delory, E (1998) Noise Sources in the Sea & the Impact for Those Who 
Live There. Acoustics & Vibration Asia 1998 Conference Proceedings  56-71 
- Renewable Energy Systems Ltd (1994) No ise Assessment at Coal Clough. ETSU 
W/13/00354/037/REP 
- Renouf,  D., G. Galway & L. Gaborko. 1980. Evidence for echolocation in harbour 
seals. J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. U.K. 60(4):1039-1042. 
- Richardson, W.J., Greene, C.R.J., Malm e, C.I., & Thomson, D.H. 1995 Marine 
Mammals and Noise. Academic Press, Inc., San Diego, CA. 
- Richardson, W.J; Green, C.R; Malme, C.L; Thomson, D.H; Moore, S.E; Wursig. B (1991) Effects of noise on marine mammals. OCS study MMS 90- 0093 Rep. From LGL Ecological Research Assoc. Inc. Texas for US Mineral Management Service. Atlantic OCS Reg, Herndon, VA.. NTIS PB91-168914    
- Richardson. W.J; Malme, C.L (1993) Man-made noise and behaviour responses in: 
Burns J.J; Montague. J.J; Cowles. C.J. (eds), the bowhead whale. Spec. Publ. 2. 
Soc.. Mar. Mammial. Lawrence, KS.   

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 148
 - Ridgway, S., Carder, D., Schlundt, C., Kamoinick, T., & Elsberry, W. 1997 Temporary 
shift in delphinoid masked hearing threshol ds. Journal of the Acoustic Society of 
America, 102, 3102. 
- Ridgway, S.H. & Carder, D.A. 1997 Hearing deficits measured in some Tursiops truncatus, and discovery of a deaf/mute dolphin. Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America, 101, 590-594. 
- Schevill, W.E; Watkins, W.A; Ray (1963) Underwater sounds of pinnipeds. Science 
141 50-53  
- Schultz, K.W; Cato, DH; Corkeron, P.J (1995) Low-Frequency Narrow-Band Sounds Produced By Bottle-Nosed Dolphins. Marine Mammal Science 11 503-509. 
- Shepherd, K. P. and Hubbard, H. H (1991) Physical Characteristics and Perception of Low Frequency Noise form Wind Turbines. Noise Control Engineering Journal 36 1 5-15  
- Simmonds, M.P; Dolman, S (1999) A note on the vulnerability of cetaceans to 
acoustic disturbance. International Whaling Commission. IWC51/E15 
- Skalski JR; Pearson WH; Malme CI (1992) Effects of sounds from geophysical survey 
device on catch-per-unit-effort in a hook-and-line fishery for rockfish (Sebastes spp.). Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Science 49 1357-1365  
- SMRU (2001) Behavioural and physiological response of seals to seismic surveys. 
Sea Mammal Research Unit Website: http://smub.st-and.ac.uk/.    
- Snow, D. J (1997) Low Frequency Noise and Vibrations Measurement at a Modern 
Wind Farm. ETSU W/13/00392/REP   
- Sorensen, P.W., Medved, R.J., Hyman, M.A.M. and Winn, H.E. 1984. Distribution and 
abundance of cetaceans in the vicinity of human activities along the continental shelf 
of the northwestern Atlantic. Mar. Environ. Res. 12(1):69-81. 
- Southall, B. L., R. J. Schusterman, et al. 2000. “Masking in three pinnipeds: Underwater, low-frequency critical ratios.” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 108(3): 1322-1326. 
- Stone, C.J. 2000. Cetacean observations during seismic surveys in 1998. Joint Nature Conservancy Committee. Report No. 301. 
- Styles, P Low Frequency Wind Turbine Noise And Vibration. Report For Etsu/Powergen Pcl 
- Swift, R.J., Butler, J., Gozalbes, P., & Gordon, J. 1999 The effects of seismic airgun arrays on the acoustic behaviour and distribution of sperm whale and other cetaceans in the north east Atlantic / Atlantic Frontier. In European Cetacean Soceity 13th Annual Conference (ed P.G.H. Evans), pp. 104. European Cetacean Society. 
- Terhune, J. & S. Turnbull. 1995. Variation in the psychometric functions and hearing 
thresholds of  a harbour seal.  In: R.A. Kastelein, J.A. Thomas & P.E. Nachtigall 
(eds).  Sensory systems of aquatic mammals. De Spil Publishers, Woerden, The Netherlands. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 149
 - The Working Group on Noise form Wind Turbines (1996) The Assessment and 
Rating of Noise from Wind Farms. ETSU-R-97 
- Thomas, J., Moore, P., Withrow, R. and Stoermer. 1990b. Underwater audiogram of a 
Hawaiian monk seal (Monachus schauinslandi ). J. Acoust. Soc. Am 87(1):417-420.  
- Thompson, D., Sjoberg, M., Bryant, M.E., Lov ell, P., & Bjorge, A. 1998. Behavioural 
and physiological responses of harbour (Phoca vitulina) and grey (Halichoerus 
grypus) seals to seismic surveys., Rep. No. Report to European Commission of BROMMAD project. MAS2 C7940098. 
- Thompson, T.J; Winn, H.E; Perkins, P.J (1979) Mysticete sounds. In: Winn, H.E; Olla, B.L (eds.), Behaviour of Marine Animals, Vol. 3: Cetaceans. Plenum Press, New 
York. 
- Turnbull, S.D. & Terhune, J.M., 1993, repetition enhances hearing detection 
thresholds in a harbor seal (Phoca-vitulina). Can. J. Zool, 71: 926-932. 
- Turnpenny, A.W.H. & Nedwell, J.R. 1994. The effect on marine fish, diving mammals 
and birds of underwater sound generated by seismic surveys. Fawley Aquatic 
Research Laboratories Ltd. Consultancy report for UKOOA, FRC 089/94:40pp. 
- Valdemarsen, J.W. 1979. Behaviour aspects of fish in relation to oil platforms in the 
North  Sea. ICES C.M., B:27. 
- Verboom WC; Kastelein RA (1995) Acoustic signals by harbour porpoises (Phocoena 
phocoena). In: Nachtigall PE; Lien J; Au WWL; Read AJ (eds.). Harbour porpoises - 
laboratory studies to reduce bycatch.. De Spil Publishers, Woerden, The Netherlands. 
- Wartzok, D., Watkins, W.A., Würsig, B. and Malme, C.I. 1989. Movements and behaviours of bowhead whales in response to repeated exposures to noises 
associated with industrial activities in the Beaufort Sea. Report from Purdue Univ., 
Fort Wayne, IN, for Amoco Production Co., Anchorage, AK. 228p 
- Wenz, G. (1962). Acoustic ambient noise in the ocean; spectra and sources. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, N34, pp 1936. 
- WDCS (2001) UK Wales and Dolphins. The Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society 
at http://www.wdcs.org/dan/publishing.nsf/allweb/D40BD8FF24FCD942802569 
CF004381F3 
- Yelverton, J.T., Richmond, D.R., Hicks, W., Sanders, K. & Fletcher, E.R. (1972). Safe distances from underwater explosions for mammals and birds. DNA 3114T, Rep. 
From Lovelace Foundation for Medica l Educ. and Res., Alburquerque, NM, for 
Defense Nuclear Agency, Washington, DC. 67 pp. NTIS AD-766952.

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 150
 Appendix E 
Standards for Environmental Impact Assessments Impacts of offshore wind turbines 
on the marine environment [Ref 44]  
Authors: Issued by Bundesamt für Seesch ifffahrt und Hydrographie (BSH) and others  
Publisher / Date: Federal Maritime and Hydrographic Agency (BSH) / 2003-2-25  
Any potential adverse impacts of the projected facilities on the marine environment have to 
be assessed within the framework of the approval procedure for offshore wind farms in the 
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). In addi tion to following the amendment to the 
Seeanlagenverordnung (effective 5 April 2002), an EIA is now mandatory for most projects, 
according to Article 2a of the Seeanlagenverordnung. In the Standards for Environmental 
Impact Assessments, information is provided to applicants on the scope of investigations required by the approval authority, with all relevant details and explanations. The Standards for Environmental Impact Assessments constitu te a framework of the thematic and technical 
minimum requirements for marine environmental surveys and monitoring in order to assess 
compliance with Article 3, Seeanlagenverordnung. 
The standard has been established based on both the general increased knowledge and 
experience provide by the German Marine Monitoring programme in the North and Baltic 
Seas, and the Helsinki Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area, and the OSPAR Convention for the Protection of the North Sea and North-East 
Atlantic. 
The German EIA standard is divided into two parts: a set of general conditions (Part A), and 
a technical code of practice (Part B). The main features of this standard are represented 
below. 
Chapter 2 of Part A deals with possible adverse impacts of offshore wind farms on the 
marine environment. Various risks have been ident ified for the construction, operation and 
decommissioning phases. These risks involve: 
• Visual and acoustic effects; 
• Adverse impacts of specific use of vehicle and machinery; 
• Loss of habitats (e.g. resting and feeding areas) or barrier effects (e.g. on birds during 
migration, or blocking of paths between different resting and/or feeding areas); 
• Pollutant emissions; 
• Turbidity of water or changed sediment distribution and dynamics; 
• etc. 
The objective is given as the investigation of  impacts on environmental features that should 
be protected (i.e. fish, benthos, birds, and mammals), by means of: 
• Determining their spatial distribution and temporal variability in the pre-construction 
phase (baseline survey); 
• Monitoring the effects of construction, operation and removal; 
• Evaluating the monitoring results, with the baseline data serving as a basis for 
comparison; and 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 151
 • Conducting within the preliminary fish studies a quantitative determination of the 
near-bottom stationary fish species to the extent that suitable methods are available. 
In a correct evaluation the data collected must be correct and comparable. Those 
participating in the surveys have to be adequately qualified and able to prove that they have 
acquired sufficient experience. The names of  the observers have to be noted on the survey 
forms. 
A distinction is made in terms of the degree of progress of a particular project, as presented 
below.  
“Pilot phase 
Large-scale wind farm projects presently have to be preceded by a pilot phase to establish whether the authorisation requirements are met. Prior to and after the pilot phase, baseline surveys and monitoring have to be carried out following notification of the probable scope of the investigations based on the Standards for Environmental Impact Assessments. The 
scope of the monitoring will depend on the results of the baseline surveys, taking into 
account experience gained in the process. 
Expansion phase 
For every expansion step following the pilo t phase, baseline surveys and monitoring in 
accordance with the Standards for Environm ental Impact Assessments will be mandatory. 
Modifications required at individual sites will be laid down in the notification of the scope of 
monitoring. 
Removal phase 
The wind turbines including their foundations have to be removed completely, with subsequent onshore disposal. In principle, the monitoring requirements during this phase 
correspond to those in the construction phase, as specified in the Standards for Environmental Impact Assessments. Possible environmental impacts depend mainly on the 
dismantling techniques used. Dismantling techniques are expected to undergo major 
developments over the coming decades, as nu merous oil and gas platforms are due for 
removal. Therefore, the scope of monitoring will be determined at a later date.”  
Moreover a photo-realistic simulation (text and visualisation) of the landscape affected by the 
project has to be presented for projects closer than 50 km from the nearest point on the 
coast within the framework of the baseline survey preceding the pilot phase. 
Chapter 10 deals with risk analysis. A state-of-the art risk analysis assessing the probability 
of a ship collision with a wind turbine, including an example study of the consequences of a 
potential pollutant spill has to be presented in the framework of the baseline surveys preceding the pilot phase. The procedure for the implementation and evaluation of studies relating to the construction and operation of offshore wind farms is described in chapter 11 
and shown in the flowchart below: 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 152
  
Fig. 30: Procedure for implementation and evaluation of studies relating to the construction 
and operation of offshore wind farms according to the German EIA standard 
Periods of assessment apply to all project phases (pilot phase, expansion phases) and are 
described in Chapter 12 as follows: 


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 153
 “Baseline survey 
Prior to the start of construction, in accordance with the Standards for Environmental Impact 
Assessments, a baseline survey has to be perfo rmed which covers the investigations made 
during two successive, uninterrupted complete seasonal cycles. One seasonal cycle 
comprises 12 calendar months including the month in which the survey begins. The baseline 
survey remains valid for two complete years. If construction work is not begun in the third year after completion of the baseline survey, the baseline survey should be updated with an 
additional seasonal cycle. Other details regardi ng the follow-up period will be dealt with on an 
individual case basis. 
Construction phase  
The construction phase covers the period from the start of construction work until completion of the construction project. Construction-phas e monitoring has to be performed throughout 
this period. If essential components are put into operation prior to completion of the construction project, operation monitoring in the project section concerned may be started in 
co-ordination with the approval authority. However, it must be ensured that such continued 
construction activities do not have a signific ant impact on the results of operation monitoring. 
The precise time for stopping the construction monitoring will be determined by the approval 
authority in each individual case. 
Operation phase 
The Standards for Environmental Impact Assessments define the operation phase as the phase following the completion of construction work, when the wind turbines are put into 
operation. After the wind farm has become operational, operation monitoring has to be performed for a period of at least three years or, if required, up to five years in the entire project area The end of operation monitoring will be determined by the approval authority in 
each individual case.” 
 Excerpt on assessment areas from  chapter 13 - Assessment areas: 
“Assessment areas in each case are the pr oject area (pilot phase, expansion phases) and 
the reference area. When indicating the size of a project area, the safety zone should not be included. The individual environmental features to be protected require different assessment 
areas in terms of size and location. If the specific conditions in individual cases are such that 
the size of an assessment area does not conform to the requirements for assessment areas as indicated below, such assessment areas have to be adjusted to local conditions in agreement with the approval authority. 
Project area  
Benthos/fish: 
The assessment area has the same size as the project area. 
Birds 
o Ship based counts: 
The assessment area of a project area must cover at least 200km2 in principle. 
The whole project area must always be surrounded by a 2nm wide assessment area.  
o Aerial counts: 
The area including reference area must cover at least 2’000 km2. 
Mammals 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 154
 o Aerial counts: 
The assessment area including the reference area must cover at least 
2’000km2 and  the assessment area must have a rectangular shape. The 
project area should be located in the middle of the assessment area if possible. The distance between the boundaries of the wind farm and those of 
the assessment area must be at least 20 km. 
o Ship-based counts: 
The assessment area has the same size as the assessment area for birds 
(see Birds).  
 
Reference areas  
Reference areas will be used for comparison, to document the condition, in areas not subject to the impact of wind turbines, of the environmental features to be protected within the project area. Reference areas should be located outside the planning areas for later wind 
farm expansion phases and should also be suitable as reference areas for such expansion 
phases. The natural environmental conditions in reference areas (location, current conditions, water depth, sediment properties, sp ecies spectrum, number of individuals) must 
correspond to those in the project area concerned. They must also be of a comparable size 
and distance from the coast. Reference areas should be free of any direct influences from wind turbines. If the reference area chosen for the pilot phase is located within the planning 
area for later expansion phases, the following points must be taken into account: 
o The distance must be large enough to avoid any impacts from pilot phase 
activities. 
o A separate reference area will also be required for the expansion phases 
The individual environmental features to be protected require reference areas of different 
size, location, and quality. 
 
Benthos / fish: 
The size of the reference area should correspond to that of the project area. If the habitat of 
the project area is very heterogeneous (e.g. di fferent sediment properties, hydrography or 
water depth), a reference area should be chosen which has a very similar habitat pattern. If 
such conditions do not exist in a single reference area, the reference area may also be composed of several smaller areas whose habitat patterns, in combination, correspond to 
that in the construction area. The individual areas should be located as close together as 
possible. 
The reference area should be located in the vicinity of the project area but should be largely 
free of any impacts from the construction area. This implies that it must also be outside of the 
propagation range of operational noise from the wind farm. Whether and to what extent wind 
farms affect the individual environmental features to be protected often cannot be determined prior to the operation phase. Therefore, the minimum distance should be 500m for benthos 
(infauna) and 1 km for fish and epifauna. 
Anthropogenic influences in the reference area should be comparable to those in the 
construction area but without the impact of t he construction activities, turbine operation and 
related activities. The location of reference areas for macrozoobenthos and fishes should be 
largely identical. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 155
 Birds 
o Aerial counts 
See project area (see birds at project area). 
o Ship-based counts 
The size of the reference area corresponds to the size of the assessment area 
for the project area. 
Mammals 
o Aerial counts 
See project area (see birds at project area). 
o Ship-based counts 
The size of the reference area corresponds to the size of the assessment area 
for the project area. 
Reporting:  
The results of the baseline surveys and monito ring have to be submitted to the approval 
authority in the form of comprehensible expert reports. The complete raw data and 
investigation documents in their original form should be stored in a suitable way by the applicant or holder of the permit and should be made available in whole or in part to the 
approval authority upon request. Different storage arrangements for the raw data may be 
agreed with the approval authority. The data formats to be used have to be agreed with the approval authority. 
Baseline surveys  
After completion of the baseline surveys, an EIA should be presented to the approval authority. If an EIA has already been made on the basis of a study covering one annual cycle, it has to be supplemented with the data of the second annual cycle. The research data 
should be provided to the approval authority upon request, but not later than the date on 
which the EIA is submitted. If the planning area is located in a National Park or in its vicinity, in a Marine Protected Area or an area that has been classified as ecologically valuable by 
conservation experts, an FFH study must be submitted in addition to the EIA in order to 
obtain approval (Art. 34, BNatSchG – Federal Nature Conservation Act). 
Monitoring  
The monitoring data should be presented to the approval authority once a year, four months after completion of the annual cycle in each case. The monitoring data shall include a documentation of the status before the construction phase and of developments and 
changes during and after the construction phase. On the basis of the monitoring results, the 
approval authority will decide on the type and scope of further investigations. Unless the 
applicant or permit holder in charge of the investigations proposes further investigations differing from the scope of investigations specified in the notification and from the present 
Standards for Environmental Impact Assessmen ts, the existing arrangements and monitoring 
periods specified in the Standards for Environmental Impact Assessments shall continue to apply.” 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 156
  
Part B  of the standards specifically aims on the protection of environmental features. 
Technical details of the investigation and monitoring to be carried out in order to protect benthos, fish, birds, and mammals are provided. The scope and targets of the investigations, 
methods to be used, and the evaluation basis are described for each of the environmental 
features to be protected. 
“Benthos  
The benthos investigations and monitoring comprise:  
• Investigation of the sediment and habitat structure and their dynamics using side 
scan sonar and sediment sampling; 
• Investigation of epifauna using video equipment and beam trawl/dredge; 
• Investigation of infauna by means of grab sampling; 
• Investigation of fouling on piles and foundations; and 
• Investigation of macrophytobenthos, if present in the area investigated. 
During the above investigations, measurements of salinity, temperature and oxygen levels 
have to be carried out at the sea surface and near the bottom in order to obtain a representative picture of the hydrographic situation in the area. 
Additionally, the sediment properties grain size distribution and organic carbon content have 
to be determined per station and throughout the assessment period.  
The investigations should be carried out at the same time as the fish investigations if 
possible, but mutual disturbance should be avoided.  
In homogeneous sandy areas, side-scan sonar surveys have to be carried out with 500m 
spacing. Areas with a heterogeneous sediment structure have to be covered completely by the surveys.  
The results of the sedimentological and benthological investigations should be combined in a 
single study.” 
The results of the sedimentological and benthological investigations should be combined in a 
single study. 
Based on the required investigations and monitoring, explanatory tables concerning targets, 
scope, timing, method and presentation of results for the baseline survey and the monitoring are given within Part B of the standard for several categories. Table 16 shows exemplary one 
table for epifauna-survey element. 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe   
 
 157
 Table 16: Examples of requirements concerning targets, scope, timing, method and 
presentation of results for the Epifauna-survey element of the EIA. 
 
Fish 
Fish surveys and monitoring have to be carried out using bottom trawls and/or beam trawls. 
Additionally, measurements of weather, depth, sa linity, temperature, and oxygen levels have 
to be made and recorded.  
Resting and migratory birds (avifauna)  
Surveying of foraging, moulting and resting birds should be undertaken, along with recording 
of bird migration and other flight movements in the survey area (radar surveys and visual 
observations/recording of flight calls). 
 
Marine mammals  
“The investigations and monitoring relating to marine mammals comprise studies of their 
abundance and distribution, possibly their habitat use, as well as noise emission and 
immission studies.  
Sightings from transects allow conclusions as to the abundance and distribution of marine 
mammals in the assessment area. 
Stationary click detectors allow continuous  monitoring of the habitat use of harbour 
porpoises. Click detectors have to be deployed in  addition to ship and aerial surveys as a 
monitoring basis. 


Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 158
 During the construction and operation of wind turbines, a broadband noise spectrum 
(including structure-borne and airborne noise) is likely to be emitted into the water. The occurrence of interferences cannot be ruled out. Measurements of immissions at particular locations and of emissions at the noise source should be made during the construction and 
operation phases. 
Not only emitted frequencies but also noise char acteristics (impulsiveness/tonality) have to 
be recorded. Via propagation computations, predictions of the expected noise pollution have 
to be made using noise emission data of the turbines and suitable models.” 
 Topics especially concerned are: 
• Abundance, distribution 
• Habitat use 
• Emission and immission of waterborne noise. 
 

  Greenpeace 
 
 159
 Table of Figures 
Fig. 1: Offshore wind power development in northern Europe. [Ref 3].................................. 18  
Fig. 2: Offshore wind power development in the United Kingdom and Ireland. [Ref 3] ......... 20  
Fig. 3: Offshore wind power development in south-west Europe. [Ref 3].............................. 21  
 Fig. 4: Electrical transport network in the countries around the North Sea [Ref 49 ]. The red 
lines indicate 380kV grid. The small dots on the lines (open circles) indicate network 
nodes. The black and coloured squares and the larger coloured dots indicate power 
plants. ........................................................................................................................ .... 29  
 Fig. 5: Electrical transmission network in the countries around the Baltic Sea. The red lines 
indicate the 380kV grid, the blue lines the 300kV grid and the green lines the 220kV grid. The small black dots on the lines indicate grid nodes. The black and blue 
rectangles and the larger black dots indicate power plants [Ref 49
].............................. 30  
Fig. 6: Electrical transport network in northern Germany [Ref 49]. The red lines indicate the 
380kV grid, the green lines the 220kV grid. The small open circles indicate grid nodes. The black and coloured squares and the larger coloured dots indicate power plants. .. 31
 
Fig. 7: Offshore wind projects currently in the approval phase in the German Bight. In the first 
(pilot) phase, the depicted areas will only partially be occupied by wind turbines, totalling 
a capacity of 3–4G W .  I n  a  s e c ond phase a much larger number of turbines is planned, 
with a total capacity of more than 20 GW [Ref 8]........................................................... 33  
Fig. 8: Investigation of sediment through side sc an sonar. The wreck of a ship is visible at the 
left-hand side. ................................................................................................................ 44 
Fig. 9: Transmission scheme for offshore wind power. ......................................................... 48  
Fig. 10: Schematic diagram of the HVAC grid connection..................................................... 49  
Fig. 11: Schematic diagram of the HVDC grid connection. ................................................... 51  
Fig. 12: HVDC-thyristor technology for energy transport by rectifier and inverter in one 
direction. ..................................................................................................................... ... 52  
Fig. 13: Pulse width modulation inverter output voltage ........................................................ 53  
Fig. 14: Example of a HVDC cable (source: Nexans)............................................................ 54  
Fig. 15: Trade-off between operational costs of HVDC and HVAC cables as function of the 
transmission distance [Ref 9]......................................................................................... 56  
Fig. 16: Costs of laying sea cables depending on trench depth. ........................................... 59  
Fig. 17: A large suction hopper dredger, excavating sediment at different sea depths. The 
excavated sediment is pumped into the sh ip’s cargo bay and is later deposited in a 
different sea area........................................................................................................... 61  
Fig. 18: Jet trenching with mass flow excavation................................................................... 62  
Fig. 19: A remote operated vehicle to burry the submarine cable by jet trenching................ 62  
Fig. 20: Burial sledge for submarine cables (a: cable inlet; b: pumps; c: sword with nozzles, 
able to be lowered to different depth; d: sledge runners)............................................... 63  
Fig. 21: Burial sledge for laying cable in shallow water and mud flats................................... 64  
Fig. 22: Example of offshore wind farm site under development (yellow), the actual baseline 
and wind farm relevant EIA area (green, incl. yellow) as well as the EIA-reference site (blue). Transect route shown in brown........................................................................... 67
 
Fig. 23: Magnetic field around a parallel bipolar c able, with currents in opposite directions. At 
a certain distance the resulting magnetic field is zero, due to the superposition of the 
two counter-rotating magnetic fields. ............................................................................. 71  
Fig. 24: Magnetic field around a concentric cable, with opposite currents in the inner and 
outer conductors. The resulting magnetic field is zero, due to the superposition of the two counter-rotating magnetic fields. ............................................................................. 72
 
Fig. 25: A comparison of peak intensities in the frequency spectrum of noise for selected 
anthropogenic, underwater noise sources. The sound pressure level is depicted versus 
the frequency of the emitted noise................................................................................. 73  
Fig. 26: Vibration, noise and other key interactions influencing the effects of offshore wind 
farms on marine wildlife. ................................................................................................ 82  

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 160
 Fig. 27: Vision of a new high voltage ‘super grid’ to transmit wind power through Europe. See 
[Ref 50]....................................................................................................................... .... 83  
Fig. 28: Different dynamic responses due to different foundations and forces. Picture taken 
out of the report............................................................................................................ 11 3 
Fig. 29: Shipping traffic in the German Bay as important parameter during risk assessment 
and calculation ............................................................................................................. 114  
Fig. 30: Procedure for implementation and evaluation of studies relating to the construction 
and operation of offshore wind farms according to the German EIA standard ............ 152  
 
List of Tables 
Table 1: CO 2 eq emission reduction targets of several EU Member States by comparison to 
1990 levels.................................................................................................................... .1 5 
Table 2: Proportion of total electricity to be generated by renewable energy sources by 2010, 
according to the 2001 European RES-E Directive......................................................... 16  
Table 3: Latest EWEA targets................................................................................................ 22  
Table 4: Offshore wind energy projects so far completed within the EU. [Ref 4]................... 23  
Table 5: Offshore wind energy projects in Europe: the numbers correspond to those shown in 
Fig. 1 - Fig. 3. The red and orange colored rows are representing completed projects as well as such under construction. The yellow and rose-colored rows are representing approved projects, whereas the white and blue colored rows are representing planned projects. [Ref 3].............................................................................................................. 27
 
Table 6: Overview on the basic differences between HVAC and HVDC systems. ................ 48  
Table 7: Maximum voltage and transfer capacities of actual AC sea cables......................... 50  
Table 8: Transmission capacity of an HVDC system  with a bipolar concentric cable and with 
two separate cables. ...................................................................................................... 55  
Table 9: Comparison of the technical characte ristics of the different transmission systems. 56  
Table 10: Comparison of the two main trench digging methods............................................ 60  
Table 11: Summary on research topics, frequency and applicatory genre. The background 
colours indicate the relation to the different chapters, 5.1.1 (yellow), 5.1.2 (blue) and 5.1.3 (green) and their corresponding Appendices A, B and C...................................... 70
 
Table 12: Summary of effects of different impulses on terrestrial mammals diving beneath the 
water surface.................................................................................................................. 74 
Table 13: Calculated ranges for significant avoidance reaction by various species. ............. 75  
Table 14: Research projects in Europe with no evaluation performed on the report ........... 119  
Table 15: Sources of basic data revised, evaluated or incorporated within the NABU study
............................................................................................................................... ...... 135  
Table 16: Examples of requirements concerning targets, scope, timing, method and 
presentation of results for the Epifauna-survey element of the EIA. ............................ 157  

  Greenpeace 
 
 161
 Bibliography 
Ref 1 Sea Wind Europe; Snodin, H.; Garrad Hassan and Partners Ltd; Greenpeace, 
London, March 2004 
Ref 2 Wind Power Targets for Europe: 75’000 MW by 2010; EWEA Briefing; October 
2003 
Ref 3 Operation Offshore; Lönker, O.; Neue Energie 12/2004; Bundesverband 
Windenergie; Osnabrück 2004 
Ref 4 Operation Offshore; Lönker, O.; New Energy 01/2005; Bundesverband Wind-
energie; Osnabrück 2005 
Ref 5 Sea Wind Europe; Snodin, H. (GH Ltd.); Greenpeace; London March 2004 Ref 6 Fishing and submarine cables working together; Stephen C. Drew and Alan G. 
Hopper.; International Cable Protection Committee; 15.April 1996 
Ref 7 Netzverstärkungs-Trassen zur Übertragung von Windenergie: Freileitung oder 
Kabel?; Heinrich Brakelmann, Universität Duisburg-Essen; Rheinberg, October 2004 
Ref 8 Maßnahmen zur Vermeidung und Verminderung negativer ökologischer 
Auswirkungen bei der Netzanbindung und –integration von Offshore-Windparks; 
Schreiber, Gellermann, Gerdes; Rehfeldt; Bramsche 15.04.2004 
Ref 9 Netzanbindungs-Konzepte für Offshore-Windparks, Rosendahl, F. (Alstom) 
(2003), 2. BMU-Offshore Workshop, 24.04.2003, Hannover  
Ref 10 Bundesamt für Seeschifffahrt und Hydographie, 
http://www.bsh.de/de/Meeresnutzung /Wirtschaft/CONTIS-
Informationssystem/ContisKarten/No rdseeOffshoreWindparks Pilotgebiete.pdf  
Ref 11 Monitoring van vogels op het NSW; N.Jeurink & E. Dönszelmann (Tauw); 2002 Ref 12 WT-BIRD. A novel bird impact detection system; Verhoef, J.P. , C.A. Westra, 
H.Korterink, A.Curvers; Petten, 2002 (ECN Report ECN-RX--02-055) 
Ref 13 Offshore Wind Energy and Noise Monitoring; J.P.Verhoef, C.A. Westra, R.J. 
Nijdam, H.Korterink, P.J. Eecen; ECN research Centre of the Netherlands 
Ref 14 An Assessment Of The Environmental Effects Of Offshore Wind Farms; Etsu 
W/35/00543/Rep; UK Department of Trade and Industry; CROWN 2000 
Ref 15 Planning Policy Guidance Note 22; Renewable Energy; Department of the 
Environment; Welsh Office; February 1993 
Ref 16 Marine Mammals and Noise; W J Richardson, C R Grenne Jr, C I Halme, D H 
Thomas; Academic Press, California, 1995 
Ref 17 Technical report produced for Strategic Environmental Assessment – SEA2: 
Background Information On Marine Mammals Relevant To Sea2; P S Hammond, J C D Gordon, K Grellier, A J Hall, S P Northridge, D Thompson & J Harwood; SMRU, August 2001 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 162
 Ref 18 Programm für naturschutzrelevante Begleituntersuchungen an Offshore-
Windenergieanlagen; Kube, J.; Unveröff. Gutachten im Auftrage des 
Bundesamtes für Naturschutz und des Bundesministeriums für Umwelt, Naturschutz und Reaktorsicherheit, Vilm und Bonn; 2000 
Ref 19  Entwicklung von naturschutzfac hlichen Kriterien zur Abgrenzung von 
besonderen Eignungsgebieten für Offshore- Windparks in der Ausschließlichen 
Wirtschaftszone (AWZ) von Nord- und Ostsee; Köppel, J., Peters, W., 
Steinhauer, I.; Endbericht eines Forschungs- und Entwicklungsvorhabens; BfN-Skripten 114; Bundesamt für Naturschutz Bonn – Bad Godesberg, 2004 
Ref 20 Assessment Of The Effects Of Noise And Vibration From Offshore Wind Farms 
On Marine Wildlife; G Vella, I Rushforth, E Mason, A Hough, R England, P 
Styles, T Holt, P Thorne; Etsu W/13/00566/Rep; Dti/Pub Urn 01/1341; Crown 
2001 
Ref 21 A note on the vulnerability of cetaceans to acoustic disturbance; Simmonds, 
M.P; Dolman, S; International Whaling Commission; IWC51/E15; 1999 
Ref 22 Offshore-Windenergieanlagen und Vogelschutz; Exo, K-M.; Hüppop, O.; 
Garthe, S.; SEEVÖGEL, Zeitschrift Verein Jordsand; Hamburg 2002/Band 23, 
Heft 4 
Ref 23 Rødsand Offshore Wind Farm - EIA Technical Background Report Birds; 
Environmental impact assessment of an offshore wind park at Rødsand: Technical report on birds; Johnny Kahlert, Mark Desholm, Ib Clausager & Ib Krag Petersen; NERI Report 2000; SEAS Distribution December 2000 
Ref 24 OSPAR Workshop on Environmental A ssessment of Renewable Energy in the 
Marine Environment; Judd; A.; Franklin, F.; Faire,S.; 17 – 18 September 2003; CEFAS 
Ref 25 Harbour Porpoises on Horns Reef - Effects of the Horns Reef Wind Farm; 
Annual Status Report 2003; Tougaard, J.; Carstensen, J.; Henriksen, O. D.; Teilmann, J.; Hansen; J. R.; NERI Technical Report Final version June 2004 
Ref 26 Noise from offshore wind turbines - effects on porpoises and seals; 
Henriksen,O.D.; Masters thesis University of Southern Denmark; 110 pp; 2001 
Ref 27 Behavioural reactions of free-ranging porpoises and seals to the noise of a 
simulated 2 MW windpower generator; Koschinski,S., Culik,B., Henriksen,O.D., Tregenza,N., Ellis,G., Jansen, C., Kathe,G; Marine Ecology Progress Series 
265:263-273; 2003 
Ref 28 Short-term effects of the construction of wind turbines on harbour porpoises at 
Horns Reef; Tougaard,J., Carstensen,J., Henriksen,O.D., Skov,H., Teilmann,J.; 
Hedeselskabet, Roskilde, Denmark; 72 pp.; 2003 
Ref 29 Investigation of marine mammals in relation to the establishment of a marine 
wind farm on Horns Reef; Tougaard,S., Skov,H., & Kinze,C.C.; Fisheries and 
Maritime Museum, Esbjerg, Denmark; 34 pp.; 2000 
Ref 30 Impact assessment of an off-shore wind park on sea ducks; Guillemette, M., 
Larsen, J. and Clausager, I.; NERI Technical Report 27; 63 pp.; 1998 

  Greenpeace 
 
 163
 Ref 31 The potential effects of electromagnetic fields generated by cabling between 
offshore wind turbines upon Elasmobranch Fishes; Dr Andrew B., Taylor, G., 
Taylor, H.; Research Project for Countryside Council for Wales; Applied Ecology Research Group Jones Buildi ng School of Biological Sciences 
University of Liverpool; September 2001 
Ref 32 Utgrunden off-shore wind farm - Measurements of underwater noise; Lindell, H., 
Rudolphi, E.; Ingemansson Technology AB; 17-06-2003 
Ref 33 Satellite tracking of harbour seals on Horns Reef. Technical report to Techwise 
A/S; Tougaard, J., Ebbesen, I., Tougaard, S., Jensen T. and Teilmann, J.; Biological Papers from the Fisheries and Maritime Museum; Esbjerg. No.3, 2003 
Ref 34 Impact assessment of an off-shore wind park on sea ducks; Guillemette, M., 
Larsen, J. K., Clausager, I.; NERI Technical Report No. 227; Ministry of Environment and Energy, NERI; March 1998 
Ref 35 Assessment of sub-sea acoustic noise and vibration from offshore wind turbines 
and its impact on marine wildlife; initial measurements of underwater noise during construction of offshore windfarms, and comparison with background 
noise; Dr Nedwell, J., Langworthy, J., Howell, D.; Report No. 544 R 0424; 
COWRIE for Crown Estates; May 2003 
Ref 36 Safe distances from underwater explosions for mammals and birds; Yelverton, 
J.T., Richmond, D.R., Hicks, W., Sanders, K., Fletcher, E.R.; Rep. From Lovelace Foundation for Medical Educ. and Res. for Defense Nuclear Agency; 
67 pp.; 1972 
Ref 37 Effects of marine windfarms on the distribution of fish, shellfish and marine 
mammals in the Horns Rev area; Hoffmann, E., Astrup, J., Larsen, F., Munch-Petersen, S., Støttrup, J.; Baggrundsrapport nr. 24, Danish Institute for Fisheries Research Department of Marine Fisheries; May 2000 
Ref 38 Havvindmøller – VVM. Støjunder søgelse – undervandsstøj; Ødegaard & 
Danneskiold-Samsøe; Report 00.792; Ødegaard & Danneskiold-Samsøe A/S; 
2000 
Ref 39 Scientific Support Plan For A Su stainable Development Policy II; Optimal 
Offshore Wind Energy Developments In Belgium; Van Hulle, F., Le Bot, S., Cabooter, Y., Soens, J., Van Lancker, V., De leu, S., Henriet, J.P., Palmers, G., 
Dewilde, L., Driesen, J., Van Roy, P., Belmans, R.; Belgian Science Policy; May 
2004 
Ref 40 Milieu-effectenbeoordeling van het project “Seanergy” ingediend door de 
tijdelijke vereniging Electrabel-Jan de Nul; Koninklijk Belgisch Instituut voor Natuurwetenschappen, Beheerseenheid Mathematisch Model van de Noordzee, Afdeling Beheer van het Mariene Ecosysteem; April 2002 
Ref 41 Strategie der Bundesregierung zur Windenergienutzung auf See im Rahmen 
der Nachhaltigkeitsstrategie der Bundesregierung; BMU, BMWi, BMVBW, BMVEL, BMVg, dena; Januar 2002 
Ref 42 Security of energy supply: offshore wind can be the answer to Europe’s energy 
crunch; EWEA - NEWS RELEASE; at 01.01.2005: 

Greenpeace : Offshore Wind Energy - Im plementing a New Powerhouse for Europe  
 
 
 164
 http://www.ewea.org/documents/0927-Offshore WD FINAL.pdf / ‘Background 
paper, Offshore Policy Workshop’; Brussel, September 2004 
Ref 43 Enabling Offshore Wind Developments; Shaw, S., Cremers, M.J., Palmers, G.; 
3E – EWEA, Brussels 2002 
Ref 44 Standards for Environmental Impact Assessments - Impacts of offshore wind 
turbines on the marine environment; Bundesamt für Seeschifffahrt und 
Hydrographie BSH (Federal Maritime and Hydrographic Agency); Hamburg and 
Rostock, February 2003 
Ref 45 Offshore Wind Farms - Guidance Note for Environmental Impact Assessment in 
Respect of FEPA and CPA Requirements; Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS); Crown; June 2004 
Ref 46 Infauna Monitoring Horns Rev Offshore Wind Farm - Annual Status Report 
2003; Bech, M., Leonhard, S. B., Pedersen, J., Moeslund, B.; Bio/consult a.s.; May 2004 
Ref 47 
Hard Bottom Substrate Monitoring Horns Rev Offshore Wind Farm Annual 
Status Report 2003 ; Leonhard, S. B., Pedersen, J., Moeslund, B.; Bio/consult 
a.s.; May 2004 
Ref 48 Regelenergiebedarf und Leistungskredit der Windenergie; Bischof, R.; 
Bundesverband Windenergie, Dec. 2004 
Ref 49 Elektrizitäts-Verbundsysteme in Europa, Verlag Glückauf GmbH, Essen, ISBN 
3-7739-1269-2 and ISBN 3-7739-1270-6 
Ref 50 Europe needs a super grid; Dowling, Paul; Focus on EWEC, 2004 European 
Wind Energy Conference and Exhibition; London, 22-25 November 
Ref 51 Energiewirtschaftliche Planung für die Netzintegration von Windenergie in 
Deutschland an Land und Offshore bis zum Jahr 2020, Konsortium DEWI / E.ON Netz / EWI / RWE Transportnetz Strom / VE Transmission, Köln, 24.Februar 2005 

greenpeace international
Ottho Heldringstraat 5, 1066 AZ Amsterdam, Netherlandst +31 20 718 2000  f +31 20 514 8151www.greenpeace.org

OFFSHORE WINDIMPLEMENTING ANEW POWERHOUSEFOR EUROPE“EVENTUALLY , IT IS ESTIMATED THAT A SEA AREAOF 150,000 SQUARE KILOMETERS WITH A WATERDEPTH OF LESS THAN 35 M COULD BE AVAILABLEFOR OFFSHORE-WIND FARMS.THIS WOULD PROVIDEENOUGH POWER TO SATISFY ALL OF EUROPE´SCURRENT ELECTRICITY DEMAND.”
greenpeace international
Ottho Heldringstraat 5, 1066 AZ Amsterdam, Netherlandst +31 20 718 2000  f +31 20 514 8151www.greenpeace.org