# Archivo original: partners-in-crime-malaysian.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:41:43 -03 2025

MMaallaayyssiiaann  llooggggeerrss,,  
ttiimmbbeerr  mmaarrkkeettss  aanndd  tthhee
ppoolliittiiccss  ooff  sseellff--iinntteerreesstt  iinn  
PPaappuuaa  NNeeww  GGuuiinneeaaPPaarrttnneerrss  iinn
ccrriimmee


“Our bush was really green and healthy 
[before the company came] – nowadays it isblack. The company came and spoilt ourenvironment here. The animals are now faraway – before the company came in thoseanimals were close.”
Baida Bamesa, women’s representative from Middle Fly region, 
Kiunga-Aiambak area
“Because of the many problems that
have been caused by Concord Pacific, we do not want any logging activity. We lose our forest and wildlife, including animals, birds, insects …”
Lawrence Simeti, Aiambak landowner© Greenpeace/Sabbath© Greenpeace/SabbathLocated in the Western Province of Papua New
Guinea, where much of the country’s intactrainforest remains, the Kiunga-Aiambak ‘road’goes right into the heart of some of the mostremote and biodiverse forest in the world

Executive summary 
The Paradise Forests of Papua New Guinea are among the
largest and most biologically diverse ancient forests left inthe world. The future of these forests, and of the people whodepend upon them, is currently at the mercy of aninternational market whose voracious appetite for cheaptimber, furniture and flooring is driving ancient forestdestruction. This market, led in Papua New Guinea’s case byChina’s huge demand for raw material for furnituremanufacture, turns a blind eye to the human andenvironmental devastation it is causing. Many of thetransnational logging companies that currently dominatePapua New Guinea’s forestry industry have moved to theseforests after depleting rich forests nearer to home. Theycome with appalling corporate, environmental and socialrecords. Unsurprisingly, their record to date in Papua NewGuinea is no better: promises to local communities arebroken while the forest around them is destroyed and goodgovernance is undermined. This report profiles thescandalous Kiunga-Aiambak Road Project as one example ofwhat is going wrong in Papua New Guinea’s forests. It alsoprovides a lens through which to examine the impact onthose forests of the international trade in furniture, flooring,cheap plywood and other wood products.
Key points
•Rogue industry: the controversial Kiunga-Aiambak ‘Road Project’ has in practice been nothing but a ploy
for a Malaysian-owned logging company to access thousands of hectares of Papua New Guinea’srainforest.
•Politics of self-interest: the project – which has been unlawful from the very beginning – has been built on
relationships between a number of high-ranking Papua New Guinean officials and Malaysian-born PhilipLee, Concord Pacific general manager.
•Ancient forest destruction: the seven-year project has had extensive and well-documented environ-
mental, economic and social consequences, including the loss of the forest resource itself, the devastationof traditional food sources and the non-payment of millions of kina in revenue owed to local landowners.
•International market demand: the Kiunga-Aiambak Road Project is just one example of everything that is
wrong with Papua New Guinea’s forestry sector – one that, like the rest of the industry, is driven bydemand from the international market for cheap timber. Despite all the evidence of the scandalous natureof the logging industry in Papua New Guinea, countries such as Australia and China are expanding importsof Papua New Guinea forest products.
•Opportunity for change: given determined community and national leadership together with
international support, local initiatives and larger-scale ecologically responsible forest use could worktogether to reform Papua New Guinea’s defective forestry industry.
The 2002 Ancient Forest Summit and beyond
The Kiunga-Aiambak Road Project is just the tip of the iceberg. It is but one of countless examples of thefailure of the world’s governments to ensure the protection of the Paradise Forests, and of ancient forestsaround the world. Yet Greenpeace believes there is still room for hope. This year, at a series of key meetingsincluding the Ancient Forest Summit at The Hague in April and the Johannesburg Earth Summit in August,world governments will meet to determine the fate of the planet’s remaining ancients forests and the people,plants and animals they support. Whether the governments act to stamp out the trade that drives illegal anddestructive logging in Papua New Guinea will be but one test of their ability to move beyond rhetoric and intothe realm of action. Governments and the people that elect them need to listen to the voices of villagers ofKiunga-Aiambak and other areas hurt by logging. Governments must act to stop the destruction, clean up thetimber trade and fund the protection of the world’s ancient forests. 
The bird of paradise, Papua New Guinea’s national emblem, seen
depicted on a log tag in Zhang Jia Gang port in China and in its naturalhabitat – ironically, forest product exports to China and elsewhere aredestroying the bird’s habitat and threatening Papua New Guinea’seconomic security and social stability
Partners in crime  1
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea
© Jack Fields/ Corbis ©Greenpeace

Introduction
The world’s ancient forests are in crisis. Only 20% of the
earth’s original forest cover remains as large intact areas andmore than a third of these are under threat – with industrial-scale logging posing the single largest menace to theirsurvival.
1
The ancient forest of Papua New Guinea – the world’s third-largest tropical rainforest
2– is no exception, threatened by a
logging sector characterised by illegality, social conflict andlocal economic failure. This sector, dominated by just a fewlarge operators, jeopardises the livelihoods of thousands of
forest-dependent communities and destroys habitat critical to countless species of plants and animals. Italso costs the Papua New Guinea government millions of dollars each year in lost revenue through widespreadtransfer pricing, misreporting of log volumes and species, and other forms of tax evasion and theft.
3
The industry is driven by a complacent international marketplace: consuming nations worldwide, eager tofulfil a relentless demand for wood and paper, turn a blind eye to the social, environmental and legalproblems that characterise Papua New Guinea’s forestry sector.
One clear example of everything that is wrong with the logging industry in Papua New Guinea is the
Kiunga-Aiambak Road Project, located in the Western Province, in the heart of the country’s largest tractsof ancient rainforest. This area is legally owned by the local forest-dwelling people and has a populationdensity of less than three persons per square kilometre.
4Purported to be a ‘development project’ to
further the region’s economy, the project – driven by the Malaysian-owned logging company ConcordPacific (controlled by Datuk Yaw of Samling)
5and justified by them in terms of “improving
communications” and “benefits to people”6– is in practice nothing more than a licence to log on a large
and uncontrolled scale, with no regard for even basic environmental or forest management standards.Over the last seven years the so-called road-building project has yielded over 600,000m
3of logs with a
declared export value of more than US$60 million.7 These logs are exported mainly to Japan and China,
from where they may well be re-exported as processed products to the US, Europe and around the world.8
Logs from the Malaysian-owned company Concord Pacific 
exported from Papua New Guinea to China
2Partners in crime
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea© Greenpeace
© Greenpeace/SolnessThe third-largest area of intact tropical forest on earth, the beautiful rainforests of Papua New Guinea support at least 5% of  our planet’s
species as well as providing a home and history for more than four million people

After seven years of logging, however, there is no functional road. Moreover, the logging looks set not only
to continue, but also to expand even deeper into the heart of Papua New Guinea’s ancient forests.
Nevertheless, Greenpeace, along with Papua New Guinean non-governmental organisations such as the
Centre for Environmental Law and Community Rights and the Papua New Guinea Eco-Forestry Forum,believes that there is still hope for Papua New Guinea’s magnificent forests. The controversial Kiunga-Aiambak project should be a test case for Papua New Guinea and the international community; a case thatcan demonstrate whether world leaders are serious about stopping the wholesale destruction of theEarth’s remaining ancient forests. 
It is well within the power of the Papua New Guinea government, together with the international
community and all of us as consumers, to halt the rampant destruction of this ancient forest and bring anend to the abuse of the country’s forest-dependent peoples, the destabilisation of Papua New Guinea’sgovernance and economy, and the logging industry’s flagrant disregard for the law.  
Papua New Guinean customary landowners get together after a workshop with NGOs to discuss their constitutional rights, 
responsibilities and ‘integral human development’
Partners in crime  3
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea© Greenpeace/Solness

The Kiunga-Aiambak
project: 
a road that is not a road
The Kiunga-Aiambak Road Project is a highly controversial and destructive logging operation located in
previously intact rainforests in Papua New Guinea’s remote Western Province. It was originally presentedas a ‘development project’ to further the region’s economy, but it soon became clear that it was no suchthing. In fact, it was nothing but a ploy for a Malaysian-owned logging company to gain access to valuabletimber stocks legally owned by Papua New Guinea’s indigenous forest-dwelling communities. 
Initiated in 1995, the Kiunga-Aiambak project – which has destroyed thousands
of hectares of pristine forest over the last seven years – appears to have beenunlawful from the very beginning. In 1995, the then Forest Minister for PapuaNew Guinea, Tim Neville, issued a permit known as a Timber Authority to acompany called Paiso Ltd, which professed to be a ‘landowner company’representing the local landowners in the region. The Timber Authority is alegal instrument that allows its holder to fell trees 40m on either side of acentre-line to clear a way for road construction: in theory it was a licence forPaiso Ltd to construct a road between the small township of Kiunga and thevillage of Aiambak. 
In practice, however, the story was very different. Paiso Ltd was not a company owned by or representing
local landowners. In fact, just two people owned it: Malaysian-born Philip Lee, general manager and majorshareholder of Concord Pacific, and a Papua New Guinean called David Kaya.
10Moreover, Paiso Ltd itself
had no intention of logging or of building a road. It was a company in name only, with a paid-up sharecapital of just 20 kina (about US$5). The company immediately subcontracted the ‘construction work’ toConcord Pacific, despite the clear prohibition in the Papua New Guinea Forest Act against transferringrights under a Timber Authority. 
Logs taken from spurring tracks one kilometre or more from the Kiunga-
Aiambak road are brought to the log pond at Binge for loading onto barges
“Generally this project is
seen as a thinly disguised
method employed by a
logging company to gain
access to logs for export.”
Independent Review Team,9October 2001
Barge loaded with Kiunga-Aiambak logs destined for export to China or Japan
4Partners in crime
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea
© Greenpeace/Sabbath © Greenpeace/Sabbath

It soon became clear that the proposed ‘road project’ was simply a pretext for a much larger logging
operation. Within a few months, Concord Pacific obtained permission from Minister for Forests TitusPhilemon (and later from his successor Fabian Pok) for an unlawful and unlimited extension of the projectuntil “successful completion”.
11
The actual construction of the ‘road’ began at Aiambak in May 1995. By March2001, around 179km of forest had been cleared northwards towards Kiunga. Butthere is not – and never has been – a functional highway. The ‘road’ is nothing but abulldozer track through the forest. It has no permanent bridges, hopelesslyinadequate drainage and no surfacing – only a network of temporary logging roadspushing deeper into the forest on either side. Already the Aiambak end of the roadis impassable, with another 60km to go before reaching Kiunga.
12Moreover, and
as is typical in Papua New Guinea’s forestry sector, no prior informed consentfrom the rightful landowners of the resources was obtained for the project, andminimal royalties or benefits have been provided to them.
Astonishingly, Concord Pacific has somehow managed to secure a far-reaching court injunction, which is
restraining the Papua New Guinea Forest Authority (PNGFA) from closing the illicit project down. It alsoprohibits the PNGFA from seizing logs or delaying export permits, even though the timber is being illegallyextracted. To date, the government has made no attempt to overturn the injunction or even to challengethe substantive issues of the case. 
Despite Concord Pacific’s claimed goal of “improving communication”, the road is already impassable in many areas“At no time since the
purported issuance of theTimber Authority (loggingpermit) has any aspect ofdue process beenobserved.”
Independent Review Team, October 2001
Partners in crime  5
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea© Greenpeace/Sabbath

The impact of the
road: 
“A disaster from 
day one”13
Over the last seven years, the extensive environmental, economic and social
consequences of the Kiunga-Aiambak project have been well documented.Papua New Guinea’s Centre for Environmental Law and Community Rights,representatives from local communities and the Independent Review Team(see page 10) have all given accounts of the nature and extent of theseimpacts. These include the loss of the forest resource itself, the loss to localcommunities of millions of kina
14in potential revenue due the unlawful removal
of logs, the increased scarcity of game animals traditionally hunted for food,and the loss of clean water supplies, traditional building materials andmedicines. All these factors lead to conflict and cultural and socialbreakdown.
15
The Huon Tree Kangaroo (Dendrolagus matschiei) – 18 living species of tree
kangaroo are found on the island of New Guinea
Papua New Guinea’s insect biodiversity is staggering – most species depend upon forests for their survival “In many cases the timber
industry has made life
harder for the landowners
at all levels. Not only do
they have to face
destruction of their
environment, but they face
the destruction of their
society.”
Justice Thomas Barnett, 1987
6Partners in crime
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea© antphoto.com.au
© aap

Impacts on the forest
The tropical rainforests of Papua New Guinea range from mangrove, coastal and swamp forests in the
lowlands to monsoon and deciduous forests in the drier, more mountainous regions. In the lowland regionof the Kiunga-Aiambak project the forests are primarily evergreen, and like other ancient forests aroundthe world they shelter unusually high biodiversity, including many plants and animals that are foundnowhere else. These forests also fulfil essential environmental functions, controlling rainfall, maintainingwater supplies and stabilising soils. 
The consequences of damaging or destroying these forests can therefore include loss of rare species,
changes in rainfall patterns and the occurrence of ‘natural’ disasters such as floods and landslides. In theregion of the Kiunga-Aiambak project, local people have already reported losses of wildlife – includingimportant sources of protein on which local people have depended for generations.
16
Impacts on local communities
Representatives from local communities have described thedestructive and dangerous activities of Concord Pacific,complaining that the company “came in to destroy, not tobring revenue to the people”.
17The report by the
Independent Review Team confirms these complaints andadds that some landowners were deliberately misled fromthe very beginning of the project, while others were simplynot consulted.
The area of forest affected by the Kiunga-Aiambak project
supports the culture and livelihoods of the forest-dwellingcommunities who are the region’s legal landowners. Thesepeople depend on the forest for food, medicines, buildingmaterials and clean water as well as for their cultural andspiritual life. The activities of Concord Pacific and thedamage that has been done to the forest have had asubstantial impact on these communities. They are thevictims not only of broken promises and the theft of theirlogs, but also of threats to their food security, rising ill-health, harsher living conditions, failed safety standards andabuses of basic human rights. 
“Some workers went blind because of dust from chainsaws in their eyes and
because no safety goggles were issued. Others were wounded by fallingbranches because no helmets were issued. Some were even killed. But nocompensation was paid.”
Charles Dambara, clan chief of Aewa village 
and a former employee of Concord Pacific
Papua New Guinea’s forests have a plant diversity among the highest in
the world, with over 15,000 species, including the greatest diversity oforchids on earth
Partners in crime  7
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea
© Greenpeace/Davison © Greenpeace/Sabbath

Looking ahead
Despite Concord Pacific’s documented record of deceit, fraud, trespass, environmental destruction and
human rights abuses,18the project not only continues unabated, but could actually be set to expand. In May
2000 Concord Pacific prepared a new submission to the Papua New Guinea Government seekingpermission to build a further 875km of ‘roads’ over the next 15 years. This proposal would cut a swathe ofdestruction from Kiunga to the Central Highlands, opening vast new tracts of pristine forest toirresponsible logging and subsequent cultural and environmental degradation. The new proposal is basedon a totally flawed assessment of the development value of the present logging operation. It has involvedno consultation with local landowners and does not have their informed consent.
19
“The people were tricked
… the road has brought no
real and good changes.
Life has worsened. In the
past animals and food
were plentiful. Now they
have decreased
dramatically, and the
water is very dirty.”
Enup Sep, Baboa village businessmanLogging truck bringing logs down the Kiunga-Aiambak road for export –
it is likely this is the only use the ‘road’ will get 
Hunter bringing home a wild pig – a main
source of protein for many Papua New
Guinea forest communities, and one which
depends on healthy forests 
8Partners in crime
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea© Greenpeace/Sabbath
© Johan van Roy

Partners in crime: 
international markets, 
poor forest management and the
politics of self-interest
In a landscape dominated by powerful Malaysian-owned companies and financed
by the international demand for cheap tropical timber, Papua New Guinea’sdefective forestry sector is driven by the behaviour of self-interested timberbarons, propped up by corrupt governmental interests. Published accounts ofwidespread unlawful logging and trade in illegally extracted logs abound.
20
The forestry sector and “pervasive forest crime”
A key underlying factor which has allowed, and continues to allow, disastrousprojects like the Kiunga-Aiambak ‘road’ to occur is the state of Papua NewGuinea’s forestry industry.
In 1988-1989 Justice Thomas Barnett
21led the country’s seminal ‘Commission of
Inquiry into Aspects of the Timber Industry in Papua New Guinea’, prompted bythe widespread corruption and scandal arising from the industry. After two yearsof close study, Barnett produced a definitive report documenting “pervasiveforest crime” ranging from the granting of illegal permits to companies to massivetransfer pricing and other forms of tax evasion.“Logging companies are
the worst offenders forcorruption. Some of themanaging directors ofthese companies have adirect line to our nationalleaders, while I as a seniorminister had problemsreaching them.”
Jerry Nalau, Labour and Employment
Minister, in his 1995 resignation speech
Unlawful and destructive logging and forest
conversion is the main threat to these forests – ithas been recorded that for every tree that isremoved up to 45 more are destroyedForest Minister and Deputy Prime Minister
Michael Ogio has pushed through tax breaks forConcord Pacific’s Kiunga-Aiambak Project on twooccasions while the Prime Minister was overseas– both tax breaks were later overturned
Partners in crime  9
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea© Greenpeace/Solness

After Barnett – problems and possibilities22
“Governance has been particularly poor in the area of forestry, with the side effect of promoting corrupt
practices and undermining environmental sustainability in logging activities. The Government iscommitted to introducing a moratorium on all new forestry licenses, extensions and conversions, and toproceed with a review of all existing licenses, to ensure that proper procedures are followed, that loggingpractices are not carried out in an unsustainable way, and that landowners get their share of fair benefitsfrom resource use.”
Sir Mekere Morauta, Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea
23
In 1999 Papua New Guinea’s Prime Minister, Sir Mekere Morauta, announced a moratorium on new logging
concessions as a measure to address the continuing chaos and corruption in the forestry sector. Hiscabinet also authorised a review of proposed new logging projects. The review was carried out by anIndependent Review Team,
24commissioned by the World Bank and funded by the Australian Agency for
International Development, Ausaid.
By the time the Independent Review Team finished its work in 2001, it had exposed many examples of
illegality, fraud and mismanagement throughout the 32 logging concessions it investigated. While thereview team reported that the Kiunga-Aiambak project was the worst example of these – “a disaster fromday one” – it was certainly not an isolated case. The review team found:•breaches of the law and/or failure to follow procedure in the processing of all 32 concessions
investigated;
•inadequate involvement of local landowners in decision-making, or even their complete exclusion; 
•incompetence at almost every level of the Papua New Guinea Forest Authority;
•significant logging areas within Fragile Forest;
25
•more than a third of the operations to be fundamentally illegal in that they were not included
in the country’s official National Forest Plan;
•22 of the 32 proposed projects have insufficient timber to be viable or provide sustainable yields.
While the review team’s recommendations are aimed at addressing problems in the forestry sector, they
have no legal weight and fall short of what is needed to tackle the myriad of abuses endemic in the sector.The government has made commitments to implement the review’s recommendations. However a furthershift in political will and key actions by the international community and marketplace are needed toachieve forest conservation and ecologically and socially responsible forest use.
Following the publication of the Barnett Report, throughout the 1990s and up until the present, the Papua
New Guinea Government has worked with the support of the World Bank and the international communityto develop a series of new laws, regulations and measures. Its goals have been to capture equitable rents,to ensure sustainable yields and to conserve this valuable forest resource for current and futuregenerations of the communities to whom the lands belong. But in practice the impact of these measureshas been insufficient, as logging companies like Concord Pacific have found new ways to avoid complyingwith the regulations and to gain unlawful and uncontrolled access to the country’s valuable timber supply.Demonstrating courageous leadership, Papua New Guinea’s Prime Minister responded to this situation in1999 by declaring a moratorium and initiating an independent review of new logging projects. This reviewrevealed that little has changed since Barnett’s Commission of Inquiry. But hope remains, as long as thereis continued action towards genuine reform.
10 Partners in crime
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea
©  OrsakPapua New Guinea’s Logging Code of Practice mandates that only trees
above 50cm may be cut, but violations of this and other rules arecommonplace in the country’s forestry sector

Datuk Yaw Teck Seng – the man behind the destruction
Concord Pacific’s Director and controlling shareholder (60%) is
Datuk Yaw Teck Seng, the Chinese-Malaysian timber tycoon whofounded the multinational Samling Corporation 30 years ago. DatukYaw and his Samling companies now control around 1.5 million haof forest in Sarawak (Malaysia) and have additional forest lands inGuyana and Cambodia. Samling’s logging operations in Sarawakhave caused massive environmental damage as well as serioussocial and economic problems for the Penan communities whosetraditional livelihoods are almost totally dependent on forestproducts.
26
Beyond the law – 
key corporate and government players 
There are a number of individuals – within logging companies and within the Papua
New Guinea government – who let personal interests override their professionalresponsibilities when it comes to making decisions of national importance.
27 This
situation is further exacerbated by the inaction of other government officialswhose jobs would be threatened if they were to challenge the status quo. 
In the case of the Kiunga-Aiambak project itself, this group of high-ranking
individuals has included four Ministers for Forests, a Deputy Prime Minister, aMinister for Commerce and an Attorney General, as well as a representative ofConcord Pacific.
28
The close relationship between Concord Pacific associatesand Papua New Guinea politicians is clearly illustrated by anepisode in August 2001. Having been found to hold fivedifferent passports – three of which were Papua NewGuinean – Concord Pacific’s Malaysian-born general managerand major shareholder Mr Philip Lee was deported fromPapua New Guinea for holding illegal passports.
29The
Minister for Foreign Affairs, John Pudari, who bravelyordered Mr Lee’s deportation, has since been sacked.
30His
successor, John Waiko, who admitted he had shares in thesame company as Lee, had the deportation order reviewed.
31
Philip Lee, general manager and major shareholder of Concord Pacific, was
found in possession of three Papua New Guinea passports like this one in 2001Datuk Yaw Teck Seng
“Some of the [logging]
companies… are nowroaming the countrysidewith the assurance ofrobber barons; bribingpoliticians and leaders,creating socialdisharmony and ignoringlaws…”
Justice Thomas Barnett, 1987
Partners in crime  11
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea
© Greenpeace/Davison

Driving destruction: 
the international marketplace
Perhaps the most potent component of the scandal – and a key driver in perpetuating this corrupt,
destructive and unscrupulous approach to timber extraction – is the demand from the internationalmarketplace:•the demand from importing nations around the world who turn a blind eye to the industry’s problems 
in their eagerness to maintain cheap supplies of tropical timber;
•the demand from corporate and individual consumers who buy plywood and furniture with no 
thought for the massive destruction and human misery that the trade in these products causes in one ofthe world’s last remaining ancient forests.
Indeed, despite all the evidence of the scandalous state of Papua New Guinea’s forestry sector, some
countries not only continue their imports but actually look set to increase them, while lending tacit supportto the current illegal practices by adopting a ‘business as usual’ approach. For example, the AustralianTrade Commission recently offered to organise a forestry trade fair in the Papua New Guinean capital PortMoresby, to run alongside a Papua New Guinea Forest Industry Association seminar promoting overseasinvestment and the development of new markets – a missed opportunity to insist on the sort of far-reaching industry reforms advocated by Australia’s own overseas aid agency Ausaid.
32
The vast majority of Papua New Guinea’s valuable timber is exported as low-value raw logs.33This means
that in addition to suffering the effects of the destructive and unsustainable manner in which the wood isobtained, the country misses out on the economic benefits brought by value-added timber processingindustries. In 2001 the major market for these logs was China and Hong Kong (49%) followed by Japan(28%) and Korea (16%).
34Another significant export market is Australia, which imports the bulk of Papua
New Guinea’s sawn timber. Although accounting for less than 2% of exports by volume, sawn woodgenerates almost one-tenth of exports in terms of value.
35
The main markets for Papua New Guinea logs are China and Hong Kong, followed by Japan and Korea; driving log imports to China i s a
rapidly growing export market for Chinese furniture to markets in the USA, Hong Kong, Japan and the EU
12Partners in crime
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea

Timber species from Papua New Guinea, including those
logged by Concord Pacific, are extensively employed in theproduction of furniture, flooring and cheap plywood, oftenused only once – as concrete mouldings on construction sites– before it is thrown away. Many higher-value processedproducts are manufactured in China and then exported to theUS and Europe.
36
Companies known to be trading directly with ConcordPacific are the Japanese trading firms Nissho Iwai andMarubeni Corporation, and the Chinese importers Lei ShingHeng Ltd, Kam Hing Trading and Wayne Wood (HK) Ltd. Anytrader or manufacturer buying from these companies should therefore be aware that they could also bebuying from Concord Pacific. In addition, any company – or country – importing plywood, furniture or otherproducts from China should note that there is no guarantee that the products have not come fromcompanies engaged in unlawful and destructive activities unless the products they buy are certified at leastto the standards required by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC).
37
Concord Pacific, China and the rest
of the world
Until 1994, China imported around 60,000m3of logs and
timber annually from Papua New Guinea; by 2000 it wasimporting around 740,000m
3– a twelve-fold increase over six
years. Driving this huge increase in consumption have beentwo significant factors – the introduction of new forestrylaws in China and an increase in worldwide demand forChinese furniture. 
In 1998, China introduced a new forestry law banning logging in the remaining natural forests of the
country’s western provinces. This legislation was brought in essentially to protect the upper reaches of itsmain rivers after logging was identified as the principal cause of the huge floods the country suffered thatyear. 
At the same time, China has recently seen a rapid growth in its furniture sector, which is currently worth
over US$12 billion a year. Dominated by foreign joint-venture companies, the export trade for this furnitureis estimated to be worth more than a third of that total, with major markets in the US (55%), Hong Kong(15%), Japan (10%) and the EU (11.8%).
38One of the main regions for furniture production within China is
around Shanghai, where manufacturers are provided with easy access to the largest log port in China –Zhang Jia Gang. It is here that the majority of logs exported from Papua New Guinea to China are destinedto go; it is also the main export destination for Concord Pacific’s Papua New Guinean logs.
39
Partners in crime  13
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea
Logs of Calophyllum from Concord Pacific in China’s largest port, Zhang Jia
Gang; Calophyllum is mainly used in the production of plywood and furniture,both of which are extensively exported to the US, Europe and Japan
© Greenpeace“We asked for housing, water supply, health and education. Ourexpectation was that our demand would be carried out. But up to this daywe haven’t seen any development from [Concord Pacific] of any sort.”
Joe Lukas, former community educator, Manda village

Turning things
around
Despite the scandalous nature of projects such as the Kiunga-Aiambak ‘road’ and questions about Papua
New Guinea’s forestry sector as a whole, the country’s forest management is currently at something of acrossroads. On the one hand there is a continuing state of chaos and corruption within the sector,potentially exacerbated by the government’s recent lifting of its earlier moratorium on new loggingconcessions; on the other hand there is growing support for improving existing policies and practices andexpanding community-centred alternatives.
40
The present government has developed a forest action plan, with specific timelines, to implement selectedrecommendations of the Independent Review Team. It has also secured a package of grants and loans fromthe World Bank to improve the forestry sector.
41At the same time, a growing number of communities are
rejecting large-scale destructive logging in order to develop their own alternatives and conserve theirnatural resources.  
There is an urgent need to build on this shift in domestic political will, and to secure support from the
international community – citizens, trading partners and governments – to follow the responsible path.
Towards just and sustainable forest use
Despite its problems, Papua New Guinea presents a unique opportunity to set a global example in effectingsuch a turnaround. More than 95% of its area is privately held under customary ancestral land tenure,which is upheld by the country’s constitution, and cannot be alienated or sold. Moreover, half of thecountry’s ancient forests still remain unallocated in large tracts. The country also boasts a greater diversityof intact, largely self-reliant subsistence cultures than anywhere on earth, a relatively independent
judiciary, a free press and some extraordinary and visionaryleaders. Given these circumstances there is a real chance todevelop an alternative future for Papua New Guinea – and toachieve genuine community-centred forest conservation andsustainable forest use. The result would be the protection ofmore than 5% of the earth’s terrestrial species, along withthe spearheading of innovative and effective models forecologically and socially responsible development.
Community Eco-Forestry Team at the end of a long day, 
West New Britain, Papua New Guinea – eco-forestry is a growing 
enterprise in Papua New Guinea 
14 Partners in crime
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea
© Greenpeace/Barry© Greenpeace/ColeA shipment of community-produced eco-timber from a Greenpeace-
supported project in the Solomon Islands – by specifying products certified by the Forest Stewardship Council, consumers can be part of the solutionrather than the problem

Across Melanesia there are now many examples of community-centred initiatives that can both sustain the
environment and earn revenue. Ecotourism, the production of plant extracts and the sale of indigenousarts and crafts are being linked with customary and subsistence activities in groundbreaking ways. Inaddition, eco-forestry – a unique partnership between local communities, NGOs, ‘green’ consumers andsometimes governments – has, in recent years, proved an appropriate and viable alternative to industrial-scale forest exploitation.
42Indeed, economic studies in the neighbouring Solomon Islands have found that
the value to communities of small-scale enterprise and subsistence activities can be more than three timesthat of industrial logging and oil palm plantations.
43
To secure such a future it is necessary to break the political stalemate that blocks forest conservation andreform. With determined community and national leadership, and with international support,conservation, eco-forestry and other community initiatives can be combined with larger-scale socially andecologically responsible forest use.
44Together with land-use planning led by and involving informed local
communities, this approach could provide a real alternative both for Papua New Guinea’s forestry sectorand for the millions of people who own and depend on the country’s forests.
Future generations of Papua New Guineans require ecologically and socially responsible decisions from their leaders to ensure t hat the
heritage passed down from their ancestors remains in their handsMaisin woman performing a welcome celebration at Collingwood Bay –
Papua New Guinea’s Maisin community have rejected large-scale
destructive logging on their land and become leaders in developing
conservation and alternative sources of income
Partners in crime  15
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea
© Nick Bownes© Greenpeace

Time for action, 
not words
In the run-up to the forthcoming Ancient Forest Summit,46the Earth Summit II47
and beyond, Greenpeace is urging governments of all importing countries to
bring an immediate end to their role in the destruction of Papua New Guinea’sancient forests, by committing to the following actions: 
•
stop the destruction 
by stopping any further industrial activities in intact ancient forest until 
responsible plans for forest conservation and sustainable use have been agreed. 
•
clean up the timber trade
by ensuring that timber is produced and traded in a legal and ecologically 
responsible way; by refusing to trade with companies known to be operating illegally or destructively; and by demanding that all wood and wood products entering national ports must come from legal and well-managed forest operations with high social and ecological standards.
48
•come up with the money 
by providing at least US$15 billion each year to pay for forest conservation and sustainable development.
Greenpeace recommendations on the Kiunga-Aiambak project
Greenpeace is calling for action from consumers, trading partners and governments around the world toend their role in driving the illegal and destructive activities of unscrupulous forestry companies. In thecase of Concord Pacific’s Kiunga-Aiambak logging project this requires:
•the Papua New Guinea Government to implement the Independent Review Team’s recommendation to
shut down the Kiunga-Aiambak project and seize the assets of Concord Pacific in order to reimburselandowners for their losses;
•the Papua New Guinea Government to act on the Independent Review Team’s recommendation that any
application to extend the scope and term of the project should be roundly rejected;
•the Papua New Guinea Government and the international community to investigate fully and prosecute
those involved in the scandal;
•the Papua New Guinea Government permanently to revoke Concord Pacific’s status as a ‘Forest
Industries Participant’;
•nations around the world to prohibit the import – whether direct or indirect – of Concord Pacific’s
products;
•Concord Pacific’s current trading partners to refuse to purchase any more of its products.
Greenpeace is calling on governments around the
world to end their role in driving this
unscrupulous industry
“Forest law cannot be
effectively enforced in the
absence of good
governance. Good
governance begins with
strong political will,
demonstrated by solid and
consistent commitment at
the highest level of
government.”
Mark Baird, World Bank, September 200145
16 Partners in crime
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New Guinea© Greenpeace/ Beltra

Partners in crime  19
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and the politics of self-interest in Papua New GuineaEndnotes
1 Greenpeace defines ancient forest as “the world’s
remaining forests which have been shaped largely bynatural events and which are little impacted by humanactivities”. Logging is a threat to 72% of the world’sthreatened frontier forests, compared to 20% threatenedby agricultural clearance and 38% by mining and road-building. Sources: Greenpeace (1999a); Bryant et al. (1997).
2 After the Amazon and the Congo Basin.3 “Review of Papua New Guinea’s Forest Revenue System”,
Papua New Guinea-appointed, World Bank-commissionedinquiry, draft report 2001.
4 Mike Wood, Associate Professor of Anthropology, James
Cook University, pers. comm.
5 Datuk Yaw Teck Seng, of Malaysian logging giant Samling
Group, is the controlling shareholder of Concord Pacific.
6 Submission to the National Executive Council signed by the
Ministers for Transport and Civil Aviation, Forest, Worksand Implementation and Deputy Prime Minister (9 May 2000).
7 PNGFA (2001).8 CSIL (2001). 9 Independent Review Team (2001a). The Independent Review
Team was appointed by the Papua New Guinea governmentand commissioned by the World Bank to review proposednew logging concessions in 2000-01. 
10 Information supplied by the Registrar of Companies. David
Kaya is from the Pari Village in an area close to the road.However, although the Pari have usufructuary rights theyare not landowners in the area of the project. On 28 April2000, Philip Lee swore an affidavit in which he stated: “I amthe General Manager of the First Plaintiff Company,Concord Pacific Ltd, and I have the concern and carriage ofaffairs of the said Company”; Post Courier (2002b).
11 Letter from Minister for Forests, Dr Fabian Pok, to Paiso Ltd, 
dated 21 September 1997.
12 As witnessed during Greenpeace field investigations (2001).13 Independent Review Team (2001a).14 There are approximately 4 kina to one US$.15 Papua New Guinea Forest Watch (2002). Additional impacts
of the project have included loss of life due to inadequatesafety precautions taken by Concord Pacific and the humanrights abuse of individuals speaking out against the project.Source: Videoed testimonies to Greenpeace interviewers.There are alleged links between project employees and theillegal trade in guns and drugs between Papua New Guineaand Australia. Source: PNGFW (2002).
16 Videoed testimonies to Greenpeace interviewers.17 Lawrence Simeti, Aiambak landowner, pers. comm.18 The consequences are clearly explained in a letter from
Papua New Guinea’s Center for Environmental Law andCommunity Rights to the World Bank: “Landowners havehad their land damaged by illegal logging along the KiungaAiambak Road. Logs worth millions of kina have beenunlawfully removed and our clients have suffered muchdamage. The Independent State of Papua New Guinea usesits police force to terrorise our clients. Some of our clientshave been unlawfully imprisoned, beaten and tortured bypolice, who receive support from the logging company inthis area.” Source: CELCOR (2001a).19 Independent Review Team (2001a).
20 See for example Barnett (1987); Duncan (1994);
Independent Review Team (2001a). A report published bythe Australian International Development AssistanceBureau in 1994 reported the prevalence of transfer pricing,under-reporting of log prices and tax exemptions commonlyused to reduce both company tax payments and in-countryprofits (Duncan 1994). Papua New Guinea Forest Watch has also investigated cases of unlawful logging, most notably inTuwapu and Pondo in West Sepik and East New Britainprovinces respectively.
21 Barnett, a judge of the National Court, was appointed as a
Commissioner under the Commission of Inquiries Act.
22 Independent Review Team (2001a) Independent Review
Team (2001b); Papua New Guinea Eco-Forestry Forum(2001).
23 CELCOR (2001b).24 According to the Independent Review Team, “The TA holder,
Paiso Company Limited, fraudulently represented itself as a landowner company. It is owned equally by one landownerand an expatriate… In the meeting held at Kiunga on the 14thof February in the presence of two members of the reviewteam, the Aiambak landowners denied having beensufficiently consulted during the discussion phase of theproject, nor were they represented in the PFMC meetingwhen the decision was made to proceed with the project.”Source: Independent Review Team (2001a). 
25 Fragile forests, as defined by the Office of Environment and
Conservation, are “forest types that do not have thepotential to regenerate and which consequently areunsuited to sustained wood production”. Source: ReviewTeam Observations and Recommendations Report,Appendix 3, page 2. Fragile forests are not recognisedexplicitly in forestry planning laws or regulations.
26 Forbes (1995); Forests Monitor/ World Rainforest
Movement (1998).
27 For example, Minister for Forests Andrew Posai was found
to be living in a 335,000 kina (US$83,750) home funded bya logging company. Posai was later found guilty of 26 countsof misconduct and abuse of ministerial power (from aprevious ministry). Source: Kakas (1995). Reporter DominicKakas won a Pacific Investigative Journalism Award for theinvestigation.
28 The current Minister for Forests and Deputy Prime Minister,
Michael Ogio, has twice granted improper tax concessionsto Concord Pacific. Papua New Guinea’s current AttorneyGeneral Francis Damen obtained Concord Pacific’sinjunction against the PNGFA while acting as attorney forthe company when still in private practice. (Damen Lawyersobtained the injunction on behalf of the first and secondplaintiffs, Concord Pacific and Paiso Ltd respectively.Francis Damen of Damen Lawyers was the attorney whorepresented the plaintiffs in court. Moreover, theIndependent Review Team (2001a) remarked, “It should benoted that the Attorney General has previously acted in aprivate capacity for the logging operator (Concord Pacific)in relation to these proceedings.”) Former Minister forForests Tim Neville improperly gave out the original TimberAuthority No. 24 and Minister for Commerce NakikkusKonga improperly granted tax concessions to ConcordPacific. (In both cases Prime Minister Sir Mekere Morautaintervened to reverse these illicit tax breaks after strong press condemnation.) Source: Post-Courier (2001b). Two
Ministers for Forests – Fabian Pok and Titus Philemon –approved the original extension of Timber Authority No. 24.(In a letter to Paiso Ltd dated 21 September 1997, Pok wrote,“As directed, I hereby grant and approve the extension ofthe validity of the Timber Authority TA 024 until thecompletion of the road and allowable Timber Volume isharvested.”) Concord Pacific’s application for a furtherextension to log the 875km Trans-highland Highway wasendorsed and signed by Ministers Bart Phileman, MichaelOgio, Alfred Pogo and Mao Zeming.
29 Mr Lee claims to be a naturalised Papua New Guinean – an
issue that is currently before the Papua New Guinea courts –but the illegal possession of a passport is an offenceirrespective of whether he is a naturalised citizen. Note thatPhilip Lee was also one of the two owners of Paiso Ltd, thecompany that was awarded the initial Timber Authority forthe Kiunga-Aiambak project.
30Post Courier (2001c). 
31Post Courier (2002a).
32 Burton (2002).33 Over the past decade raw logs have accounted for roughly
97% of the value of all exports of ‘forest products’ fromPapua New Guinea. Source: Filer et al. (1999).
34 Other importers include the Philippines (5%) and Taiwan
(2%). Source: PNGFA (2001).
35 PNGFA & FIA (2001).36 Jiangsu Economical & Technical Cooperation (2001); CSIL
(2001).
37 The FSC is currently the only international certification and
labelling system that uses globally endorsed ecologicalperformance standards, ensures a traceable chain-of-custody from production to final consumption and bringstogether a broad range of environmental, social andeconomic stakeholder interests. Some ecoforestry projectssuch as the ecotimber projects in the Solomon Islands’Guadalcanal Island operate to standards exceeding those ofthe FSC. Source: Greenpeace (1996).
38 Additional markets include Canada (2%) and Australia (1%).
Source: CSIL (2001).
39 CSIL (2001).40 See for example Bismark Ramu Group (2002).41 World Bank (2001).42 Local communities manage the forest and mill ecotimber,
NGOs provide information, training and support, and the‘green’ buyers preferentially seek ecotimber and othertimber which is certified to at least the standards requiredby the FSC.
43 Greenpeace (1996; 1999b).44 As promoted by the FSC.45 ENS (2001).46 The Ancient Forest Summit is the sixth Conference of Parties
to the Convention on Biological Diversity. It will be held inApril 2002, in The Hague, The Netherlands and will have amandate to agree a ten year forests programme inpreparation for the Earth Summit II.
47 The Earth Summit II is the United Nations’ World Summit on
Sustainable Development which will take place inJohannesburg in August/September 2002.
48 In other words, from sources certified to at least the
standards required by the FSC.•Barnett T (1987). Commission of Inquiry into Aspects of the
Timber Industry in Papua New Guinea.
•Bismark Ramu Group (2002). How people in Wanang in
Madang Province PNG set up their conservation area.Unpublished.
•Brunois F (1997). The Ecological Impact of the Wawoi Guavi
Company’s Logging Exploitation on the Terrority and Societyof the Kasua People (translated from Avenir des Peuples des
Forêts Tropicales ). Paris.
•Bryant D et al. (eds.) (1997). The last frontier forests:
Ecosystems and economies on the edge . WRI, WCMC,
Washington DC. 
•Burton B (2002). Australia backs increased Papua New Guinea 
logging. Asia Times , 5 March 2002.
•CELCOR (2001a). Letter to Mr Klaus Roland, World Bank.
Lifting of the moratorium on new logging concessions in PapuaNew Guinea and its impact on forest resources of customarylandowners. 1 November 2001.
•CELCOR (2001b). Submission to the World Bank Inspection
Panel for inspection of Kiunga-Aiambak Road filed by certainnamed customary owners of forests in Kiunga-Aiambak,Western Province, Papua New Guinea. 29 November 2001.
•CSIL (2001). The furniture industry in China, including Hong
Kong. CSIL Milano (Furniture Industry Research Institute),
Milan.
•Daniel P , Palmer K, Watson A and Brown R (2000). Report on
the Taxation Review: Redefining the tax system . Government
of Papua New Guinea, Port Moresby.
•Duncan RC (1994). Melanesia Forest Sector Study . Aidab,
Canberra.•ENS (2001). East Asia pledges action on illegal logging. 17
September 2001.
•Filer C, Dubash NK and Kalit K (2000). The thin green line:
World Bank leverage and forest policy reform in Papua NewGuinea . Research School of Pacific and Asia Studies and
National Research Institute, Canberra and Boroko.
•Flannery T (1995). Mammals of New Guinea . Tim Reed Books,
Chatswood, NSW.
•Forbes (1995). Asia’s Billionaires .17 July 1995.
•Forests Monitor and World Rainforest Movement (1998 ). High
Stakes: The need to control transnational logging companies:a Malaysian case study .
•Greenpeace (1996). Working together: Sustaining forests and
communities in Melanesia . Greenpeace Pacific, Auckland.
•Greenpeace (1999a). Buying destruction: A Greenpeace
report for corporate consumers of forest products .
Greenpeace International, Amsterdam.
•Greenpeace (1999b). Islands adrift? Comparing industrial and
small-scale economic options for the Marovo Lagoon regionof the Solomon Islands . Greenpeace Pacific, Suva.
•Hiscock G (1997). Asia’s Wealth Club . Allen & Unwin, Sydney.
•Independent Review Team (2001a). Auditing forestry projects
currently ‘in process’ for compliance with the requirements ofthe policy, the Forestry Act and other regulations andguidelines. Individual project review report number 31:Aiambak-Kiunga Road Timber Authority (Western Province) .
March 2001. 
•Independent Review Team (2001b). Review of forest
harvesting projects being processed towards a Timber Permitor Timber Authority. October 2001. •Jiangsu Economical & Technical Cooperation (2001). The
classification and use of Papua New Guinea logs .
•Kakas D (1995). Giant logger linked to Posai housing. The 
Independent , Port Moresby, 22 July 1995. 
•Papua New Guinea Eco-Forestry Forum (2001a). Summary and
Analysis of the Review Team Reports on New ForestsConcessions Currently in Process. Eco-Forestry Forum,
Kimbe.
•Papua New Guinea Eco-Forestry Forum (2001b). Iko-Forestry
Nius 3 (3). Eco-Forestry Forum, Kimbe.
•Papua New Guinea Forest Authority (2001). Papua New
Guinea Forest Authority annual timber digest 1995-2001. 
•Papua New Guinea Forest Authority and FIA (2001). The forest
industries of Papua New Guinea .
•Papua New Guinea Forest Watch (2001). Pondo and Tuwapu,
the unanswered questions . PNG Forest Watch, Port Moresby.
•Papua New Guinea Forest Watch (2002). Impacts of logging
on forest-dependent communities . PNG Forest Watch, Port
Moresby.
•Post Courier (2001a). Minister “helps deported man”. Port
Moresby, 5 January 2001. 
•Post Courier (2001b). Sir Mekere in response to timber claims.
Port Moresby, 17 April 2001.
•Post Courier (2001c). Port Moresby, 6 August 2001.
•Post Courier (2002a). Port Moresby, 7 February 2002. 
•Post Courier (2002b). Port Moresby, 15 March 2002. 
•SBS Dateline (2001). Wilderness Laid Waste. Broadcast 2 May
2001.
•World Bank (2001). Forestry and conservation project
appraisal document . World Bank, Washington DC.
References

“Forests provide the basis of livelihood and cultural life
to the 80% of Papua New Guineans who still live inrural communities.” 
World Bank, Forestry and Conservation Project Appraisal
Document, November 2001
Design by Suggestie & illusie, Utrecht, The Netherlands. Printed by Primavera, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Printed on 100% recy cled paper.March 2002
Greenpeace International
Keizersgracht 1761016 DW AmsterdamThe Netherlandswww.greenpeace.org
www.paradiseforest.org“The company [Concord Pacific] came in to destroy, 
not to bring revenue to the people.”
Lawrence Simeti, Aiambak landowner
Cover photo: Like many of the country’s forestry laws, the stipulation that jobs for bulldozer drivers and machine operators be  reserved for Papua New Guineans
is often ignored by the logging industry  © Gr eenpeace/Solness