# Archivo original: renewables-24-7.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:29 -03 2025

© GREENPEACE/MARKEL REDONDO 
reportglobal energy grid scenario [r]enewables 
24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
EUROPEAN RENEWABLE 
ENERGY COUNCIL 
© DANIEL BELTRA/GP 
© GP/MARKEL REDONDO 

2
image THE MARANCHON WIND TURBINE FARM IN GUADALAJARA, SPAIN IS THE LARGEST IN EUROPE WITH 104 GENERATORS, WHICH COLLECTIVELY PRODUCE 208 MEGAWATTS OF ELECTRICITY,
ENOUGH POWER FOR 590,000 PEOPLE, ANUALLY. cover image ANDASOL 1 SOLAR POWER STATION IS EUROPE’S FIRST COMMERCIAL PARABOLIC TROUGH SOLAR POWER PLANT. IT WILL SUPPLY 
UP TO 200,000 PEOPLE WITH CLIMATE-FRIENDLY ELECTRICITY AND SAVE ABOUT 149,000 TONS OF CARBON DIOXIDE PER YEAR COMPARED WITH A MODERN COAL POWER PLANT.contents foreword 4
executive summary 6
introduction 9renewable energy 
and hybrid systems 14 
smart grids 26 
super grid 
- the interconnection 
of smart grids 41 super grid: 
simulation of the 
energy [r]evolution 
for europe 47 
appendix 74 Smart grid or super grid,
decentralised or
centralised renewable 
power plants? The 
discussion about the 
future of our power supply 
is running hot, and hi- tech 
visions are everywhere.
The solar and wind 
markets have continued to 
grow despite the economic
crisis. So as more and 
more renewable power
generation comes online a 
question arises. How do we 
transport and integrate 
renewable energy sources 
into existing power grids?
Will the lights go out if the 
wind is not blowing and 
the sun is not shining? 
Do we still need coal or
nuclear power to provide 
base-load and back-up for
wind and solar power? climate friendly 
infrastructure is 
needed in all countries 
The time to build up our ‘climate- 
friendly infrastructure’ – 
comprising networked smart grids 
and district heating pipelines – is 
now! The window of opportunity 
is available for industrialised 
countries as well as developing 
countries. While the industrialised 
nations in North America, Europe 
and Australia have to reinforce 
their 40- and 50-year old grids,
developing countries – especially 
China and India – are in the 
process of building theirs 
for the first time.foreword 
1
2
34
5

3
 © GREENPEACE/FLAVIO CANNALONGA But we do not need to start from scratch. Neither ‘smart grids’ nor ‘super 
grids’ are completely new. We can move from today’s infrastructure 
toward smarter grids step by step. To convert a city’s existing grid to a 
smart grid just means adding intelligence. In many cases, no new cables 
are needed, just an IT-driven control system that allows utilities to 
manage decentralised power production in line with local demand. 
As a wider network of these smart grids forms from city to city 
and country to country, a super grid emerges.
50% wind power is possible already 
On 7 November 2009, wind power supplied more than half of Spain’s 
electricity demand for an entire night. Wind power’s share of supply 
reached 53% several times and was steadily above 50% between 
3:00am and 8:30am. A record figure of 11,546 MW of simultaneous 
wind power generation was reached. Events like this will occur more 
often in many countries worldwide, especially regarding renewable 
leaders like Denmark, Germany and Spain. 
This shows that there is still plenty of ‘room’ in the grid and no reason 
to slow down the development of renewable energy. Rather, it is time to 
start evolving the grid into a more flexible power supply system so that 
even higher levels can be sustained. This means a move away from a 
stiff, inflexible ‘base-load’-driven power system towards a smarter,
interconnected system. 
This report, ‘[R]enewables 24/7 – Infrastructure needed to save the 
climate’ is one of the more technical reports in the series of Energy 
[R]evolution scenarios. For the first time, we have taken our own 
scenario and commissioned a detailed analysis of if and how the grid 
must be changed in order to implement a climate-friendly power supply; 
one where 90% of the power supplied comes from renewable energy 
sources. To compile the report, Energynautics – a leading research 
company in the field of Grid Integration – compared 30 years of weather 
data with European annual demand curves on a 15 minute basis.So, will the Energy [R]evolution mix in the year 2050 guarantee 
a safe and secure 24/7 power supply? 
The answer is yes! The analysis showed that there is only a 0.4% 
chance – or 12 hours a year – that high demand correlates with 
low solar and wind generation. In the past 30 years, we found only 
three extreme events when no or low sunshine and unusually low 
wind speeds coincided with high demand: August 2003, November 
1987 and January 1997. 
However, some new cable connections between countries are needed 
in order to be able to integrate offshore-wind from windy areas with 
concentrated solar power stations in deserts. This report presents a 
first draft of a possible grid expansion. But more research is needed 
to develop the most cost effective modern climate-friendly 
infrastructure. This report is Greenpeace’s contribution to this 
debate, and we appreciate that it is only one possible concept that 
will have to compete with others and evolve over time.
Nevertheless, a different political framework is needed to 
implement any new infrastructure. Addressing climate change 
requires a drastic change in global energy generation – including 
the power grids that support it.
Greenpeace International, European Renewable Energy Council (EREC)
date November 2009. EREC Arthouros Zervos, Christine Lins. Greenpeace InternationalSven Teske, Project 
Manager. authors Dr. Thomas Ackermann, Dr. Eckehard Tröster, Rebecca Short, Sven Teske. editorRebecca Short,
Dörte Müller. research Dr. Thomas Ackermann, Dr. Eckehard Tröster, energynautics GmbH, Mühlstraße 51, 63225 
Langen, Germany. printing www.primaveraquint.nl design & layoutone hemisphere, Sweden, www.onehemisphere.se 
contactGreenpeace International: Sven Teske; sven.teske@greenpeace.org 
for further information about the global, regional and national scenarios please visit the energy [r]evolution website: 
www.energyblueprint.info/ 
Published by Greenpeace International. Printed on 100% post consumer recycled chlorine-free paper.Arthouros Zervos 
EUROPEAN RENEWABLE 
ENERGY COUNCIL (EREC) 
Sven Teske 
CLIMATE & ENERGY UNIT 
GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL 
NOVEMBER 2009 


4[R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
grids keep power systems working 
The grid is the sometimes over-looked part of the electricity system.
The developed world has extensive electricity grids supplying power 
to nearly 100% of the population, but in parts of the developing 
world, many rural areas get by with unreliable grids or local, dirty 
electricity - for example from diesel - which is also expensive for 
small communities. 
Our future on this planet depends on a massive shift to clean energy 
sources worldwide, as outlined in Greenpeace’s Energy 
[R]evolution. However the grids that bring the electricity to our 
homes and factories were designed for big, centralised generators,
now running at huge loads, providing what is known as ‘base-load’
power. Until now, renewable energy had has to fit in as an extra,
small slice of the energy mix and adapt to the conditions the grid 
currently operates under.Some critics of renewable energy say it is not ever going to be able 
to provide enough power for our current energy use, let alone for 
projected growth of energy demand. This is because it relies mostly 
on natural resources, like wind and sun, which don’t appear to be 
available 24/7. 
This report shows how that thinking is wrong. 
We have sun, wind, geothermal sources and running rivers available 
right now, and ocean energy, biomass and efficient gas turbines set 
to provide massive energy supplies in the future. Clever technologies 
can track and manage energy use patterns, provide flexible power 
that follows demand through the day, use better storage options and 
group customers together to form virtual batteries. With all these 
solutions we can secure the renewable energy future needed to 
avert catastrophic climate change.
We just need smart grids to put it all together and effectively 
‘keep the lights on’.
executive summary 
“WE HAVE SUN, WIND, GEOTHERMAL SOURCES AND RUNNING RIVERS AVAILABLE RIGHT NOW, AND OCEAN ENERGY, BIOMASS 
AND EFFICIENT GAS TURBINES SET TO PROVIDE MASSIVE ENERGY SUPPLIES IN THE FUTURE.” 
© DREAMSTIME 
image OFFSHORE WIND FARM, COPENHAGEN, DENMARK.

5smart grids can handle renewable energy 
A smart grid is an electricity grid that connects decentralised 
renewable energy sources and co-generation and distributes power 
in a highly efficient way. It uses distributed energy resources and 
advanced communication and control technologies to deliver 
electricity more cost-effectively, with lower greenhouse gas intensity 
and in response to consumer needs. Typically, smaller forms of 
electricity generation are combined with energy management to 
balance out the load of all the users on the system. Small
renewable energy generators can be closer to the users, rather than 
one large centralised source a long way away. 
Smart grids are a way to get massive amounts of renewable energy 
with no greenhouse gas emissions into the system, and to allow 
decommissioning of older, centralised power sources. Advanced 
types of control and management technologies for the electricity 
grid make it run more efficiently overall. This applies whether we 
are talking about a major, complex system like in Denmark or a 
small village system in the Pacific Islands. 
from little things, big things grow 
Hybrid systems, and to some extent micro grids, are concepts for 
islands and for rural communities, where a number of small
generators like wind turbines or PV panels are linked together and 
controlled centrally, to provide sufficient power to all.
When it comes to these kinds of power supplies, small is beautiful
(and cheap to run). Significant savings are possible in remote areas 
in switching from diesel to renewable energy. Greenpeace outlines a 
method to bundle up several island power systems to attract more 
upfront funding from international sources. See Section 1 on hybrid 
systems and Micro Grids for more. 
get smart, manage demand 
Smart grids can help to get very large amounts of renewable 
energy into the system, while keeping a reliable and secure supply.
Renewable energy 24/7 is technically and economically possible, it 
just needs the right policy and the commercial investment to get 
things moving. Demand management is a crucial part of this, it 
basically means turning off or down instead of boosting supplies.
Section 2 outlines what demand management means and provides 
some exciting real-life examples of how it is possible to re-imagine 
the operation of the grid to use flexible supply. We don’t need to be 
stuck with the model of base-load generation. Electricity users can 
act together to take the strain out of a system, like the case study 
where hundreds of cool warehouses or thousands of electric car 
owners form giant virtual batteries and save power for everyone.
When you look at the real scenarios, for example in Spain, where 
huge amounts of solar power have been added to the system, large,
inflexible fossil and nuclear power plants simply do not fit together 
with renewable energy. 
© KATE DAVISON/GREENPEACE image WELDER WORKING AT VESTAS 
WIND TURBINE FACTORY,
CAMPBELLTOWN, SCOTLAND.
super grid – connecting the dots intelligently 
Smart and super grids are not a science fiction but a further 
development from today’s grids. So we do not need to start from 
scratch. In fact, various types of high voltage systems suitable for long- 
distance connections are already under development and deployment.
With super grids, we can effectively plug in areas of high demand like 
Central Europe to areas of high supply, like Northern Africa, and 
provide a more sustainable energy supply and income to all. 
european modelling – the grid can support 
the energy [r]evolution 
This report includes an analysis of the EU 27 Energy [R]evolution 1
scenario showing that extreme weather events where the supplies of 
naturally occurring sun and wind drop too low for our needs occur 
rarely, around once a year. The conclusion is that we can develop 
towards a smarter super grid and expand renewable energy supplies 
in parallel. There is no reason to stop expansion of renewable 
energy while we wait for better grids. 
policy recommendations 
towards a climate-friendly infrastructure: interconnected 
smart grids It is technically possible to operate a power system 
with over 90% renewables and guarantee a security of supply 24 
hours a day, seven days a week 365 days a year. This is why the title 
of this report is ‘Renewables 24/7’. However the existing grid 
system in most industrialised countries is over 40 years old.
Reinforcement of this important infrastructure is needed,
regardless. To prepare for a very high share of renewables, we need 
to move towards an ‘interconnected smart grid’. 
This document gives Greenpeace’s position on cross-border electrical
interconnections and points out the benefits of a more interconnected 
electrical system and the disadvantages that this represents in a 
system with a high percentage of dirty energies. Greenpeace calls for 
an increase in international electrical interconnections and the build- 
up of ‘smart grids’ which are needed to operate decentralised 
renewable energy sources and co-generation power plants. The 
current grid must be upgraded towards a connected smart grid 
system in order to implement the Energy [R]evolution – the way out 
of the climate crisis. The following political changes are needed to 
implement this very much needed ‘climate infrastructure’: 
the advantages of a more interconnected and smarter system 
Greenpeace considers that a greater capacity of cross-border electrical
interconnection brings advantages in security of supply, energy efficiency 
and the development of an electrical system based on renewables: 
•security of supply: An interconnected system allows an increase 
in the security of supply, since, for the same installed power, there 
are more options for managing the system assuring the quantity 
and quality of coverage of demand. For example, in the case of 
demand peaks, countries could import electricity from other 
geographic areas when it is necessary and this would reinforce 
the security of the electrical supply. 
reference 
1 THE ANALYSIS INCLUDES NORWAY, SWITZERLAND AS WELL AS THE EU-27 

6[R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
•energy efficiency: A more interconnected system allows better use 
of the installed power, avoiding the overall need for power production 
capacity. A similar effect is achieved through demand side 
management, which means changing demand to meet supply, rather 
than the other way around. Through exploiting these effects, polluting 
conventional power production capacity can be reduced substantially. 
renewable energies Global emission reductions of at least 30% by 
2020 and at least 80% by 2050 are necessary to prevent the most 
dangerous levels of climate change. In order to reach these objectives 
renewable energy sources will need to contribute a lot more to our 
electricity supply - at least 50% by 2030 and close to 100% by 2050. 
A large-scale penetration of renewables requires improvements in 
the infrastructure of the transmission network, both within a 
national electrical system and in the interconnections between 
countries, to balance variable power output and demand across 
regions and to transmit the renewable energy generated by off- 
shore installations and large-scale solar power stations. Also, the 
more distributed generation system with small-scale and larger 
renewable energy installations requires a smarter design and 
operation of the distribution and transmission system. 
Greenpeace demands the development of smart grid 
technology and the increase of international electrical 
connections The development of a smart grid will lead to an 
essential ‘climate protection infrastructure’ that will get distributed 
and variable renewable energy sources into the power system and 
maximise energy efficiency. It should be developed specifically with 
a view to achieving both these objectives. 
In parallel, greater interconnection capacity brings a range of 
advantages for the security of supply, energy and economic efficiency 
and the development of an electrical system based on renewable energy.
Greenpeace is in favour of a more interconnected grid that is linked to a 
suitable energy plan focused on ecological sustainability criteria.
However, the present planning system is based on a supply-side 
approach and not on a demand side management approach and runs 
on mainly on dirty energies. The opening of new interconnection lines 
without conditions could favour dirty energies and hinder energy saving. 
To promote the development of the grid system, Greenpeace 
demands the following: 
•Governments, as a top priority, should establish by law mandatory 
energy planning objectives in the medium to long-term,
specifically the following: 
•Increase Energy Efficiency to reduce the overall demand.
•Increase contribution of renewables according to the 
Energy [R]evolution scenarios.
•A timetable for the gradual but urgent phasing out of 
nuclear and coal power stations.•The power system must be flexible to allow the large-scale 
integration of fluctuating renewable energy. No new, large nuclear 
or coal power plants should be licensed, and existing plants must 
be replaced progressively with flexible, highly efficient and more 
decentralised plants.
•Renewable energy should be guaranteed priority access to the grid.
Access to the exchange capacity available at any given moment 
should be fully transparent and the transmission of energy from 
renewable sources should always have preference, in both directions. 
•The design of distribution and transmission networks, in 
particular for interconnections, should be guided by the objective 
of facilitating the integration of renewables and to achieve a 
system as close as possible to 100% renewable.
•Guarantees should be established that exclude the possibility 
of transferring electricity from nuclear origin through 
the new interconnections.
•In planning new interconnections, the existing infrastructure should 
be exploited as much as possible. Where it is not possible, all
environmental considerations should be taken into account, using a 
global and exhaustive analysis, so that the new installations have 
the minimum environmental impact. In order to achieve this, the 
interconnections should have a favourable Environmental Impact 
Statement in all cases where it is mandatory and should fulfil all
the conditions and corrective measures included in the EIS. The 
Environmental Impact Assessment should include the option of 
burying the lines, along with all possible alternatives.
Environmental criteria must prevail over economic criteria.
•A complete ownership unbundling of electrical grids from power 
generation and supply companies should be enforced.
Transmission and distribution system operators must make all
relevant grid data accessible so that independent institutions can 
develop grid optimisation concepts.
•For the construction of new transmission and distribution 
capacity, preference should be given to ground-based cables, rather 
than overland high tension lines, as is already done in Denmark. 
•Governments should create appropriate framework conditions to 
support and expand demand side management.
•Regional pilot projects should promote the further optimisation 
and demonstration of smart grid technology, virtual power 
stations and highly-developed demand side management. 
•The transport sectors (e.g. electric vehicles) should increasingly 
be integrated into national and regional power supply strategies.
•Communication standards for smart grids should be agreed.

7The electricity ‘grid’ is a collective name for all wires, transformers 
and infrastructure that transport electricity from power plants to 
users. In all networks, some energy is lost as it travels, making 
distribution inefficient.
The existing electricity transmission and distribution system was 
mainly designed and planned 40 to 60 years ago. All over the 
developed world, the grids were built with large power plants in the 
middle, with high voltage alternating current (AC) power lines to 
the areas where the power is being used. A smaller ‘distribution 
network’ carries the current to the final consumers. This is known as 
a centralised grid system and the large power sources are mostly 
coal and gas power stations. The systems supported massive 
industrialisation in cities and also brought electricity to rural areas 
in most developed parts of the world.
In the future, we need to change the grids so they do not rely on 
large, central conventional power plants, but instead on clean 
energy, from sources like wind, solar, hydro and biomass. These are 
typically smaller power generators, and they will be distributed 
throughout the grid, as well as concentrated in large power plants such as offshore wind power plants. Examples of big generators of 
the future are the massive wind farms in the North Sea and large 
areas of land covered in concentrating mirrors to generate energy in 
Southern Europe or Africa. 
The challenge ahead is to integrate new generation sources and at 
the same time phase out most of the large-scale conventional power 
plants, while keeping the lights on 24/7. This will need new types of 
grids and power system architecture. The major new technologies 
needed are to balance fluctuations in energy demand and supply.
Plenty of new measures are available today, like demand-side 
management, advanced weather forecasting and energy storage; 
we just need to put them to work.
The key elements of the new power system architecture are micro 
grids, smart grids and a number of interconnectors for an effective 
super grid. The first three sections of this report provide 
information on the technologies and economics of each of these 
systems. The final section outlines the study which applied the 
Greenpeace Energy [R]evolution scenario for Europe and worked 
out how big the onshore super grid would need to be to support it.
introduction 
“IN THE FUTURE, WE NEED TO CHANGE THE GRIDS SO THEY DO NOT RELY ON LARGE, CENTRAL CONVENTIONAL POWER PLANTS, 
BUT INSTEAD ON CLEAN ENERGY, FROM SOURCES LIKE WIND, SOLAR, HYDRO AND BIOMASS.” 
© GREENPEACE / DANIEL BELTRÁ 
image THE MARANCHON WIND FARM IS THE LARGEST IN EUROPE WITH 104 GENERATORS WITH A TOTAL CAPACITY OF 208 MW, ENOUGH ANNUAL POWER FOR 590,000 PEOPLE. THE FARM 
ANNUALLY PRODUCES THE EQUIVALENT ELECTRICITY OF 100,000 TONS OF OIL, THEREBY ELIMINATING 430,000 TONS OF CO 2.

8[R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
the vision 
To create smart grids takes an overall approach; it is not bound to 
one particular distribution network. Micro grids and therefore also 
smart grids use new monitoring and control infrastructures 
embedded in distribution networks, that use local energy generation 
resources; for example, combinations of solar panels, micro 
turbines, fuel cells, energy efficiency and 
information/communication technology to control loads.
The super grid is a concept that helps to guarantee the security of 
supply at all times. Broadly defined, the concept refers to micro 
grids supplying local power needs, to smart grids balancing demand 
out over a region, and to super grids operating to transport large 
energy loads between regions. The three types of systems support 
each other and interconnect with each other. 
The scenario in Section 4 sets out a way of supplying 90% of 
European electricity by renewable generation, as part of the global
energy mix to meet the tough greenhouse gas reduction 
requirements needed to avoid dangerous climate change. The study 
answers the question of ‘what super grid infrastructure is needed to 
keep the lights on 24/7 when 90% of Europe’s electricity demand 
is supplied by renewable generation?’ It tracks the extreme weather 
situations that have occurred in Europe over the last 25 years in 
order to work out how much capacity the onshore super grid would 
need, and where it would be located in order to balance the local
renewables resources available with big generating potentials like 
North Sea wind and southern Europe’s sun.definitions 
Hybrid system is a term for new electricity supplied on 
islands or to bring electricity to rural areas, especially in 
developing countries. In the future, several hybrid systems 
could be connected and form micro grids which can support 
the functions of the smart grid by, for instance, enabling virtual
power plants which can be used to firm up variable generation.
In developing countries, hybrid systems can be built for remote 
locations or island; they are simpler than micro grids but they 
can be a step towards a micro grid, when they are upgraded 
and get integrated to a power system. 
Smart grid is an electricity grid that connects decentralised 
renewable energy sources and co-generation and distributes 
power highly efficiently. It is an electricity network that uses 
distributed energy resources and advanced communication 
and control technologies to deliver electricity more cost- 
effectively, with lower greenhouse intensity and in response to 
consumer needs. Typically, smaller forms of electricity 
generation are combined with energy management to balance 
out the load of all the users on the system. Small generators 
include wind turbines, solar panels, micro turbines, fuel cells 
and co-generation (combined heat and power). These types of 
energy sources can be closer to the users, rather than one 
large centralised source a far. Smart grids are a way to get 
massive amounts of renewable energy with no greenhouse 
emissions into the system, and to allow decommissioning of 
older, centralised power sources. Advanced types of control
and management technologies for the electricity grid can also 
make it run more efficiently overall. These include things like 
smart electricity meters that show real-time use and costs 
and can respond to remote communication and dynamic 
electricity pricing.
Super grid is a large interconnection - typically based on HVDC 
technology - between countries or areas with large supply and 
large demand. An example would be the interconnection of all
the large renewable based power plants in the North Sea or a 
connection between Southern Europe and Africa where 
renewable energy could be exported to bigger cities and towns,
from places with large locally available resources.

Smart grid using micro grids and virtual power plants 
9
© PAUL ANGROCK/ZENIT/GP image CONSTRUCTION OF THE OFFSHORE WINDFARM AT 
MIDDELGRUNDEN NEAR COPENHAGEN, DENMARK.
figure 1: overview of the future power system with high penetration of renewables 
SMART 
GRID CITY 
SMART 
GRID CITY SMART 
GRID CITY 
SMART 
GRID CITY SMART 
GRID CITY 
SMART 
GRID CITY SMART 
GRID CITY 
SMART 
GRID CITY 
SMART 
GRID CITY North Sea wind turbines 
and offshore supergrid 
CSP in Southern Europe and Africa North Sea wind turbines 
and offshore supergrid 
existing AC system 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 
NEW HVDC SUPERGRID 
 
VIRTUAL POWER STATION MICROGRID APP MINIGRID DISTRIBUTED GENERATION GRID 
16kWh 
battery bank 1kW 
solar PV 
1kW wind 
turbine 1kW vertical
wind turbine 3 x 20kW 
wind turbine 90kW 
solar PV 2 x 60kW 
gas turbine 
30kW gas 
turbine 23kW 
solar PV 64kW test 
load bank minigrid 
control room power grid 
site loads 
+-


10 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
a big role for the IT sector
Greenpeace runs the ‘Cool IT’ campaign to put pressure on the 
IT sector to make the technologies described in this report a 
reality. The giants of the telecommunications and technology 
sector have the power to make the grid smarter, and to get us 
towards a clean energy future, faster. There are many opportunities for the ICT sector to help to redefine 
the power network, which will look a lot different to what we have 
today. Because a smart grid has power supplied from a diverse 
range of sources and places it relies on the gathering and analysis 
of a lot of data. This requires software, hardware and data 
networks that are capable of delivering data quickly, and of 
responding to the information that they contain. 
Several key IT players are racing to smarten up energy grids across 
the globe, and there are also hundreds of companies that could 
potentially be involved with the smart grid, from 
telecommunications companies, such as Deutsche Telecom, or 
AT&T; software providers, like Cisco, or Google, and hardware 
providers, like Fujitsu and IBM; and many more. 
figure 2: ICT solutions opportunities 
SMARTGRID SUB 
SECTORS 
Network integration and 
management of distributed 
power generation 
remote demand 
management smart 
parking systems 
distributed storage 
systems 
vehicle to grid 
charging/storage 
social networking 
for ride/car sharing 
3D video 
conference route planning/goods 
management 
wireless grid 
management access to low(er) trans alternatives 
meeting 
facilitation software 
route planning/
goods management 
desktop virtualization 
e-books, e-music, digital
photos, paperless workspace 
cloud virtualization 
of servers smart meter connectivity 
software for 
demand response 
demand response integration 
with IT equipment 
highly efficient PCs congestion 
pricing and 
management tele-conference real-time transfer 
of information facility level
GHG management 
supply chain management 
and GHG reporting 
GHG management dashboards 
cloud server/virtualization software 
smart 
appliances 
building energy 
management Telecom 
Software 
Equipment TRANSPORTATION DE-MATERIALIZATION BUILDINGS INFORMATION 
MANAGEMENT 
source GREENPEACE 

11 Then there is the requirement for smart metering and information 
systems on the consumer side of the equation. This enhanced energy 
management information is needed to monitor any local resource,
such as a private photovoltaic array, ensuring that this resource is 
managed and any excess is sold to the grid accurately. Providing 
energy users with real-time data about their energy consumption 
patterns and the appliances in their buildings helps them to improve 
their own energy efficiency, and will allow many energy using 
appliances to be used at a time when local supply is high, for 
example, when the wind is blowing. As the grids get smarter still,
there will be implications for storage and use in times of low 
demand, to mop up any excess that may exist. 
There are many IT companies offering products and services to 
manage and monitor energy. The companies are of varying size from 
small start-ups through to large household names, and other companies 
that are better known as service providers. 
© GP/MARKEL REDONDO image ANDASOL 1 SOLAR POWER STATION IS EUROPE’S 
FIRST COMMERCIAL PARABOLIC TROUGH SOLAR POWER 
PLANT. IT WILL SUPPLY UP TO 200,000 PEOPLE WITH 
CLIMATE-FRIENDLY ELECTRICITY AND SAVE ABOUT 
149,000 TONS OF CARBON DIOXIDE PER YEAR COMPARED 
WITH A MODERN COAL POWER PLANT.
image THE PS10 CONCENTRATING SOLAR TOWER PLANT IN SEVILLA, SPAIN, USES 624 LARGE MOVABLE MIRRORS CALLED HELIOSTATS. THE MIRRORS CONCENTRATE THE SUN’S RAYS TO 
THE TOP OF A 115 METER (377 FOOT) HIGH TOWER WHERE A SOLAR RECEIVER AND A STEAM TURBINE ARE LOCATED. THE TURBINE DRIVES A GENERATOR, PRODUCING ELECTRICITY.IBM and Fujitsu both provide some hardware solutions to facilitate 
smart power production and they are involved in producing 
monitoring equipment for the loads and weather. Google has 
provided open source software application Powermeter, to help 
consumers directly leverage their electricity consumption data from 
their smart meter, providing real-time analysis of energy 
consumption. Microsoft has also entered the market with its Holm 
energy meter software. Cisco is looking to duplicate its role in the 
development of smart grids as they did in building the internet,
providing enterprise scale networks for application to energy 
management. It is rapidly expanding its smart grid product offerings 
to become a fully vertically integrated smart grid solutions company 
and are exploring all kinds of solutions in this area. 
Technology companies need to be pushing for the development of 
decentralised smart grids. These companies should be leading the 
way to a clean technology revolution over vested interests of some 
energy utilities that use smart grids to refer only to improving the 
efficiency of centralised fossil fuel based generation. Smart grids 
have the potential to transform the way that people use energy, and 
drive the massive global shift away from fossil fuels and towards 
renewable energy that is required to prevent the worst ravages of 
climate change. The onus is on leading technology companies to 
take the bold steps needed to realise this potential.
© GP/MARKEL REDONDO 

12 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 1
1renewable energy and hybrid systems 
GLOBAL RENEWABLE TECHNOLOGIES 
HYBRID SYSTEMS DESIGN MICRO UTILITY MODEL 
“...more power, 
at a cheaper rate...”
GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL 
CLIMATE CAMPAIGN 
image SOLAR PANEL. © BERND JUERGENS/DREAMSTIME 

13 Richer countries have more people connected to electricity in their 
homes and work-place. The percentage of people with access to 
electricity in a country is also referred to as ‘electrification.’ Table 1 
gives an overview of electricity access in three representative 
countries: Zambia, a developing economy, India, a rapidly 
industrialising economy and Germany, a post-industrial country.
In post-industrial countries and regions such as Japan, Europe and 
North America, the power system essentially reaches everywhere. 
In these countries each person typically uses 20-25 kWh per day. 
In developing countries however, the power system does not reach 
as far, and each person typically uses only 1-2 kWh per day when 
averaged across a country’s entire population. 
There are challenges in developing countries to update the electricity 
system: the existing system is very small, with poor quality of supply 
and frequent power interruptions and at the same time, there is a 
rapid increase in demand in the areas that are already connected to 
the grid. Any solution must address climate change issues; otherwise 
providing more power in developing countries will have a significant 
impact on climate change in the future. In particular, the electrification of rural areas that currently have 
no access to any power system cannot go ahead as it has in the 
past. A standard approach in developed countries would be to 
extend the grid by installing high- or medium-voltage lines, adding 
new substation(s) and a low-voltage distribution grid. But when 
there is low potential electricity demand, and long distances 
between the existing grid and rural areas, this method is often not 
economically feasible.
Electrification based on renewable energy systems (RES) with 
hybrid electricity systems is often the cheapest as well as least 
polluting alternative. Hybrid systems connect renewable energy 
sources such as wind and solar power to a battery via a charge 
controller, which stores the generated electricity and acts as the 
main power supply. They typically have back-up from a fossil fuel,
wind-battery-diesel or PV-battery-diesel systems, for instance.
Decentralised hybrid systems are more reliable, consumers can be 
involved in operation through innovative technologies and they can 
make best use of local resources. Decentralised renewable energy 
systems are less dependent on larger-scale infrastructure and can 
be constructed and connected faster, especially in rural areas. 
The following sections describe today’s state-of-the-art solutions of 
renewable energy solutions for grid connection and electrification of 
rural areas in developing countries. The focus is on renewable 
energy solutions which already exist and have been successfully 
employed in developing countries. 1renewable energy and hybrid systems |ELECTRICITY ACCESS 
image SOLAR PANEL. © BERND JUERGENS/DREAMSTIME 
table 1: electricity access and use in illustrative countries 
CIRCUIT OF > 132 KV 
TRANSMISSION 
LINES/SQ KM 
0.0048 
0.021 
0.234 PERCENTAGE WITH 
ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY 
IN 2000 
12 
43 
100 COUNTRY 
Zambia 
India 
Germany PER CAPITA KWH 
USE IN 2003 
662 
435 
6,900 AVERAGE ANNUAL CHANGE 
IN PER CAPITA KWH USE 
IN 2000 - 2003 (%) 
4.6 
2.7 
1.1 PER CAPITA KWH 
USE IN 2000 
582 
402 
6,682 
source ENERGY BALANCES OF OECD COUNTRIES (2006 EDITION); ECONOMIC INDICATORS AND ENERGY BALANCES OF NON-OECD COUNTRIES 
(2006 EDITION);WORLD ENERGY OUTLOOK: ENERGY AND POVERTY (2002), PARIS: IEA; . HTTP://WWW.SAPP.CO.ZW/; HTTP://WWW.POWERGRIDINDIA.
COM/POWERGRID/; HTTP://WWW.EON-NETZ.COM/.
graph source HTTP://EETD.LBL.GOV/EA/EMS/REPORTS/MICROGRIDS-LARGER-ROLE.PDF ‘Hybrid systems’ can provide renewable energy solutions on 
islands or rural electrification in developing countries. This 
section describes the way that renewable energy technologies 
can provide more power, at a cheaper rate, with a reliable 
supply on islands and in rural areas. The ‘grid’ part of the 
equation refers to how the technology for interconnection and 
system control can make renewable energy systems more 
feasible economically, by connecting several small generators 
to one integrated system.
© GP / BAS BEENTJES image BIOMASS POWER PLANT IN LELYSTAD, THE 
NETHERLANDS. BY BURNING WOOD CHIPS THE POWER 
PLANT GENERATES ELECTRICITY, ENERGY AND HEAT 
AND PROVIDES FOR 3000 HOUSEHOLDS. 

14 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
1.1 renewable technologies 
Over the past decade, most renewable energy technologies have become 
mainstream energy technology and they are applied world-wide where 
there are sufficient natural resources (Table 2). For example, there is now 
more than 125 GW of wind energy installed world-wide, from small wind 
turbines with a few kW to multi-megawatt plants. Approximately 25 GW 
are added every year, making this a truly established energy technology. 
Renewable energy technology is now reliable and economically 
competitive in many areas around the world, particularly if compared 
to grid extension. The implications for integrating renewable energy to 
conventional power grids are discussed in smart grids Section 2.1.1renewable energy and hybrid systems |RENEWABLE TECHNOLOGIES 
1.1.1 selecting the right type of renewable energy source 
The most appropriate type of renewable energy for any one site,
depends on the local conditions, and needs field data to be collected.
The best choice of technology will take technical, economic, financial,
and socio-cultural considerations into account. The following basic 
criteria should be considered to design an optimal power solution: 2
•location: The suitability of the site to be electrified, 
its topographic and geographical characteristics. 
•For example, wind turbines should not be installed near buildings,
trees and other obstacles to avoid turbulence and loss of energy 
production. Wind turbines should be at least 2m above any 
building or obstacles in the area. 
•resource: Resource evaluation requires data collection 
and interpretation.
solar: The solar resource is linked to solar irradiation, latitude,
altitude, cloud cover and content of water vapour and dust in the 
air. Therefore, the essential factors for developing solar energy 
are the monthly average of daily sunshine hours, site latitude,
local average cloudy days, foggy days and rainfall day.wind: The power in the wind is directly related to the cube of the 
wind speed and to the air density, i.e. a 10% higher average wind 
speed will result in an approximately 30% higher energy yield.
Wind resources become exploitable where average annual wind 
speeds exceed 5 m/s. Essential factors for wind resource 
evaluation are the yearly average wind speed; height at which 
wind speeds were measured; site altitude; primary seasonal wind 
directions; topography of the site and forestry cover at the site.
small hydro power (SHP): The energy output of a hydro power is 
determined by flow rate (litres/s) and net head (m) of water. Therefore,
the essential factors for evaluating resources for small hydro power 
are annual flow-rate; monthly distribution of the resource.
•load analysis: A load analysis is done to match supply to 
demand, it typically includes: 
load type: There are three main groups to be considered: 
domestic loads (lighting, TV, refrigerator, iron, etc), community 
loads (schools and public lighting and appliances, water pumping,
etc) and commercial loads (electric power tools, etc); 
load calculation or how much power is required; 
load growth: A study of the current and future local demand for 
electricity is needed to match the system size to future use and 
avoid power shortages. A flexible system design that can be 
expanded as load demand increases helps to mitigate risks 
associated with unpredictable load growth rates. 
Table 3 provides an overview of average daily working hours for 
typical loads and their rated power.table 2: status of renewable energy technology 
EXPERIENCE 
WORLDWIDE 
Extensive 
Extensive 
Some 
Some 
Extensive, in 
wood and agro 
industries worldwide 
Enormous (e.g. China,
Nepal, Vietnam) COMMERCIAL STATUS 
Fully commercial
Commercial and 
evolving rapidly 
Under development, first 
commercial products 
becoming available 
Limited but expanding 
commercial availability; 
expanded commercialization 
underway 
Commercial 
site-engineered systems 
Fully commercial, 
with innovative products 
emerging TECHNOLOGY 
Photovoltaics 
Small wind power 
(electric) 
Small modular 
biopower units 
(10 kWe to 100+ kWe) 
Small packaged 
biopower units 
(100 - 500 kWe) 
Bioenergy > 0.5 Mwe 
Microhydro electric 
source ALLIANCE FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION, HTTP://WWW.RURALELEC.ORG/table 3: rated power and average daily working 
hours for typical loads 
RATED POWER 
(W) 
9-30 
70 
20 
40 
150 
120 
165 
10 
750 
2,000 
50 
1,000 
20 
400 
200 
100 
1,000 AVERAGE DAILY 
WORKING HOURS (H) 
5
5522
10 
0,5 11
5 (Summer) 
2 (Summer) 
3155
30min 
10min LOAD / APPLICATION 
Energy-saving lights 
21” Color TV 
B/W TV 
Cassette recorder 
Washing machine 
Refrigerator 
1/5 HP Water Pump 
Radio set 
Dust cleaner 
2 Pair conditioner 
Electric fan 
Moveable Electric Heater 
Bubble Jet Printer 
Desk computer 
Monitor 
Fax machine 
Microwave stove 
source ALLIANCE FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION, HTTP://WWW.RURALELEC.ORG/,
HTTP://WWW.RURALELEC.ORG/8.0.HTML?&L=0, 

15 
 © GWEC/WIND POWER WORKS image WORKERS ON A WIND TURBINE 
BY THE VILLAGES OF NIEBÜLL AND 
MARIENKOOG, GERMANY. 1renewable energy and hybrid systems |HYBRID SYSTEMS DESIGN 
1.2 hybrid systems design 
The electrification of rural areas that have a poor security of supply 
or are entirely without access to any power system requires new 
solutions. Often; diesel generators are used for power supply in 
these areas they may supply just a single load (house or business) 
or island power systems. Using diesel is expensive for communities 
and they cause significant emissions. Fuel prices are only going up,
so the costs will increase for towns running on diesel. Hybrid 
systems that use a significant share of renewable power sources are 
becoming economically competitive and are a lot cleaner. The hybrid 
system definition for this report is ‘a combination of different, but 
complementary energy supply systems used in the same island 
power system’. Hybrid systems are typically designed to balance 
variable renewable energy resources and other energy supply 
systems, including storage systems such as battery and flywheel
systems. The advantage is being able to supply energy even at times 
when one part of the hybrid system is not available. 
A typical example for a hybrid system is a wind/PV/Battery/Diesel
hybrid system. In many places in the world wind and solar 
resources occur at different times, if solar radiation is high, wind 
speeds are low and vice versa. 
The storage systems within hybrid systems are typically designed to 
cope with short-term fluctuations; they can store surplus power 
supply for times when demand is higher than local renewable 
generation capacity. The storage capacity, however, is typically only 
enough to provide balancing in the time frame of minutes (5 to 10 
minutes). In places where renewable energy does not provide power 
100% of the time, diesel gensets are typically used as back-up 
systems.Hybrid systems can be designed in many different ways,
mainly because of great variations in the availability of local natural
resources. Often diesel generator sets are already installed in the 
local area, and hybrid systems are usually developed in two steps: 
1Small amounts of renewable energy sources are added to a diesel
island power system, i.e. the renewable energy sources have a 
rather small influence on the overall island power system 
operation. In this case, the only impact is the reduction of fuel
consumption in the diesel gensets, but the general control scheme 
is typically not affected.
2Increasing shares of variable renewable energy sources, which 
requires adjustment of the overall control scheme and the 
possible addition of storage systems. One of these control
schemes is known under the term micro grid (see also Section 
1.3.2 about control approaches for hybrid systems).Hybrid systems can be designed in a variety of ways, and there are 
many different combinations in working systems. 
A common hybrid system suitable for developing countries consists of: 
•A primary source of energy, i.e. renewable such as wind or PV; 
•A secondary source of energy for supply in case of shortages 
e.g. Diesel; 
•A storage system to guarantee stable output (battery) during 
short periods of time and/or to meet peak demands; 
•A charge controller which regulates the state-of-load of the battery; 
•DC/AC inverters may also be needed.
Some examples of technologies in operation are: PV/Battery,
PV/Diesel, PV/Battery/Diesel, PV/Flywheel/Diesel, Wind/Battery; 
Wind/Diesel; Wind/Battery/Diesel, Wind/Flywheel/Diesel,
Wind/PV/Small Hydro; Wind/Small Hydro; Wind/Small
Hydro/Battery; Small Hydro/Biomass; Small
Hydro/Battery/Biomass; Wind/PV/Biomass.
1.2.1 hybrid systems: main technical design options 
There are different principal technical design options for hybrid 
systems, depending on the overall system demand. A general
categorisation of hybrid systems is given in Table 4. 
Examples of these four categories are: 
•A micro system is a small PV or wind turbine with a capacity of 
less than 1kW and a small battery (DC bus system); 
•A village home system typically has a load between 1 and 100 kW 
with a renewable energy generation capacity of 1-50 kW (AC and 
DC bus possible); 
•An island power system typically has a peak load from 100 kW to 
10 MW and an installed renewable generation capacity in the range 
from 100 kW to 1 MW, and 
•A large (interconnected) island power system typically is larger 
than 10 MW with several renewable power plants installed, each 
typically larger than 1 MW.table 4: categorization of hybrid systems 
CATEGORY 
Micro systems 
Village power systems 
Island power systems 
Large interconnected 
systems DESCRIPTION 
Single Point DC-based system 
Small power system 
(DC and AC) 
Isolated grid systems (AC) 
Large remote 
power system (AC) INSTALLED POWER 
< 1kW 
1 – 100kW 
100 kW -10MW 
> 10MW 
source WIND POWER IN POWER SYSTEMS, EDITOR T. ACKERMANN, WILEY & SONS 
reference 
2 BASED ON ALLIANCE FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION ,HTTP://WWW.RURALELEC.ORG/.

16 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
Wind Energy-diesel systems are the most established hybrid 
systems, they can provide a model for how much renewable energy 
can be included in hybrid systems. Figure 3 shows the maximum 
penetration level of wind power in existing hybrid systems, defined 
as the ratio between instantaneous wind power output and 
instantaneous primary electrical load. The real-life conditions in 
Denmark in 1998 and a projection for Denmark for the year 2030,
give an indication of how much wind energy could be included in 
different power systems of varying sizes.
It shows that small hybrid systems can achieve a renewable 
penetration level of 100%, but with the penetration levels typically 
lower for systems of greater capacity. However, the reasons are often 
economic and not technical issues – the increasing price of diesel fuel
is likely to raise renewable penetration levels in larger hybrid systems.
In the following, we will briefly describe the principal design options. 
DC interconnected hybrid system All electricity generating 
components are interconnected via a DC (direct current) 
connection which is used to charge a battery. AC generating 
components need an AC/DC converter. The battery is typically 
protected from overcharge and discharge by a charge controller.
The battery supplies power to the DC loads in response to the 
demand. AC loads can be operated via a DC/AC inverter (see Figure 
4 for a principal overview).
Security of supply is typically limited as no back-up supply is available.1renewable energy and hybrid systems |DC INTERCONNECTED HYBRID SYSTEM 
•MICRO SYSTEMS •VILLAGE POWER SYSTEMS •ISLAND POWER SYSTEMS 
LARGE INTERCONNECTED SYSTEM 
TODAY 
FUTURE figure 3: present and expected future development of
the wind energy penetration vs. the installed system 
capacity based on lundsager et al. (2001)
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0
installed system power (W) wind penetration (%) 
source SOURCE: WIND POWER IN POWER SYSTEMS, 
EDITOR T. ACKERMANN, WILEY & SONS.10 Frøya Island 
Foula Island 
Cape Clear 
Rathlin Island 
Masabit 
La Desirade 
Dachen 
Mindelo Denham 
SalDenmark 
(1998) Denmark 
(2030) 
100 1k 10k 100k 1M 10M 100M 1G 10G 100G 1T 
source HYBRID POWER SYSTEMS BASED ON RENEWABLE ENERGIES: A SUITABLE AND COST-COMPETITIVE SOLUTION FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION, ALLIANCE FOR RURAL 
ELECTRIFICATION.figure 4: example for DC interconnected hybrid system 
~~~PHOTOVOLTAICS 
 WIND 
 HYDRO 
 GENSET 
~AC/DC converters and chargers 
Charge controller 
DC LOADS 
optional 
BATTERY INVERTER AC LOADS DC VOLTAGE 
AC VOLTAGE DC bus line 

17 AC interconnected hybrid system All generating components are 
connected to an AC interconnection and AC generating components 
may be directly connected to loads via AC connection or via an AC/AC 
inverter (Option A, see Figure 5). The battery is connected to the AC 
system via an inverter. The inverter controls the energy supply to the AC 
loads; and DC loads can optionally be supplied directly via the battery. 
In option B (see Figure 6), the DC generation resources are directly 
connected to the battery via a DC connection.
There are different options for the frequency control and voltage control
in the AC system, see also section on control for hybrid systems.
© GP/HU WEI image THE HUGE SHADOW OF A 60-METRE-HIGH WIND 
TURBINE EXTENDS ACROSS THE GOBI DESERT FLOOR AT 
THE HE LAN SHAN WIND FARM IN THE NINGXIA 
PROVINCE, CHINA.1renewable energy and hybrid systems |AC INTERCONNECTED HYBRID SYSTEM 
source HYBRID POWER SYSTEMS BASED ON RENEWABLE ENERGIES: A SUITABLE AND COST-COMPETITIVE SOLUTION FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION, 
ALLIANCE FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION.figure 5: AC interconnected hybrid system – option A 
~
~
~~
~PHOTOVOLTAICS 
 WIND 
 HYDRO 
 GENSET 
~AC/AC converters 
Inverters 
DC LOADS 
optional 
BATTERY Master inverter and 
battery charger AC LOADS 
DC VOLTAGE 
AC VOLTAGE AC bus line 

18 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
1.2.2 hybrid systems: control technologies 
In hybrid systems that focus around a DC interconnection, batteries 
act as a large power resistor, smoothing out any short or long-term 
fluctuations in the power flow. Hence the control required for DC 
systems is very simple as it regulates itself based on a few battery- 
specific parameters. 
AC-interconnected hybrid systems have greater control requirements – 
both for production balancing as well as load and voltage regulation.
The simplest control approach is based on ‘droop control’, a simple 
proportional control scheme. The big advantage of droop control is 
that it does not require any complicated communication system. 
Droop control is commonly used in diesel-based island systems where 
several generators are running at once. Because it is simple, and based 
on inverter technology already used in PV/batteries and wind turbines,
island systems now use droop control. Island systems using inverter 
systems with droop control are often referred to as micro grids.3
Micro grids typically can also be part of a larger power system.
During a utility-grid disturbance, they can separate and isolate 
themselves seamlessly from the utility with little or no disruption to 
the loads within the micro grids. When the utility grid then returns to normal, the micro grid automatically resynchronises and 
reconnects itself to the grid, in an equally seamless fashion.4This is 
particularly interesting for areas in developing countries which have 
grid supply, but experience frequent power interruptions. Distributed 
PV systems and other renewable generation sources can be 
interconnected to a micro grid and be operated in a micro grid in 
case the main power supply is interrupted. 
In hybrid systems that have more than one-third of variable 
renewable generation, additional devices will be integrated into the 
hybrid system to achieve high overall efficiency. This is largely done 
with the use of synchronous condensers, dispatchable load banks,
storage, demand-side management which may require advanced 
supervisory control systems that carefully monitor the operating 
conditions of each component to ensure that the result is power 
with a consistent frequency and voltage. The disadvantage of such a 
supervisory control system is the need for additional fast 
communication in the island system.1renewable energy and hybrid systems |HYBRID SYSTEMS: CONTROL TECHNOLOGIES 
source HYBRID POWER SYSTEMS BASED ON RENEWABLE ENERGIES: A SUITABLE AND COST-COMPETITIVE SOLUTION FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION, 
ALLIANCE FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION.figure 6: AC interconnected hybrid system – option B 
~ ~
~PHOTOVOLTAICS 
 WIND 
 HYDRO 
 GENSET 
~AC/AC converter 
AC/DC converter and charger 
Charge controller 
AC bus line 
DC bus line DC LOADS 
optional 
BATTERY Master inverter and 
battery charger AC LOADS 
DC VOLTAGE 
AC VOLTAGE 
references 
3 MICRO GRIDS – AN OVERVIEW OF ONGOING RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND 
DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS, SEE HTTP://EETD.LBL.GOV/EA/EMP/REPORTS/62937.PDF,
FOR DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS FOR PV BASED MICRO GRID SYSTEMS SEE ALSO 
HTTP://DOWNLOAD.SMA.DE/SMAPROSA/DATEIEN/1698/REFOCUS_ELECCHINA.PDF 
4 HTTP://CERTS.LBL.GOV/CERTS-DER-MICRO.HTML 

case study: comparison of PV with diesel or grid connections 
Location: Far & Middle East, Africa (>5,000 kWh/ m 2/ year) 
Daily energy requirement: 10,000 Wh/day 
Maximum peak power of load: <20kW 
Power supply of load equipment: 3x230V AC Case study Figure 2 shows the investment cost for a public grid 
extension versus an independent 30kWp photovoltaic power 
supply system. If we suppose a certain amount for a transformer 
station and 20,000 Euro per km of grid extension, the initial
investment cost for a PV system is cheaper if it is situated 
further than 17 km away from the public grid.
19 1.2.3 hybrid systems: design and economic modelling tools 
For a principal first evaluation of the economic and technical feasibility 
of a particular hybrid system the following software tools are useful: 
•HOMER is a computer model that simplifies the task of 
evaluating design options for both off-grid and grid-connected 
power systems using large shares of renewable generation.
HOMER’s optimisation and sensitivity analysis algorithms allow 
the user to evaluate the economic and technical feasibility of a 
large number of technology options and to account for 
uncertainty in technology costs, energy resource availability, and 
other variables. The model is available for free from the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL),
https://analysis.nrel.gov/homer/.•Hybrid2 is a state-of-the-art time series model for the prediction 
of the technical-economical performance of hybrid wind/PV 
systems and offers a very high flexibility in specifying the 
connectivity of systems. Publicly available at 
http://www.ceere.org/rerl/rerl_hybridpower.html
•RETScreen is a spreadsheet (Microsoft Excel)-based analysis 
and evaluation tool for the assessment of the cost-effectiveness of 
potential projects with renewable energy technologies. The 
software package consists of a series of work sheets with a 
standardised layout as well as an online manual and a weather 
and cost database. Publicly available in 34 languages at 
www.retscreen.net. See the case study below, comparing two 
types of village power systems.5
© LANGROCK/ZENIT/GP image CONSTRUCTION OF 
WIND TURBINES.1renewable energy and hybrid systems |HYBRID SYSTEMS: DESIGN AND ECONOMIC MODELLING TOOLS 
case study figure 1: economic comparison between 
diesel / fuel operated power supply 
and a photovaltaic power supply 
800, 000 
700,000 
600,000 
500,000 
400,000 
300,000 
200,000 
100,000 
€0
years generator 
photovaltaic 
0123456789 10 
150,000 Euro 
80,000 Euro 
30,000 Euro 
20,000 Euro 
20,000 Euro 
300,000 Euro 
2,000 Euro 
15,000 Euro 
17,000 Euro case study table 1: pv power supply 
Investment cost of 30 kWp PV village power supply 
PV modules 
Industrial batteries 
Electronics 
Accessories 
Infrastructure & installation 
Total 
Annual cost 
Maintenance 
Interest rate (5%) 
Total 20,000 Euro 
6,000 Euro 
10,000 Euro 
10,000 Euro 
20,000 Euro 
66,000 Euro 
15,000 Euro 
40,000 Euro 
4,500 Euro 
2,000 Euro 
3,300 Euro 
64,800 Euro case study table 2: diesel generator
Investment cost of 20> KWA diesel generator 
Generator 
20,000 l tank 
48 V DC supply 
Accessories 
Infrastructure & installation 
Total 
Annual cost 
Maintenance 
Fuel consumption (15l/h) 
(131,000 liter / year 0.30 € / liter) 
Transport of fuel (9x) 
Oil consumption 
Interest rate (5%) 
Total case study figure 2: village power supply by PV 
systems: public grid versus 30kWp photovaltaic 
power supply (VPS)
1,000,000 
900,000 
800, 000 
700,000 
600,000 
500,000 
400,000 
300,000 
200,000 
100,000 
€0
years public grid 
30 kWp PV power supply 
05 10 15 20 25 30 35 
reference 
5 HTTP://WWW.RURALELEC.ORG/INDEX.PHP?ID=118&TYPE=0&JUMPURL=UPLOADS%2 
FMEDIA%2FECONOMIC_ANALYSIS_COMPARISON_PV-DIESEL_BY_SOLAR_02.PDF& 
JUSECURE=1&LOCATIONDATA=118%3ATT_CONTENT%3A487&JUHASH=5776920B9D 

20 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
1.2.4 PV-systems / PV-diesel systems 
example PV-diesel micro grid: Greek island 
The system in Gaidouromantra, Kythnos 6electrifies 12 houses in a 
small valley in Kythnos, an island in the cluster of Cyclades situated in 
the middle of the Aegean Sea. It is a 1-phase hybrid micro grid system 
composed of overhead power lines and a communication cable running 
in parallel (see Figure 7). The settlement is situated about 4 km away from the closest pole of the medium voltage line of the island. The 
system just needed one new building with a surface area of 20 m 2in 
the middle of the settlement to house the battery inverters, the battery 
banks, the diesel genset and its tank, the computer equipment for 
monitoring and the communication hardware.
The system produces 10kW (peak) and the solar cells are divided 
into smaller sub-systems and a battery bank with a nominal capacity 
of 53kWh and a diesel genset with a nominal output of 5kVA. 
A second system with about 2 kW(peak) mounted on the roof of the 
system house is connected to a Sunny-island inverter and a 32kWh 
battery bank. This second system provides the power for the 
monitoring and communication needs of the systems. The PV modules 
are integrated as canopies to various houses of the settlements.
The power in each user’s house is limited by a 6 Amp fuse. The 
micro grid is powered by 3 island battery inverters connected in 
parallel, which means that more than one battery inverter can be 
used when more power is demanded by the consumers. The battery 
inverters in the Kythnos system can operate in both isochronous or 
‘droop’ mode. In frequency droop mode the system can pass 
information on to switching load controllers when the batteries 
have low charge and can limit the power output of the PV inverters 
when the battery bank is full. 1renewable energy and hybrid systems |PV-SYSTEMS / PV-DIESEL SYSTEMS 
table 5: current status of pv-diesel systems 
EXPERIENCE 
WORLDWIDE 
Extensive, especially for 
telecommunications 
worldwide COMMERCIAL STATUS 
Fully commercial and the 
preferred option for remote 
telecommunications,
commercially evolving for 
village power TECHNOLOGY 
PV/diesel hybrids 
source ALLIANCE FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION, HTTP://WWW.RURALELEC.ORG/.
source FRAUNHOFER IWES figure 7: kythnos pv-diesel micro grid 
reference 
6 HTTP://WWW.MICROGRIDS.EU/INDEX.PHP?PAGE=KYTHNOS&ID=2 ~=PV Array 
PV Array 
PV Array AC Grid: 3~ 400 V 
=~
=~
=~
=~
MORE PV MODE Battery PV Diesel Battery PV =~
=~
=~
=~
G~=
~=
~=~=
AC Grid: 3~ 400 V 

21 1.2.5 wind-diesel systems 
The following five case studies show how wind-diesel systems are 
appropriate for a diverse range of circumstances around the world. 
Afghanistan: small wind/PV/battery system The main aim of this 
system is to supply power to water disinfection/treatment units. Eleven 
stand-alone systems have been installed in villages, including the districts 
of Parwan, Wardak and Kapisa. The power system consists of a Bergey 1 
1kW wind turbine on a 42 ft tilt-up tower, a 280W PV, a battery bank,
and an inverter. The water treatment technology uses a small-scale 
ozonation system. Ozone is very effective for water treatment and uses 
minimal amounts of energy. Most communities are using the system to 
treat around 2,000 to 4,000 litres of drinking water per day.7
Guadeloupe Islands: wind/diesel In January 1993 twelve 12 kW 
wind-powered generators were set up at an altitude of 270 m on 
the island of La Désirade, on high table-land facing the open sea,
swept most of the time by trade winds blowing at an average of 9 
to 10 metres a second. Before this, electricity generation on the 
island was wholly dependent on a 350- kW diesel-driven power 
plant that consumed nearly 600 tons of oil per year.
Now, the wind farm saves around 220 tons of diesel oil a year and 
the price of wind-generated electricity per kW/h is now less than that 
of diesel-generated power. The installed capacity of the wind farm 
was more than doubled in 1996 and is now rated at 500 kW, and is 
now producing about 80% of the island’s power requirements. When 
local energy demand is low, La Désirade even exports wind-generated 
electricity to the neighbouring island of Guadeloupe.
An extra design feature is that the wind turbines on the Guadeloupe 
islands can be lowered when a hurricane is approaching. On August 16,
2007, for instance, while Hurricane Dean was approaching, local crews 
lowered the 27 turbines of Guadeloupe securely fastened them to the 
ground and they survived wind gusts of more than 250 km/h. Once Dean 
had passed over the islands, the wind farms quickly resumed production.8
Bonaire: wind/diesel system A wind-diesel system is currently 
under construction on the island of Bonaire in the Dutch Carribean.
The system has a total capacity of 10.8 MW, made up of connects 
14 wind turbines. The turbines are connected to 5 diesel gensets with 
a total capacity of 14.33 MW and it has a 3 MW battery system,
which provides 100 kWh for 3 minutes. The diesel gensets can 
operate on bio-diesel, so the system can run on 100% renewable energy. The overall hybrid system runs with a ‘loss of load’ probability 
of 99.932%, so locals can expect only 6 hours per year when the 
system might not be able to meet the island’s electricity demand.
Finally, the system fulfils an advanced grid code which is similar to 
Western European grid codes for large integrated power systems, so 
the power quality is equal to large interconnected power systems.
Galapagos: wind/diesel system The wind-diesel hybrid system on 
San Cristobal Island in Galapagos, Ecuador reduces the amount of 
diesel fuel used for power generation and promotes new renewable 
energy on the Galapagos Islands. There are three 800 kW wind 
turbines coupled to the existing diesel generator system.  An 
electrical collector system gathers the power from each wind turbine 
through underground cabling and transports the power to the wind 
farm boundary where it connects to a transmission line via a 
disconnect switch.  Output at the wind farm is 13.8 kV to allow for 
voltage drop in the transmission line. A new transmission line was 
installed to transport the power from the wind farm to the existing 
Elecgalapagos S.A. Diesel Plant substation which was updated with 
a new control system.  The new transmission line connects to the 
Elecgalapagos distribution substation at the diesel plant.9
Alto Baguales: wind-hydro-diesel system This system in Patagonia,
Chile, supplies energy to the regional capital of Coyhaique, providing a 
maximum power of 13.75 MW. The wind turbines are now connected 
to hydro power, installed in 2003 so the whole load is met by wind and 
hydropower, completely eliminating diesel production.
Three 660-kW Vestas wind turbines were installed to supplement 
the diesel and hydro production in 2001. Initially, the Alto Baguales 
wind energy project was designed to supply more than 16% of the 
local electric demand and replace about 600,000 litres (158,500 
gallons) of diesel fuel per year.
The turbines are operated remotely from the diesel plant with no 
additional control capabilities; and they operate at capacity factor of 
approximately 50% due to strong winds at the turbine site. To date,
the highest percentage of supply was 22% of total demand based on 
15-minute instantaneous readings taken at the power station.
Cape Verde: wind-diesel system The Archipelago of the Republic 
of Cape Verde consists of 10 major islands off the Western cost of 
Africa. Three wind-diesel systems have successfully provided power 
to the three main communities of Cape Verde: Sal, Mindelo, and 
Praia since the mid-1990s. These power systems are very simple,
containing only a dump load and a wind turbine shut-down function 
to keep minimum diesel load conditions. Three 300-kW wind 
turbines at each site are connected to the existing diesel
distribution grid in a standard grid-connected fashion. The average 
loads for the communities vary from 1.15 MW for the smallest,
Sal, to 4.5 MW for the largest, Praia (the nation’s capital). 
The power systems operate at monthly wind energy penetrations of 
up to 25%, depending on the system and time of year. At Sal and 
Mindelo the wind turbines have provided 14% of the total
consumption by wind power each year. The maximum monthly 
percentage of wind power was of 35% was reached in Sal. 1renewable energy and hybrid systems |WIND DIESEL SYSTEMS 
table 6: current status of wind-diesel systems 
EXPERIENCE 
WORLDWIDE 
Significant, not 
yet extensive COMMERCIAL STATUS 
Commercial, competitive, 
and evolving TECHNOLOGY 
Wind/diesel hybrids 
source ALLIANCE FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION, HTTP://WWW.RURALELEC.ORG/.
references 
7 HTTP://WWW.BERGEY.COM/EXAMPLES/AFGHANISTAN.HTML 
8 HTTP://WWW.VERGNET.FR/IMAGES/STORIES/PDF/EN/DOCUMENTS/PLAQUETTE- 
GEV_MP275-UK.PDF reference 
9 HTTP://WWW.EOLICSA.COM.EC/INDEX.PHP?ID=3 
image THE PS10 CONCENTRATING SOLAR TOWER PLANT 
IN SEVILLA, SPAIN, USES 624 LARGE MOVABLE MIRRORS 
CALLED HELIOSTATS. THE MIRRORS CONCENTRATE THE 
SUN’S RAYS TO THE TOP OF A 115 METER (377 FOOT) HIGH 
TOWER WHERE A SOLAR RECEIVER AND A STEAM TURBINE 
ARE LOCATED. THE TURBINE DRIVES A GENERATOR,
PRODUCING ELECTRICITY.
© GP/MARKEL REDONDO 

case study: solar island states 
solar island states – a Greenpeace concept to help island 
utilities go fossil-free 
The ‘Solar Island States’ idea is a way to get financing from the 
‘top-down’, but planning for the systems from the ‘bottom-up’,
which means that communities are involved in deciding where 
systems are built and how they are run. 
A) top-down financing In remote islands, individual and rural
electrification projects are usually too small to be interesting for 
foreign investors and quality control is difficult. A solution 
proposed by Greenpeace is to bundle power generation projects 
from whole islands, the entire island state (such as the Maldives) 
or even several Island states (such as the 14 Pacific Island States) 
into one project package. This would make it large enough for 
funding as an international project, by OECD countries. Funding 
mechanisms can come from a mix of a feed-in tariff and a fund 
which covers the extra costs as proposed in the Energy 
[R]evolution, called FSTM (Feed-in Tariff Support Mechanism). 
A bundled project could be worth $US 2 billion or more – that 
means in the range of an average size power plant investment 
such as a coal power plant -making it relevant for international
finance institutions and for infrastructure projects. A project this 
size would be too big for a single project developer or an existing 
small island utility, but it would be interesting for institutional
investors. A bigger project also achieves ‘economies of scale’ so 
project developers and potential hardware manufacturers can 
operate with lower costs and centralised quality control and 
equipment performance guarantees.
B) bottom-up planning A research paper from UNDP 11 and 
numerous other organisations come to a very clear result: Almost 
all renewable energy projects in the Pacific have failed because of 
top-down planning and poor maintenance due to a lack of training 
of local technicians. Only a few projects – which were planned 
from the community – were successful. Good planning and a long- 
term organisation of the maintenance are required to make rural
electrification with renewable energy a success.financing island utilities 
The main obstacles to switching from diesel to solar are the high 
upfront investment costs, and utilities in Pacific Island countries 
cannot finance the required new solar capacities. The graph 
below provides an overview of the annual payment (total
payment – including interest) and the interest costs of a 20 kW 
system which will be completely financed with a 3% soft loan, or 
6% and 10% conventional bank credit over 20 years. The Island 
Utility concept needs to overcome this investment barrier.
how to read the graph - examples: 
•In regions with 5.4 kWh/day solar energy, the annual savings 
on diesel fuel (with a diesel price of $1.78/L) can balance out 
the average annual interest rates of a soft loan credit with 3% 
interest & 20 years).
•In regions with 6.95 kWh/day solar energy, the annual diesel fuel
savings (with a diesel price of $1.78/L) can balance out the 
average annual total payment of credit with 10% interest 
& 20 years.
Example A shows that a solar system could be financed with fuel
savings alone if the diesel price is at $ 1.78/L or higher. With an 
average consumer price of 15 cents/kWh – the break-even point for 
solar systems operated by a utility will be at around $1.3 /L diesel.
22 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
1.3 new ownership approaches: 
the micro-utility model
In many developing countries, communities or individuals cannot 
afford to install a hybrid system or a PV home system. For this 
reason, new ownership models are required in developing countries 
to help the growth of clean energy options.
The power company Grameen Shakti (GS) in Bangladesh 10 , for 
instance, has introduced the idea of micro-utility systems. Under 
this model, one entrepreneur installs the system at his own premises 
and shares the load with some of his neighbours. The owner of the 
system is responsible for making the instalment payments to the 
power company, but more than 50% is covered by the rents 
collected from the users of the system. The micro-utility model has 
become very popular in rural market places in Bangladesh and has 
helped to increase business turnover by extending business hours.
More than 1,000 micro-utility systems are now operating in rural
market places. 1renewable energy and hybrid systems |THE MICRO-UTILITY MODEL 
reference 
10 HTTP://WWW.GSHAKTI.ORG/SOLAR_MICROUTILITY.HTML reference 
11 PACIFIC ISLANDS RENEWABLE SPREP ENERGY PROJECT; A CLIMATE CHANGE 
PARTNERSHIP OF GEF, UNDP, SPREP AND THE PACIFIC ISLANDS, OCTOBER 2004,
PETER JOHNSTON, JOHN VOS, HERBERT WADE 

case study: solar island states 
solar island states – a Greenpeace concept to help island 
utilities go fossil-free 
The ‘Solar Island States’ idea is a way to get financing from the 
‘top-down’, but planning for the systems from the ‘bottom-up’,
which means that communities are involved in deciding where 
systems are built and how they are run. 
A) top-down financing In remote islands, individual and rural
electrification projects are usually too small to be interesting for 
foreign investors and quality control is difficult. A solution 
proposed by Greenpeace is to bundle power generation projects 
from whole islands, the entire island state (such as the Maldives) 
or even several Island states (such as the 14 Pacific Island States) 
into one project package. This would make it large enough for 
funding as an international project, by OECD countries. Funding 
mechanisms can come from a mix of a feed-in tariff and a fund 
which covers the extra costs as proposed in the Energy 
[R]evolution, called FSTM (Feed-in Tariff Support Mechanism). 
A bundled project could be worth $US 2 billion or more – that 
means in the range of an average size power plant investment 
such as a coal power plant -making it relevant for international
finance institutions and for infrastructure projects. A project this 
size would be too big for a single project developer or an existing 
small island utility, but it would be interesting for institutional
investors. A bigger project also achieves ‘economies of scale’ so 
project developers and potential hardware manufacturers can 
operate with lower costs and centralised quality control and 
equipment performance guarantees.
B) bottom-up planning A research paper from UNDP 11 and 
numerous other organisations come to a very clear result: Almost 
all renewable energy projects in the Pacific have failed because of 
top-down planning and poor maintenance due to a lack of training 
of local technicians. Only a few projects – which were planned 
from the community – were successful. Good planning and a long- 
term organisation of the maintenance are required to make rural
electrification with renewable energy a success.financing island utilities 
The main obstacles to switching from diesel to solar are the high 
upfront investment costs, and utilities in Pacific Island countries 
cannot finance the required new solar capacities. The graph 
below provides an overview of the annual payment (total
payment – including interest) and the interest costs of a 20 kW 
system which will be completely financed with a 3% soft loan, or 
6% and 10% conventional bank credit over 20 years. The Island 
Utility concept needs to overcome this investment barrier.
how to read the graph - examples: 
•In regions with 5.4 kWh/day solar energy, the annual savings 
on diesel fuel (with a diesel price of $1.78/L) can balance out 
the average annual interest rates of a soft loan credit with 3% 
interest & 20 years).
•In regions with 6.95 kWh/day solar energy, the annual diesel fuel
savings (with a diesel price of $1.78/L) can balance out the 
average annual total payment of credit with 10% interest 
& 20 years.
Example A shows that a solar system could be financed with fuel
savings alone if the diesel price is at $ 1.78/L or higher. With an 
average consumer price of 15 cents/kWh – the break-even point for 
solar systems operated by a utility will be at around $1.3 /L diesel.moving from diesel to renewable energies 
Currently most islands and island states are powered almost 
exclusively with diesel generators. In the Pacific for example, Fiji,
Papua New Guinea and Samoa are the only pacific island countries 
with a substantial use of other sources for electricity generation 
than diesel – mainly hydro. All other pacific islands have 90% to 
100% diesel power supply. 
This high diesel share in the electricity supply makes the electricity 
prices very dependent on global oil prices and diesel prices have 
increased significantly within the past 2 years. The average price 
per litre diesel increased from around $US 0.80 in 2006 to 
$US1.70 in 2008 – and the diesel price will almost certainly not 
drop in the future, but continue to rise.
limited access to diesel 
In some cases, the access to diesel is difficult for remote islands 
and is a constant problem for a reliable electricity supply for these 
islands. Research on diesel access in Pacific island countries shows 
problems with access and / or lack of competition, which puts the 
prices up for the customers. 
generation costs for clean energy on island states 
Solar electricity systems are in most cases already cheaper than 
diesel power generation. The graph below shows the fuel costs per 
kWh for different diesel prices and solar radiation per day (both 
excluding capital costs): 
•Solar PV systems in regions with 5.4 kWh/day annual average 
solar radiation (like Niue) can produce electricity at a fuel price 
level of $1.20 per litre diesel.
•If diesel costs are more than $1.20 per litre, solar photovoltaics is 
cheaper almost everywhere within the Pacific Island region.
23 
 © GP / STEVE MORGAN image ELECTRICAL TOWER IN A FLOODED FIELD IN THE 
SEVERN RIVER VALLEY. GLOUCESTERSHIRE, UK, 2000.1renewable energy and hybrid systems |SOLAR ISLAND STATES 
case study figure 1: diesel generator versus solar generator
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 0$ cents/kWh 
50 cent/liter diesel100 
cent/liter 
diesel120 
cent/liter 
dieselsolar radiation 
8 kWh/day 200 cent/liter 
dieselsolar radiation 
5.89 kWh/day 
[2,150 h/a] solar radiation 
4 kWh/day 
niue solar radiation: ca.
5.4 kWh/day - 1,950 h/a 
=> 40 cent/kWh niue diesel price 
january 2008: 
> 190 cent/liter 
=> ca. 57 cent/kWh 
source SVEN TESKE / GREENPEACEINTERNATIONAL DIESEL 
SOLAR 5.4 kWh/day 6.85 kWh/day 7.5 kWh/day 
ABcase study figure 2: annual fuel savings of a 20 kW solar
could finance solar systems 
40,000 
35,000 
30,000 
25,000 
20,000 
15,000 
10,000 
5,000 
$ / a 0
source SVEN TESKE / GREENPEACEINTERNATIONAL DIESEL PRICE: 0.8 $/LITER 
DIESEL PRICE: 1.2 $/LITER 
DIESEL PRICE: 1.78 $/LITER 
ANNUAL PAYMENT WITH 6% 
ANNUAL PAYMENT WITH 10% 
ANNUAL PAYMENT WITH 3% 

24 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
smart grids 
GLOBAL INTEGRATING RENEWABLE 
GENERATION INTO POWER SYSTEMS WHY DO WE NEED SMART GRIDS? THE SMART GRID VISION FOR THE 
ENERGY [R]EVOLUTION 
“...a vision for better,
cleaner future 
power systems...”
GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL 
CLIMATE CAMPAIGN 
image ASSEMBLING SOLAR POWERED PHOTO-VOLTAIC (PV) CELLS IN CHINA. © GREENPEACE/ALEX HOFFORD 22

25 2smart grids |INTEGRATING RENEWABLE GENERATION 
Some of the specifics of a smart grid-based power system architecture 
are still emerging through academic research and industry development.
However, there is sufficient knowledge and experience for a sound overall
description of future power systems that use smart grids.
For this report we define the term as: 
An electricity network that uses distributed energy resources and 
advanced communication and control technologies to deliver 
electricity more cost-effectively, with lower greenhouse intensity 
and in response to consumer needs. Smart grids have smaller forms 
of electricity generation and high percentages of renewable energy,
combined with energy management to balance out the load of all
the users on the system. The energy sources are closer to the users,
instead of one large centralised source a long distance away.
Genuine smart grids rely on renewable energy with no greenhouse 
emissions, but control technology can also make more efficient use 
of conventional fossil fuel power plants and help to integrate more 
renewables to older-style networks. Today’s power systems account 
for about 41% of world-wide carbon emissions 12 It is a fact that 
power systems of the future will need a much higher percentage of 
renewable energy in the mix to help achieve the national and 
international emission-reduction objectives that will prevent 
dangerous levels of climate change.
The impact of carbon emissions and other greenhouse gases on 
climate change was acknowledged in 1992, when 154 governments 
and the European Community signed the United Nations’ Framework 
Convention on Climate Change at the Rio Earth Summit. Today, there 
are many national and international targets to reduce these 
emissions. Denmark, for instance, has a national target of 50% of its 
national energy consumption from renewables in 2050. The EU has a 
target of producing 20% of electricity from renewables by 2020,
compared to the current level of 8.5%.13 However, we can only 
stabilise carbon emission levels in the atmosphere and reduce the 
impact of climate change with future electric power systems 
operating with between 80 to 90% renewable energy.
This section lays out the concept of future power systems based on 
smart grid systems with high levels of renewables which can ensure 
security of supply at all times. We present technical solutions and 
existing demonstration projects to illustrate key elements of a 
future power system that runs on clean sources and is supported 
by smart grids.2.1 integrating renewable generation into power
systems: it can be done!
The key task of any power system, with or without renewable power 
generation, is to keep the power available 24 hours a day, 7 days a 
week. To do this, the system needs to balance electricity consumption 
and generation at all times, and the network must be designed to 
cope with different system states.
2.1.1 integration of renewable energy into power systems 
The task of integrating renewable energy technologies into existing 
power systems is similar in all power systems around the world,
whether they are large, centralised systems or island systems. 
The main aim of power system operation is to balance electricity 
consumption and generation at all times. 
Thorough planning ahead is needed to ensure that the available 
production can match demand at all times. In addition to balancing 
supply and demand, the power system must also be able to: 
•Fulfil defined power quality standards –voltage/frequency- which 
may require additional technical equipment in the power system 
and support from different ancillary services (see Appendix 1 
for definitions of terms); and 
•Survive extreme situations such as sudden interruptions of supply 
(e.g. a fault at a generation unit) or interruption of the 
transmission system. 
Typically, power systems use cheap power sources as base-load 
power plants which operate most of the time at rated capacity. These 
centralised units are often ‘inflexible’ generation resource, meaning 
they are quite inefficient and it is expensive to change their output 
over the day, to match what people actually use (load variation).
“Smart Grids is a new concept for
electricity networks across Europe.
… [It is] a shared vision which 
enables Europe’s electricity grids 
to meet the challenges and 
opportunities of the 21st century 
[and] fulfils the expectations 
of society.” 
SMARTGRIDS EUROPEAN TECHNOLOGY PLATFORM 
FOR ELECTRICITY NETWORKS OF THE FUTURE: 
VISION AND STRATEGY FOR EUROPE’S ELECTRICITY 
NETWORKS OF THE FUTURE, 
HTTP://WWW.SMARTGRIDS.EU/DOCUMENTS/VISION.PDF 
references 
12 HTTP://WWW.IEA.ORG/WEO/DOCS/WEO2009/CLIMATE_CHANGE_EXCERPT.PDF 
13 HTTP://EUR-LEX.EUROPA.EU/LEXURISERV/LEXURISERV.DO?URI=OJ:L:2009:140:0016: 
0062:EN:PDF The term ‘smart grids’ is being used in the media and by 
politicians, but it is very difficult to find a commonly accepted 
definition. Typically, the term signifies a vision for better,
cleaner future power systems, that will use more information 
technology than they do today. The section presents more 
information on the overall system architecture and the smart 
components in these electric power systems. 
© GWEC/WIND POWER WORKS image WIND TURBINE WORKER IN MARANCHO ́N,
GUADALAJARA, SPAIN.

In reality, load varies over time (see Figure 8) which means that 
additional flexible power generation resources are required to provide 
the right amount of power. For larger power systems, typical
technologies are combined-cycle gas turbines (CCGT) or hydro-power 
stations with a sufficient storage capacity to follow the daily load 
variations. In conventional island power systems, typically a number 
of small diesel generators (gensets) are used to provide 24/7 supply.
Several gensets have to operate continuously at the point of their 
highest efficiency, while one is used to follow the load variations.
The impact of adding renewable power generation to a 
conventionally centralised or island power system will affect the 
way in which a conventionally-designed electricity system runs. 
The level of impact depends on the renewable energy technology: 
•Biomass/geothermal/solar thermal (CSP)/hydro power with 
storage: power output can be regulated, i.e. they can supply base 
load as well as peak load; 
•Hydro power without storage (run–of-the-river)/photovoltaic/wind 
power: power output depends on the available natural resources,
so the power output is variable.14 
There are two main types of impact to consider when introducing 
renewable energy to micro grids, the balancing impact and 
reliability impact.Balancing impact relates to the short-term adjustments needed to 
manage fluctuations over a period ranging from minutes to hours 
before the time of delivery. In power systems without variable power 
generation, there can be a mismatch between demand and supply.
The reasons could be that the energy load was not forecast 
correctly, or a conventional power plant is not operating as it is 
scheduled, for instance a power station has tripped due to a 
technical problem. 
Adding a variable power generation source increases the risk that 
the forecasted power generation in the power system will not be 
reached, for instance, due to a weather system moving faster than 
predicted into the area. The overall impact on the system depends 
on how large and how widely distributed the variable power sources 
are. A certain amount of wind power distributed over a larger 
geographical area will have a lower impact on system balancing 
than the same amount of wind power concentrated in one single 
location, as geographical distribution will smoothen out the 
renewable power generation. System balancing is relevant to: 
•Day-ahead planning , which needs to make sure that sufficient 
generation is available to match expected demand taking into 
account forecasted generation from variable power generation 
sources (typically 12 to 36 hours ahead); 
•Short-term system balancing , which allocates balancing 
resources to cover events such as a mismatch between forecasted 
generation/demand or sudden loss of generation (typically 
seconds to hours ahead planning).In island power systems, both 
aspects must be handled automatically by the system (see 
Section 1.3.2 on Control Approaches for further details) 
26 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
2smart grids |INTEGRATING RENEWABLE GENERATION 
figure 8: typical load variations over 24 hour and the generation sources supplying the load in a hybrid power
system with PV and batteries 
1,000 
900 
800 
700 
600 
500 
400 
300 
200 
100 
W 0
hour of day 
•ELECTRICITY DEMAND •ELECTRICITY DEMAND MET BY BATTERY / OTHER RES / GENSET •ENERGY FROM PV GENERATOR 
source HYBRID POWER SYSTEMS BASED ON RENEWABLE ENERGIES: A SUITABLE AND COST-COMPETITIVE SOLUTION FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION, 
ALLIANCE FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION. ALLIANCE FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION, HTTP://WWW.RURALELEC.ORG/.13579 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 
hour of day 13579 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 1,000 
900 
800 
700 
600 
500 
400 
300 
200 
100 
W 0
reference 
14 SOMETIMES THESE RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES ARE DESCRIBED AS ‘INTERMITTENT’
POWER SOURCES, HOWEVER, THE TERMINOLOGY IS NOT CORRECT AS INTERMITTENT STANDS 
FOR UNCONTROLLABLY, I.E. NON-DISPATCHABLE, BUT THE POWER OUTPUT OF THESE 
GENERATION PLANTS CAN BE FORECASTED, HENCE THEY CAN BE DISPATCHED.
FURTHERMORE, THEY CAN ALWAYS BE OPERATED DOWN-REGULATED IF NEEDED.

27 Reliability impact is the extent to which sufficient generation will
be available to meet peak demand at all times. No electricity system 
can be 100% reliable, since there will always be a small chance of 
major failures in power stations or transmission lines when demand 
is high. However, renewable power production is often more 
distributed than conventional large-scale power plants, so it may 
reduce the risk of sudden drop-outs of major individual production 
units. On the other hand, variable renewable power generation 
reduces the probability that generation is available at the time of 
high demand, and thus adds complexity to system planning.
Reliability is important for long-term system planning, which 
assesses the system adequacy typically 2 to 10 years ahead. Long- 
term system planning with variable generation sources is a 
challenge because of where the resources are located. To get a high 
level of renewable energy into the system, ideally plants must be 
situated at some distance from each other, for example using solar 
power from Southern Europe when there is no or limited wind 
power available in Northern Europe. These issues are discussed in 
more detail in Section 3 regarding super grids.
In island power systems, power generators are typically close to 
each other, which means that there must be a mix of different 
generation technologies in the island system or that they must be 
partly over-designed to make sure that there is always sufficient 
generation capacity available. This is typically done by adding some 
back-up diesel gensets. In addition, island power systems can adjust 
power demand to meet power supply, rather than the other way 
round. This approach is called demand-side management. An 
example of a ‘flexible’ load in island systems for demand-side 
management is water pumps and irrigation pumps which can be 
turned on and off depending on how much electricity supply there 
is. The basic planning challenges for integrating renewable energy 
technology into power systems are not new to power system design,
they apply to all power systems around the world regardless of 
capacity mix, demand levels, and market design. High penetrations 
of variable renewable generation introduce new challenges, but 
existing experience shows that renewables penetration can reach 
significant levels also in island power systems (see Section 4). 
In Denmark, for instance, wind power supplied 21.22% of the 
national consumption in 2007.15 Many times, for example during 
nights with high wind speeds and low load, the supplied wind power 
exceeds local consumption. At those times surplus wind power is 
exported to the neighbouring countries. 
2.1.2 about base-load and system balancing 
Energy power balance aims to keep frequency in the system 
consistent. The mains frequency describes the frequency at which 
AC electricity is delivered from the generator to the end user, and it 
is measured in Hertz (Hz). Frequency varies in a system as the load 
(demand) changes. In a power grid operating close to its peak 
capacity, there can be rapid fluctuations in frequency, and dramatic 
examples can occur just before a major power outage.
System engineers plan many years ahead so that the available 
production can match demand at all times and keep frequency 
variations to a minimum. In the past, generation and power system planning were tasks carried out by a centralised organisation, usually 
by the company responsible for operating the transmission system 
(transmission system operator - TSO). Today, generation investment 
planning is decentralised and influenced by electricity market prices.
The existing power systems around the world have developed 
certain technologies and generation resources, often influenced by 
the national energy policy. Typically, power systems were designed 
around large power stations providing base-load capacity, i.e. base- 
load power plants of more than 660 MW capacity, operating 
almost constantly at full output (see also Figure 9). 
These centralised units, typically nuclear or coal power plants, are 
inflexible generation resources – they can’t ‘follow load’, i.e. change 
their supply to match the changing demand throughout the day. It is 
inefficient and expensive to change their operating capacity.
Furthermore, large, centralised units require significant investment 
in grid infrastructure. 
In Finland, a planned expansion of the Olkiluoto nuclear power 
station providing an extra 1,600 MWe was originally scheduled to 
become operative in 2012. Now it is unclear if and when it will be 
completed. For the expansion to be feasible it requires an 800 MW 
undersea transmission line from near Olkiluoto to Sweden to export 
surplus electricity production. This considerable network upgrade is 
required in the Scandinavian power system for base-load operation 
of the expanded Olkiluto nuclear power station.
Load varies over time, see Figure 9, therefore more flexible power 
generation resources can ‘follow the load’. Typical technologies 
which can do this are combined-cycle gas turbines (CCGT) or hydro 
power stations because they have significant storage capacity to 
match the variations over a day. Power systems with large amounts 
of inflexible generation resources, such as nuclear power stations,
also require a significant amount of flexible generation resources. 2smart grids |BASE-LOAD AND SYSTEM BALANCING 
© GP/RODRIGO BALÈIA image AS PART OF THE LAUNCHING OF THE BRAZIL 
ENERGY [R]EVOLUTION REPORT, GREENPEACE 
INSTALLED 40 PHOTOVOLTAIC SOLAR PANELS THAT 
SUPPLY THE GREENPEACE OFFICE IN SAO PAULO. 
figure 9: typical load variations over 24 hours and the 
generation sources supplying the load in a power
system with large centralized units 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
MW      0
hour of day base middle load 
top charge 
pump 
storage •CHARGE/DISCHARGE  
STORAGE •INDUSTRY FEED IN •NATURAL GAS & 
HEATING OIL •COAL •LIGNITE •NUCLEAR •WATER 048 12 16 20 24 charge pump 
storage discharge 
pump storage 
reference 
15 WIND POWER TO COMBAT CLIMATE CHANGE, HOW TO INTEGRATE WIND ENERGY INTO 
THE POWER SYSTEM, BY ENERGINET.DK, THE DANISH TRANSMISSION SYSTEM 
OPERATOR, HTTP://WWW.E-PAGES.DK/ENERGINET/126/

28 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
2smart grids |BASE-LOAD VERSUS FLEXIBLE RENEWABLE POWER GENERATION 
2.1.3 base-load versus flexible renewable power generation 
Renewable energy integrated into a smart grid changes the need for 
‘base load’ power. In the new energy vision, it is better to think of 
energy as ‘inflexible’ or ‘flexible’. In countries with good support for 
renewable energy and natural resources, in Spain for example, the 
clean, renewable technologies already provide more than 40% of 
daily demand on certain days. Worldwide, we can bring about an 
energy switch based on renewables which redefines the need for 
‘base load’ power. Instead, a mix of flexible energy providers can 
follow the load during the day and night (e.g. solar plus gas,
geothermal, wind and demand management), without blackouts. 
Figure 10 shows a typical situation with significant variable 
renewable generation – in this case mainly PV- in the European 
power system. Here, geothermal, ocean and run-of-the-river power 
plants are operated in base-load and conventional plants – in this 
case gas-fired- and biomass plants are used to follow the variations 
caused by demand changes and changes in renewable generation 
such as PV and wind power.16 
figure 10: power production (in MW) from different
sources and overall demand in europe during extreme 
january event 
600,000 
500,000 
400,000 
300,000 
200,000 
100,000 
MW      0
days - january 1997 
•PHOTOVOLTAICS •CSP •WIND OFFSHORE •WIND ONSHORE •BIOMASS •HYDRO STORAGE •CONVENTIONAL •RUN-OF-RIVER •OCEAN •GEOTHERMAL 
DEMAND 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 05.01 
06.01 
07.01.
08.01.
09.01.
10.01.
10.01.
11.01.
12.01.
13.01.
14.01.
reference 
16 IN PRINCIPAL ALSO GEOTHERMAL COULD BE USED TO PROVIDE LOAD 
FOLLOWING CAPABILITIES.technical or economic barriers? 
In the example of Spain, renewable power supply already 
exceeds 40% of the daily demand on certain days. The power 
system is able to cope with this, there have been no black- 
outs or major technical problems. However, the renewable 
industry now faces an economic barrier, because Spain now 
has an overcapacity of supply. Effectively, Spain has much 
more generation capacity than demand, and the gap is 
exacerbated because of the economic crisis. The reason is 
that extra renewable capacity (and combined-cycle gas 
turbines) was built with the intention to move Spain to a 
clean renewable energy future, however no conventional
capacity has been decommissioned so far.
Now renewable generation takes an increasing market share 
in the electricity supply, taking it away from conventional
fossil power plants. The conventional power plants sell less 
kWh than originally planned, and they cannot run power 
plants in base-load mode anymore, which increases costs of 
operation and lowers the profit on each kWh sold. In Spain,
the operators of conventional power plants have begun to 
lobby against renewable power generation because renewable 
generation impacts their business plans. They are typically 
providers of base-load power, which is less and less needed 
with larger amounts of renewable in the power system.
Instead more flexible and fast controllable generation assets 
are needed. In this case, the integration of large-scale 
renewable energy is becoming less of a technical issue, but 
more of an economic one. The barriers are from companies 
reluctant to abandon their economic investment in 
conventional base-load power plants. 
Decommissioned power plants, or ‘stranded assets’, for 
certain companies are not a sufficiently strong reason for 
holding up the development of a massive renewable energy 
infrastructure. Greenpeace campaigns to dramatically reduce 
our reliance on coal and nuclear power in order to halt 
climate change and its devastating impact on the planet. Our 
energy options are advanced enough for conventional base 
units to become redundant in the future renewable-based 
power system. However, the power industry is planning more 
and more coal and nuclear power plants in Europe, which do 
not fit into a future renewable-based system. They are not 
clean enough and they cannot be operated flexibly enough to 
fit into the future power system.

29 
 © LANGROCK/ZENIT/GP image BERLINER GEOSOL INSTALLING 
THE SOLAR ENERGY PLANT 
(PHOTOVOLTAIK) “LEIPZIGER LAND” 
OWNED BY SHELL SOLAR IN A FORMER 
BROWN COAL AREA NEAR LEIPZIG,
SACHSEN, GERMANY.
2.2 why do we need smart grids for high 
penetration of renewables?
The future power systems around the world will need to be based 
on renewable generation with up to 90% of the consumption 
supplied by renewable energy technologies such as wind, solar,
biomass or hydro power. 
Until now renewable power technology development has put much 
effort into adjusting the technical performance to the needs of the 
power system, mainly by complying with grid codes (See Appendix 2 
on Grid Codes). For this reason, most large wind turbines comply 
with the same grid codes as conventional power stations and wind 
farms have become wind power plants. However, the time has come 
for the power systems themselves to better adjust to the needs of 
variable power generation, i.e. the power system has to become more 
flexible and less reliant on large, inflexible conventional power plants. 
The Danish example of integrating significant shares of wind power 
into the power system was mainly possible because of the 
availability of very flexible hydro power from Scandinavia, which is 
used to balance wind power variations. Similar resources are not 
available everywhere, therefore the power system has to become 
more flexible in other ways. Smart grid technology will play a 
significant role in achieving this, in particular by integrating 
demand-side management into power system operation.
The future power system will not consist of a few centralised power 
plants but of tens of thousands generation units such as solar 
panels, wind turbines and other renewable generation, partly 
distributed in the distribution network, partly concentrated in large 
power plants, like offshore wind power plants. Smart grid solutions 
will help to monitor and integrate this diversity into power system 
operation and at the same time will make interconnection simpler. 
The left picture shows 25% wind energy in the Western Danish power 
system while the left picture shows 50% wind penetration (wind in 
grey/demand as orange line). It can be seen that with increasing 
penetration levels surplus wind power might be available at certain times, while at other times, it will be not sufficient to supply the load.
Hence, the power system must become more flexible to follow the 
variable renewable power generation, for example by adjusting demand 
via demand-side management and/or by deploying storage systems.The trade-off is that power system planning will become more 
complex due to the larger number of generation assets and the 
significant share of variable power generation causing constantly 
changing power flows in the power systems. Smart grid technology 
will be needed to support power system planning, i.e. actively support 
day-ahead planning and power system balancing by providing real- 
time information about the status of the network and the generation 
units in combination with weather forecasts. Smart grid technology 
will also play a significant role in making sure systems can meet the 
peak demand at all times. Smart grid technology will make better 
use of distribution and transmission assets thereby limiting the need 
for transmission network extension to the absolute minimum.
Smart grids use information and communication technology (ICT) 
to enable a power system based on renewable energy sources. 
ICT in smart grids is used to: 
•easily interconnect a large number of renewable generation assets 
into the power system (plug and play); 
•create a more flexible power system through large-scale demand- 
side management and integrating storage to balance the impact 
of variable renewable generation resources; 
•provide the system operator with better information about the state 
of the system, which so they can operate the system more efficiently; 
•minimise network upgrades by using network assets efficiently and 
supporting an efficient coordination of power generation over very 
large geographic areas needed for renewable energy generation.2smart grids |WHY DO WE NEED SMART GRIDS 
figure 11: wind energy in the western danish power system.
4,500 
4,000 
3,500 
3,000 
2,500 
2,000 
1,500 
1,000 
500 
MW      0
•WIND POWER DEMAND 
source ECOGRID PHASE 1 SUMMARY REPORT, AVAILABLE AT: HTTP://WWW.ENERGINET.DK/NR/RDONLYRES/8B1A4A06-CBA3-41DA-9402- 
B56C2C288FB0/0/ECOGRIDDK_PHASE1_SUMMARYREPORT.PDF.•WIND POWER DEMAND 4,500 
4,000 
3,500 
3,000 
2,500 
2,000 
1,500 
1,000 
500 
MW     025% wind energy (west denmark january 2008) 50% wind energy 

30 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
2.4 the smart grid vision for the energy [r]evolution 
To develop a power system based almost entirely on renewable 
energy sources will require a new overall power system architecture 2smart grids |THE SMART GRID VISION FOR THE ENERGY [R]EVOLUTION 
–including smart grid technology, which will need substantial
amounts of work to emerge.17 Figure 12 shows a very basic graphic 
representation of the key elements of future, renewable-based power 
systems using smart grid technology. 
figure 12: the smart-grid vision for the energy [r]evolution 
A VISION FOR THE FUTURE –A NETWORK OF INTEGRATED MICROGRIDS THAT CAN MONITOR AND HEAL ITSELF.
•PROCESSORS EXECUTE SPECIAL PROTECTION SCHEMES IN MICROSECONDS •SENSORS ON ‘STANDBY’ –DETECT FLUCTUATIONS AND DISTURBANCES, AND CAN SIGNAL FOR AREAS TO BE ISOLATED •SENSORS ‘ACTIVATED’ –DETECT FLUCTUATIONS AND DISTURBANCES, AND CAN SIGNAL FOR AREAS TO BE ISOLATED 
SMART APPLIANCES CAN SHUT OFF IN RESPONSE TO FREQUENCY FLUCTUATIONS 
DEMAND MANAGEMENT USE CAN BE SHIFTED TO OFF-PEAK TIMES TO SAVE MONEY 
GENERATORS ENERGY FROM SMALL GENERATORS AND SOLAR PANELS CAN REDUCE OVERALL DEMAND ON THE GRID 
STORAGE ENERGY GENERATED AT OFF-PEAK TIMES COULD BE STORED IN BATTERIES FOR LATER USE 
DISTURBANCE IN THE GRID INDUSTRIAL PLANT CENTRAL POWER PLANT OFFICES WITH 
SOLAR PANELS HOUSES WITH 
SOLAR PANELS 
WIND FARM ISOLATED MICROGRID 
reference 
17 SEE ALSO ECOGRID PHASE 1 SUMMARY REPORT, AVAILABLE AT: 
HTTP://WWW.ENERGINET.DK/NR/RDONLYRES/8B1A4A06-CBA3-41DA-9402- 
B56C2C288FB0/0/ECOGRIDDK_PHASE1_SUMMARYREPORT.PDF 

31 A more detailed outline of the system architecture of the smart grid 
vision will be defined through ongoing research and dynamic technology 
developments. The first steps in the transition process towards a new,
renewable-based power system using smart grid technology have 
already been taken in some countries. This section presents innovative 
demonstration projects based on smart grid technology.
The examples show that smart grid technology is much more than just 
smart metering and that technology development does not need to start 
from scratch. In many cases there is already enough experience available 
to move from demonstration projects to a large-scale deployment. The 
largest problem the power system industry currently faces is not the 
lack of ideas or possible solutions, but the lack of incentives to test and 
implement the solutions in real power systems. Testing and real-life 
examples are essential for gaining additional knowledge with the 
thousands or even tens of thousands of electrical devices in the real
world compared to often only a few dozen devices used in demonstration 
projects. Incentives help apply new technology to existing electric power 
systems. However, transmission systems are classical monopolies and so 
they have little incentive to innovate to gain greater market shares. 
The smart grid concept typically focuses on applications connected to 
the medium or low voltage network, using IT technologies to monitor 
and control different applications such as small generation 
technologies (PV, Wind), and storage systems or demand technologies 
such electric; cars or heat pumps. However, the smart grid vision, is 
an overall power system approach and is not bound to one particular 
distribution network. Smart grids, micro grids and super grids will all
be needed to work in harmony to provide day-to-day system 
balancing and also transport power from areas with large amounts of 
renewable resource to areas with high electricity demand.
2.4.1 smart grid solutions for the integration of renewables 
using micro grids 
The large-scale integration of variable renewable energy resources 
into the power system will require new measures to make the power 
system more flexible on several time scales. Figure 10 provides an 
overview of selected new measures in relation to their time impact 
in the balancing process. The integration of these new measures into 
power system operation will require new ICT solutions, which can 
be considered part of the smart grid vision for Energy [R]evolution. 
Figure 13 shows that there is a large range of possible options to make 
the power system more flexible for supporting balancing from a very 
short time frame (seconds) to approximately day-ahead balancing (day- 
ahead planning). Long-term aspects are related to seasonal weather 
cycles and the need to meet peak demand at all times, so power system 
planning must includes large geographic areas. This is the point where 
the smart grid vision meets the super grid vision. For smart grids to 
work, micro grids are needed on the distribution network level.
Examples of island and rural micro grids are provided in section 1.
More broadly, the term micro grid refers to the IT monitoring and 
control infrastructure on the distribution level. Each distribution level
will represent one unique micro grid enabling selected functions based 
on the available resources or technologies in the distribution network.
The key tasks of micro grids in a smart grid system are to: 
•enable informed participation by customers to ultimately support 
demand side management; 2smart grids |SMART GRID SOLUTIONST 
figure 13: overview of new and conventional 
measures in relation to the time impact 
in the balancing process 
source ECOGRID PHASE 1 SUMMARY REPORT, AVAILABLE AT: 
HTTP://WWW.ENERGINET.DK/NR/RDONLYRES/8B1A4A06-CBA3-41DA-9402- 
B56C2C288FB0/0/ECOGRIDDK_PHASE1_SUMMARYREPORT.PDF. wind power power control
geographical
spreading 
household 
electric vehicles 
micro CHP 
cooling 
towers 
dump 
loads 
heat pumps 
heat 
storage 
flywheels CAES 
flow batteries 
pump storage 
thermal storage 
transmission system 
hydro power plants 
new interconnections 
ancillary services demand side 
heat systems 
storage 
“conventional” 
measures 
inertia 
droop frequency control
intra hour balancing 
hour by hour 
diurnal cycle 
day ahead scheduling 
weather systems 
seasonal cycle 
year by year 
long term investments 
•monitor and control all generation and storage options in the 
distribution network; 
•enable new products and services such as demand side 
management and virtual power plants; 
•address disturbances in the power system locally, e.g. by 
automated prevention or containment of faults in the power 
system or by automated restoration in case of a black-start. 
In the following, we will present selected examples of existing smart 
grid applications focusing mainly on day-ahead planning and balancing 
support. The main focus here is on how micro grid and smart grid 
technologies work together to achieve a certain functionality, less 
emphasis is given to the overall control and information structure. 
The following examples are only a selection of possible smart grid 
applications for the large integration of renewables into the power 
system; many more are currently under investigation/development.
image THE PS10 SOLAR TOWER PLANT AT SAN LUCAR LA 
MAYOR OUTSIDE SEVILLE, SPAIN, APRIL 29, 2008. 

32 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
2smart grids |MANAGEMENT OF POWER GENERATION 
2.4.2 management of power generation 
The virtual power plant A virtual power plant interconnects 
different real power plants (of different nature such as solar, wind 
and hydro) as well as storage devices distributed in the power 
system via information technology. This virtual power plant (VPP) 
can be designed / operated so that it can always comply with a 
given schedule. From the perspective of the overall power system, a 
VPP is similar to a conventional power plant and will simplify day- 
ahead scheduling. The variability of certain renewable energy 
technologies is taken care of within the VPP and does not need to 
be dealt with in the power system’s day-ahead planning.
A real-world example is the Combined Renewable Energy Power 
Plant that was developed by three German companies and is now 
operating in Germany.18 The VPP interconnects and controls eleven 
wind power plants, twenty solar power plants, four combined heat- 
and-power plants based on biomass, plus a pump storage unit, all of 
them spread throughout Germany. The VPP thereby combines the 
advantages of various renewable energy sources. Wind turbines and 
solar modules help generate electricity in accordance with how 
much wind and sun is available. Biogas and the pump storage units 
are used to make up the difference: they are converted into 
electricity as needed in order to balance short-term fluctuations, or 
are temporarily stored.19 Together they ensure sufficient electricity 
supply to cover the demand.The function of the renewable VPP can be divided into two stages: 
•anticipatory control similar to day-ahead planning, and 
•fine-tuning similar to final system balancing at the time of delivery.
The actual forecasted demand is the central starting point for the 
day-ahead planning. The forecast of the electricity demand, the 
‘load profile’, is communicated to the central control unit. The 
central control unit also has access to a wind and solar production 
forecast for the different power plants, delivered by the German 
Weather Service (DWD). Because wind and solar energy cannot 
precisely meet a given electricity demand, oversupplies and 
shortages need to be compensated by the biomass and pump 
storage unit to ensure security of supply and grid stability. 
There are the following options to balance wind and solar generation: 
•Firstly, combined heat–and-power (CHP) plants are used to 
produce electricity and heat from biogas. 
•Secondly, energy can be stored temporarily in a pumped storage 
power plant and can be quickly made available again. 
Forecasts of the expected solar and wind production makes it 
possible to plan ahead for the operation of combined heat-and- 
power plants and storage systems. If the amount of electricity 
produced by wind and solar power installations exceeds demand,
the surplus of energy is used for filling up storage reservoirs.
Another option would be to use surplus electricity to charge 
batteries in electrical cars. If maximum storage capacity is reached,
wind and solar power plants can be curtailed.
source HTTP://WWW.SOLARSERVER.DE/SOLARMAGAZIN/
ANLAGEJANUAR2008_E.HTML figure 14: principle of a VPP: stage 1 – day-ahead planning.
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
MW 0 CENTRAL CONTROL UNIT 
FORECAST 
FORECAST ELECTRICITY 
DEMAND 
OPERATING 
SCHEDULE OPERATING 
SCHEDULE REQUIRED 
VALUES 
WIND SOLAR 
BIOGAS RESERVOIR REQUIRED 
VALUES PROGNOSE 
0000 0400 0800 1200 1600 2000 2400 

33 Even with good weather forecasts the actual electricity production 
of solar and wind power can be different to predictions. To deal
with this, the operating schedules need to be fine-tuned and 
adjusted based on the actually measured values, see also Figure 15.2smart grids |THE VIRTUAL POWER PLANT 
source HTTP://WWW.SOLARSERVER.DE/SOLARMAGAZIN/ANLAGEJANUAR2008_E.HTML figure 15: principle of a VPP: stage 2 – fine tuning or balancing in real time.
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
MW 0 CENTRAL CONTROL UNIT 
OUTPUT 
OUTPUT ELECTRICITY 
DEMAND 
OUTPUT OUTPUT ADJUSTED 
OPERATING 
SCHEDULES WIND SOLAR 
BIOGAS RESERVOIR OUTPUT 
0000 0400 0800 1200 1600 2000 2400 
references 
18 SEE ALSO HTTP://WWW.KOMBIKRAFTWERK.DE/INDEX.PHP?ID=27 
19 SEE ALSO HTTP://WWW.SOLARSERVER.DE/SOLARMAGAZIN/ANLAGEJANUAR2008_E.HTML 
© GP/ALEX HOFFORD image SOLAR POWERED PHOTO-VOLTAIC (PV) CELLS ARE 
ASSEMBLED BY WORKERS AT A FACTORY OWNED BY THE 
HIMIN GROUP, THE WORLD’S LARGEST MANUFACTURER 
OF SOLAR THERMAL WATER HEATERS. THE CITY OF 
DEZHOU IS LEADING THE WAY IN ADOPTING SOLAR 
ENERGY AND HAS BECOME KNOWN AS THE SOLAR 
VALLEY OF CHINA. 

case study: greenpeace energy eG - the consumer
cooperative for clean electricity 
In Germany, as of April 2009 about 91,000 households and about 
5,000 companies from all over the country are being supplied by 
Greenpeace Energy. They operate under a cooperative model, with 
18,000 members. Apart from providing customers with a guarantee 
that they are getting power with dramatically less greenhouse gas, and 
no nuclear power, the cooperative employs both demand management 
and supports development of new renewable and CHP plants.
Electricity prices are approx 1.5 or 2 cents higher, at 21.40 cent per 
kilowatt-hour plus a basic charge of 8.90 euro per month, but there is 
a large market willing to pay the premium for a safe future. The 
consumer cooperative effectively gathers up consumer power and 
makes it possible to ensure monitoring of the quality of the electricity 
supplied, customers care and the finances. real-time monitoring and demand management
With the Greenpeace eG, the production of electricity fits the 
customer’s consumption in real time, using a computerised control
station. Every generating facility is monitored by remote inquiry. BET,
an independent engineering office in Aachen, has access to all the data 
and regularly checks that composition of electricity is being kept and 
random checks are made by facility operators. 
helping to build new renewable energy 
Clean power from Greenpeace Energy is at least 50% from 
renewable sources (hydro, wind, biomass), with a maximum of 
50% of combined heat and power plants (natural gas only). The 
supplier guarantees no nuclear, coal or oil-based power. The eG 
cooperative has also established a business for planning, financing 
and operating green power installations so Greenpeace can 
supply its members and customers with green energy from own 
power plants. These tasks are done by Planet energy Ltd., which 
is a 100% daughter company of Greenpeace Energy eG. Three 
wind parks and three PV-installations have been built already 
and another wind park is under construction. Further investments 
in hydropower, solar energy, and biomass are in planning.
34 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
Ancillary services from a wind power plant To ensure availability,
quality and safety of power supply at all locations in the overall
system, some plants must provide ancillary services. One of the key 
ancillary services is called Frequency Control Ancillary Services 
(FCAS) and combines the medium-term energy balancing. Sometimes 
this is called secondary control and the short-term, minute-by-minute 
control of the power system frequency is also known as primary 
control. The balancing service is required to adjust generation (and 
load, if applicable) continuously until minutes before delivery when 
frequency regulation service (primary control) takes over to maintain 
a minute-to minute generation-load balance. 
Historically, such ancillary services were only supplied by 
conventional power plants, but nowadays also wind farms are able 
to provide this service. Therefore they should be better referred to 
as wind power plants as they can fulfil now the same ancillary 
services as conventional power plants. Renewable energy must be 
able to work as ‘power plant’ to achieve very high penetration levels 
in the power system.For wind power, several new features are now integrated into the 
plant operation to support the operation of the power system. The 
most significant step in this direction is the wind farm controller for 
the first large offshore wind farm, the Danish Horns Rev offshore 
wind farm. The Horns Rev wind farm consists of 80 Vestas V80 (2 
MW) wind turbines with double-fed induction generators (DFIG). 
To illustrate the performance of wind power at this scale, a ‘normal’
day of operation at the Horns Rev wind farm is explained below. At 
about 4:00 am, the mode to provide frequency control ancillary 
services is activated. This causes the actual power generation of the 
wind farm to decrease below the theoretically possible power 
production. This makes the difference between actual power 
generation and theoretically possible power production available as 
spinning reserve which can be used in case of under-frequency. For 
about two hours the power output of the wind power plant is reduced 
significantly because of overproduction in the grid. Then the balance 
control and frequency control are cancelled, and the wind farm 
returns to normal operation, just as day starts and demand increases.2smart grids |GREENPEACE ENERGY EG 
case study figure 1: daily generation mix of Greenpeace 
energy over the entire year
700 
600 
500 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0•WATER •WIND •SOLAR •BIOMASS •COMBINED HEAT AND POWER (CHP) •RENEWABLE ENERGY LAW 
source SVEN TESKE / GREENPEACEINTERNATIONAL jan feb mar apr may jun july aug sep oct nov dec Daily energy use (MW) 

35 Another important development is that wind turbines can have now 
fault-ride-through control capabilities that enable the wind turbines 
to stay connected during and after grid faults in the power system,
a capability that most conventional power plants have (see also 
Appendix 3 on Wind Turbine Control Functions). The fault-ride- 
through capability is an important feature to secure stable 
operation in case of a voltage or frequency distortion.
2.4.3 demand-side management (DSM) 
Demand-Side Management (DSM) means taking active control of the 
demand by the electricity industry, including customers, to influence 
the amount and timing of electricity use. It can be done either by 
industrial or residential customers, but usually involves some advanced 
information technology so that load changes can be communicated to 
those controlling the grid, in order to regulate demand as well as 
supply. This is a new paradigm for many grid operators. A full
definition and detailed information is given in Appendix 4 on DSM.
DSM in the Norwegian balancing market The idea of a market for 
ancillary services is for other players besides the central power plants 
to provide the necessary ancillary services and to make the power 
system more flexible. The easiest market for ancillary services is a 
real-power balancing market (real-time frequency regulation). 
Those who can participate in an ancillary service market should be 
generation units as those who are creating the demand, hence the 
term ‘demand-side participation’. Demand-side participation 
increases competition in electricity markets and gives great potential
to regulate resources. Information and communication technology in 
a smart grid is typically used to bring together a number of 
electricity users so they can bid together in the market for their 
services. The basic concept is that they can increase or decrease 
demand after an order from the market operator is released, and that 
this is cheaper than for the generators to alter supply. 
In Norway, the national transmission system operator (TSO) Statnett 
developed an ‘options’ market to secure sufficient fast operating reserves 
in high-demand periods. This Regulating Capacity Option Market was 
launched in 2000. From the beginning, Statnett has encouraged the 
demand side (electricity users) to participate in this market.
© COURTESY OF ABB image LOADING SUBMARINE 
SEA CABLES.
Offers are based on area, option price, and size (a minimum of 25 
MW). The basic concept is that users can offer to ‘switch off’ in times 
of high demand, and that this gives them a cheaper electricity price. 
In the Norwegian market this has meant demand measures can 
compete with generation for ancillary services to the grid. A number of 
consumers have prepared for demand disconnection on short notice, in 
return for the financial reward of lower prices. Mainly big industries 
(aluminium industry, steal industry, oil industry) have participated,
though there is a potential for smaller demand to participate.
The maximum purchase from the demand side so far has been 
1,300 MW (mainly from the power-intensive industry). The offered 
volume is even higher. In addition, up to 1000 MW of electric 
boilers have been made available. This potential depends on 
temperature and the price ratio between oil (or other fuels) and 
average daily or weekly electricity prices.
DSM using virtual power plant of cold storage warehouses 
The EU research project Night Wind has investigated the 
possibilities of using Cold Store Warehouses for DSM to balance 
variability from wind generation.20 Cold Store Warehouses are large 
facilities for storing refrigerated and frozen products. The total
capacity of cold stores in the EU 27 is estimated at 4,300 MW 
(installed electrical maximum capacity).21 Typically cold stores do 
not operate at maximum capacity during normal operation, but 
actually at about 60-70% of maximum capacity.
When the cold store operates above average capacity, the 
temperature in the cold store drops and the products are cooled 
down. In other words, the additional energy supplied to the cold 
store is transformed into thermal energy (lower product 
temperatures). The ‘battery’ is being charged.
When the cold store operates below average capacity, the 
temperature of the products rises. The thermal ‘battery’ is 
discharged. There is no ‘real’ electricity produced in this discharging 
process. More precisely, the electricity that would have been 
required to keep the cold store at constant temperature is now 
available for other purposes, and is thus virtually produced.
The process of charging and discharging the cold store ‘battery’ is 
almost free of losses. For example you could run the refrigeration 
machine for half an hour at -16 ºC plus half an hour at –20 ºC,
instead of for one hour at -18 ºC. Doing this, you would lose less 
than 1%, efficiency – the overall efficiency is above 99%. For 
comparison, storing energy in heat pumps has an overall efficiency 
of approximately 70 to 85%.
Thus, these cold storage warehouses can become part of the system 
voluntarily ‘charging’ and ‘discharging’ to help deal with oversupply 
and keeping the temperature in the warehouses at the right level. To 
do this, they would become part of the Virtual Power Plant,
requiring two-way communication systems and software that 
aggregates the warehouses so they can take part in the electricity 
market as ancillary services. 2smart grids |DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT 
source IEEE.figure 16: balance control and reservation for
frequency control at the same time 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0
00:00 01:00 02:00 03:00 possible wind 
power production setpoint 
actual power 
04:00 05:00 06:00 07:00 08:00 Power (MW) 
Time [hh:mm] 
references 
20 SEE HTTP://WWW.NIGHTWIND.EU/.
21 SOURCE: HTTP://WWW.NIGHTWIND.EU/MEDIAPOOL/48/485045/DATA/COLD_STORAGE_ 
OF_WIND_ENERGY.PDF 

36 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
DSM with combined heat and power plants A combined heat 
and power (CHP) plant is a plant where both heat and electricity 
are produced from one fuel source, see Figure 17. The heat can be 
used to heat up water which is distributed via a district heating 
system, i.e. a pipe system in the ground, to the customers which use 
the water to heat buildings, for instance. The cold water is then 
returned to the CHP plant via additional return pipes. 
Denmark’s major cities, for instance, have city-wide district heating 
schemes where most of the heat (95%-98%) is produced in large 
coal- or gas-fired CHP plants. Smaller cities in Denmark,
communities and even small villages typically also have a district 
heating system powered by a small-scale CHP plant, utilising 
typically natural gas and operated with rather high power-to-heat 
ratio. The size of the CHP plants varies from around a few 100 MWe 
in larger cities to 0.5-10 MWe in small communities and villages. The CHP systems combined with a district heating system installed 
all over Denmark are unique in their design because almost all
district heating systems are equipped with a hot water storage tank 
which is, if filled completely, typically capable of supplying the heat 
demand in the district heating system without any support of the 
CHP plant for at least 48 hours. 
In addition, most CHP systems are also equipped with boilers, so 
electricity supplied via the Danish power system can be converted to 
heat which can be stored and distributed via the exiting 
infrastructure of the district heating systems. At times when there is 
surplus electricity generated by wind power, for example when there 
is high wind speeds and low loads, it can easily be converted to heat 
and stored in the existing heat storage tanks. Hence, instead of 
‘spilling’ power when it is in oversupply it can be used to replace 
natural gas usually used in CHP stations for producing heat. 2smart grids |DSM WITH COMBINED HEAT AND POWER 
figure 17 :example for a district heating system based on a CHP plant
source HTTP://WWW.KRISTIANSTAD.SE/SV/KRISTIANSTADS-KOMMUN/SPRAK/ENGLISH/ENVIRONMENT/DISTRICT-HEATING/WHAT-IS-DISTRICT-HEATING/
12
3
45
CONDENSER GENERATOR 
WATER 
STORAGE TANK 
WARM WATER 
COOLED WATER 
1. BIOFUEL OR NATURAL GAS FIRED CHP PLANT.
2. STEAM IS LED TO THE TURBINE.
3. THE TURBINE PRODUCES ELECTRICITY WITH THE HELP OF A GENERATOR.
4. THE STEAM (RESIDUAL HEAT) FROM THE TURBINE, CONDENSES AND IS TRANSFERRED TO THE DISTRICT HEATING NETWORK.
5. ELECTRICITY FOR LIGHTING ETC.

37 2.4.3 storage technologies 
A number of mature and emerging technologies are viable options 
for electrical energy storage. Each has benefits and drawbacks in 
terms of energy storage capacity, peak power capability, and 
response time among other variables. Therefore, each technology 
will be most viable for a particular energy storage application, such 
as peak load shaving, or local voltage control. Appendix 5 provides 
a detailed overview of the newest storage options available and 
under development for renewable energy sources. 
Storage with vehicle-to-grid The idea of the Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) 
concept is based on electric cars equipped with batteries that could be 
used to make the power system more flexible, i.e. they can be charged 
during times with surplus renewable generation and can be discharged 
to supply peaking capacity or ancillary services to the power system 
while they are parked. Investment costs would be considered zero and 
the power supply to the market would be an opportunity for an 
additional income for the car owner. Most important, during peak 
times cars are often parked close to main load centres, e.g. outside 
factories, so there would be no network issues. 
Within the V2G concept a Virtual Power Plant would be built using 
ICT technology to aggregate the electric cars for participating in 
the relevant electricity markets and to meter the charging/de- 
charging activities. The V2G concept is probably the VPP concept 
that will include the largest number of devices, i.e. electric cars,
easily amounting to several hundred thousand units. In addition, the 
VPP has to take into account the preference of the car owner, so 
the system has to know when each owner wants to use the car. 
The Danish EDISON demonstration project started 2009 to 
develop and test the infrastructure for integrating electric cars into 
the electric power system of the Danish island of Bornholm. 
Storage with pump storage Pumped storage can be considered a 
traditional technology because it has been in operation for more 
than 100 years. Pump storage can be compared to a normal hydro 
power station 22 - it is a type of hydroelectric power generation that 
can store energy. Water is pumped from a lower elevation reservoir 
to a higher elevation during times of low-cost, off-peak electricity.
During periods of high electrical demand, the stored water is 
released through turbines. Losses in the pumping process make the 
plant a net consumer of energy overall, however the system makes 
income by selling more electricity during periods of peak demand,
when electricity prices are highest. 
Pumped storage is the largest capacity form of grid energy storage 
now available. The technology is currently the most cost-effective 
means of storing large amounts of electrical energy on an operating 
basis, but capital costs and appropriate geography are critical
decision factors for building new infrastructure. Taking into account 
evaporation losses from the exposed water surface and conversion 
losses, approximately 70% to 85% of the electrical energy used to 
pump the water into the elevated reservoir can be regained when it 
is released. The technology has been successfully used for many 
decades all over the world. In 2007 the EU had 38. 3 GW net 
capacity of pumped storage out of a total of 140 GW of 
hydropower, representing 5% of total net electrical capacity in the 
EU (Eurostat, consulted August 2009) 
© GP/MARKEL REDONDO image ANDASOL 1 SOLAR POWER STATION IS EUROPE’S 
FIRST COMMERCIAL PARABOLIC TROUGH SOLAR POWER 
PLANT. IT WILL SUPPLY UP TO 200,000 PEOPLE WITH 
CLIMATE-FRIENDLY ELECTRICITY AND SAVE ABOUT 
149,000 TONS OF CARBON DIOXIDE PER YEAR COMPARED 
WITH A MODERN COAL POWER PLANT.
Along with energy management, i.e. smart grids, pumped storage 
systems help control electrical network frequency and provide 
reserve generation. Thermal plants are much less able to respond to 
sudden changes in electrical demand, potentially causing frequency 
and voltage instability. Pumped storage plants, like other 
hydroelectric plants, can respond to load changes within seconds. 
2.4.4 other power system integration services 
Black-start In a power system with large amounts of renewable 
generation, centralised generation units will no longer be available 
to re-start the power after a black-out (called ‘black-start’ by 
system engineers). This has already become an issue in the Danish 
power system which has one of the highest wind penetration levels 
in the world. During times of high wind production only a limited 
number of conventional centralised generation units are online,
which might not be enough to black-start the power system in an 
emergency situation. 
The so-called ‘Cell Project’ is investigating ‘black-start’ options and 
was initiated by the Danish TSO Energinet.dk. Within this project, the 
power system is divided into cells, each cell consisting of a 10-60kV 
distribution network. In the Danish case, there are a large number of 
wind turbines and to a lesser extent combined heat–and-power (CHP) 
units scattered all over the distribution network. The aim of the Cell
Project is to use these local generation assets to either: 
•transfers the local distribution network to controlled island 
operation supplied by the local generators, or 
•after a total black-out, to use the local generators to black-start 
the cell to a state of controlled island operation.
For this purpose, an ICT-based communication system was 
implemented in a demonstration cell in the Danish network. In 
addition, a control software, known as the cell controller, was 
developed to control and coordinate the operation of generators, load 
feeders and main power circuit breakers. The first successful tests 
were performed in November 2008.23 The project is currently 
extended to a larger cell area and more tests are scheduled for 2011.2smart grids |STORAGE TECHNOLOGIES 
references 
22 CONVENTIONAL HYDROELECTRIC PLANTS THAT HAVE SIGNIFICANT STORAGE 
CAPACITY MAY BE ABLE TO PLAY A SIMILAR ROLE IN THE ELECTRICAL GRID AS 
PUMPED STORAGE, BY DEFERRING OUTPUT UNTIL NEEDED.
23 HTTP://WWW.ENERGINET.DK/EN/MENU/NEWS/NEWSARTICLES/ENERGINET.DK+IN+ 
FRONT+WITH+SMARTGRID+CONCEPT.HTM 

38 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
New operation tools The development of smart grids will create a 
whole set of new tools for the companies that operate the power 
system. New operation tools will mean operators can better 
understand the status of the power system and control will be 
faster and more sophisticated. 
One example is the Renewable Energies Control Centre (CECRE) 
at the Spanish system operator (see also Figure 18) which was 
commissioned in June 2006. The aim of the control centre is to give 
greater supervision and control of renewable energy generation so 
more renewable sources can be integrated to the system. CECRE’s 
main function is to manage and integrate the special regime 
production depending on the needs of the electrical system.In Spain, all renewable production facilities with a total installed 
power greater than 10 MW must be controlled by a control centre 
that is directly connected to the CECRE. These local renewable 
generation control centres (RESCCs) must have enough control
over the plants in order to be able to execute CECRE’s orders 
within 15 minutes at all times This advanced system information 
sharing allows for a fast and reliable control of the renewable 
generation assets. 
In addition, the Spanish TSO has developed special computer tools 
such as GEMAS, which use the data from the control centres to 
study possible operation scenarios, power system failures in 
particular, to determine the best strategies to keep the system secure.2smart grids |NEW OPERATION TOOLS 
figure 18: the Renewable Energies Control Centre (CECRE)
source RED ELÉCTRICA DE ESPAÑA. WWW.REE.ES.

39 
3super grid – the interconnection of smart grids 
EUROPE BENEFITS OF A SUPER GRID 
SUPER GRID TRANSMISSION OPTIONS COMPARISON OF 
TRANSMISSION SOLUTIONS REGULATORY AND ENERGY POLICY 
ISSUES / POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS 
“super grids 
provide a solution to 
transfer energy over
large distances”
GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL 
CLIMATE CAMPAIGN 3image PRODUCING WIND ROTORS FOR OFFSHORE WIND ENERGY IN RINGKOBING, DENMARK. 
© PAUL LANGROCK/ZENIT/GP 

40 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
The Greenpeace simulation study (Section 4) shows that in a largely 
renewables-based power system, extreme situations can occur.
Essentially, during two successive weeks of low solar radiation and 
little wind most of the European electricity would have to be filled by 
other sources. Although these cases are not frequent, the power system 
must be adequately designed to cope with such extreme situations. 
Based on the current technology development of energy storage 
technologies, it is difficult to envision that energy storage could 
provide a comprehensive solution to this challenge. While different 
storage technologies such as electrochemical batteries are already 
available today, it is not clear whether large-scale electricity 
storage, other than hydro power described in the previous section,
will become technically and economically viable. 
Feasible storage systems would have to cover most of the European 
electricity supply during up to two successive weeks of low solar 
radiation and little wind – this is difficult to envision based on 
current technology development. The Greenpeace simulation study 
shows ( Section 4 ) that extreme situations with low solar radiation 
and little wind in many parts of Europe are not frequent, but they 
can occur. The power system, even with massive amounts of 
renewable energy, must be adequately designed to cope with such 
extreme situations. 
To design a power system that can adequately react to such 
extreme situations a substantial amount of planning ahead is 
needed in order to ensure that available generation capacity 
together with sufficient network capacity can match demand. In 
order to do so, different timescales must be considered: 
•Long-term system plans to assess the system adequacy over the 
coming years (typically a time horizon of 2 to 10 years ahead 
is considered). 
•Day-ahead planning, making sure that sufficient generation is 
available to match expected demand (typically 12 to 36 
hours ahead) 
•Short-term balancing, covering events such as a mismatch 
between forecasted generation/demand or sudden loss of 
generation (typically seconds to hours ahead planning).
Small changes in the power system – such as a small addition of 
solar or wind generation to an existing power system - will have 
little impact on the overall design of the system design. The E[R] 
energy mix proposed by Greenpeace, however, results in a major 
change in the generation structure, hence the network structure 
must be adopted to the new generation structure in order to be able to ‘keep the lights on’ even in extreme situations such as low solar 
radiation and little wind in many parts of Europe. A key element of 
this new network structure will be the onshore and offshore super 
grid, discussed in more detail in the following.
3.1 benefits of a super grid 
From around 1920 each load centre in Europe had its own isolated 
power system. With the development of transmission lines using 
higher voltages, the transport of power over larger distances became 
feasible, and soon the different power systems were interconnected. In 
the beginning, only stations in the same region were interconnected.
Over the years, technology developed further and maximum possible 
transmission line voltage increased step by step.
The main driver of extending network structure had two main reasons: 
•Larger transmission networks and high voltage lines meant 
suppliers could follow the aggregated demand of a large number 
of customers, instead of the demand variation of one customer - 
which can change significantly over time- with one generation 
resource. The demand of those aggregated customers became 
easier to predict and generation scheduling therefore significantly 
easier (see Figure 19); 
•The larger transmission networks created economies of scale by 
installing larger generation units. In the 1930s, the most cost- 
effective size of thermal power stations was about 60 MW. In the 
1950s, it was 180 MW, and by the 1980s about 1,000 MW. This 
approach made only economic sense because extending the power 
system was cheaper than adding local generation capacity. 
This approach includes some major risks, like the break-down of a 
large power station or the interruption of a major transmission line,
which can interrupt the power system over a large area. To be 
better prepared for such situations national transmission systems in 
Europe and elsewhere were interconnected across borders.
Countries can help each other in case of emergency situations by 
cooperating in the organisation of spinning reserve, reserve capacity 
and frequency control. 
Transmission network expansion has always played a key role in 
developing a reliable and economic power supply. Now, shifting to 
the Energy [R]evolution energy mix with approximately 90% of the 
electricity supply coming from renewable energy sources will also 
require a significant redesign of the transmission network to adapt 
to the needs of the new generation structure. The right kind of grid 
gives us an economic, reliable and sustainable energy supply. 
In the E[R] energy mix, distributed generation that is close to the 
actual demand, plays a key role (about 70% of all generation is 
located close to the load centres). Biomass, pump storage systems as 
well as large-scale renewable power plants, such as offshore wind 
farms in the North Sea and CSP in North Africa are used to 
compensate the variations in local supply caused by the variability of 
the demand and the local renewable energy sources. In addition, the 
E[R] assumes that customers become more flexible in their demand; 
that about 20% of the local demand can be reduced for 3-4 hours by 
demand-side management and/or local storage options.3super grid – the interconnection of smart grids |BENEFITS OF A SUPR GRID 
In a power system electricity demand and supply must be 
equalised at all times to keep supply flowing to where it is 
needed. To guarantee this, sufficient generation capacity must 
be available at all times and network capacity must be 
adequate and operational when needed. Adding large shares of 
–partly variable- renewable generation to a power system does 
not change this criteria. The concept of super grids provides a 
solution to transferring energy supply between areas of large 
resources and areas of large demand.

In principal, oversizing local generation would reduce the need for 
large-scale renewable generation elsewhere as well as upgrading the 
transmission network.24 However, making local plants bigger 
(oversized) is less economic compared to installing large-scale 
renewable energy plants at a regional scale integrating them into 
the power system via extending the transmission system. The 
allocation of 70% distributed renewable generation and 30% 
large-scale renewable generation is not based on a detailed 
technical or economic optimisation – in each location the optimum 
mix is specific to local conditions. Further detailed studies on 
regional levels will be needed to better quantify the split between 
distributed and large-scale renewable generation.
The main aim of the transmission system redesign under the E[R] 
energy mix scenario is to keep the lights on 24/7, even in extreme 
situations. Such extreme situations are, for instance: 
•Less than average wind production over main parts of Europe 
during the winter, when solar radiation is low; 
•An unscheduled interruption of supply, for instance, of a major 
interconnection to a large offshore wind farm (n-1 criteria). The 
impact of such a sudden interruption will be within milliseconds. An appropriately designed transmission system is the solution in 
both cases as it can be used to transmit the required electricity 
from areas with surplus of generation to areas that have an 
electricity deficit. 
In general, the transmission system must be designed to cope with: 
1) Long-term issues: 
•Extreme variations in the availability of natural resources from 
one year to another, e.g. the output of wind turbines in any given 
area can vary by up to 30% from one year to the next, for hydro 
power the variations can be even larger.
2) Medium-term issues: 
•Extreme combinations in the availability of natural resources,
e.g. less than average wind production over main parts of Europe 
during the winter, when solar radiation is low. 
3) Short-term issues: 
•Significant mismatch between forecasted wind or solar 
production and actual production with significant impact on 
power system operation in the range of 15 minutes to 3 hours; 
41 figure 19 :customer aggregation in a power system 
22 kW 
0
Time of day 2 Households Load/cust. 
15 kW 
0
Time of day 20 Households Load/cust. 15 kW 
0
Time of day 5 Households Load/cust. 
15 kW 
0
Time of day 100 Households Load/cust. 
reference 
24 IN THIS CASE THE LOCAL POWER SYSTEM WILL EVOLVE INTO A HYBRID SYSTEM 
THAT CAN OPERATE WITHOUT ANY OUTSIDE SUPPORT.3super grid – the interconnection of smart grids |BENEFITS OF A SUPR GRID 
© ELIANDRIC/ISTOCK image GEOTHERMAL POWER 
STATION,TUSCANY, ITALY. 

42 WORKING FOR THE CLIMATE 
RENEWABLE ENERGY & THE GREEN JOB [R]EVOLUTION 
•Loss of a significant amount of generation due to unscheduled 
break-down or network interruption, impact within milliseconds.
The mainland European power system is currently designed to 
cope with a maximum sudden loss of generation of 3000 MW. 
If this is sufficient for the future depends, for example, on the 
maximum transmission capacity of a single transmission line.
Most likely the maximum transmission capacity of a single 
transmission line in the future HVDC super grid will exceed a 
capacity of 3000 MW, hence sufficient spare generation and/or 
network capacity must be considered when redesigning the power 
system (considered in the simulation report (Section 4) by 
loading the super grid to a maximum of 70%). 
Section 4 aims to determine the appropriate transmission capacity 
between key regions based on extreme combinations in the 
availability of natural resources (medium-term issues). The medium- 
term issues are most critical for the design of the transmission 
system, i.e. as long as the transmission system is appropriately 
designed to cope with the medium-term issues, it will most likely 
also be able to cope with the long-term and short-term issues. The 
model focuses on determining the transmission capacity between 
different European regions, but no power system dynamic issues 
were investigated. 
3.2 super grid transmission options 
In principle, there are different technical options for the redesign 
of the onshore transmission network. In the following, the technical
options are briefly presented, followed by a general comparison.
•HVAC (High Voltage Alternating Current); 
•HVDC LCC (High voltage direct current system using line 
commutated converter); 
•HVDC VSC (High voltage direct current system using voltage 
source converter); 
•Other technical solutions 
3.2.1 HVAC 
A high voltage AC transmission (HVAC) using overhead line has 
become a leading technology in electrical networks.25 Its advantage is 
in using transformers to increase the typical, rather low voltage at the 
generators to higher voltage levels, which is a significantly cheaper 
approach than the AC/DC converter stations for the HVDC 
technologies. Transmission over long distances with low or medium 
voltage will result in high and prohibitively expensive losses, so high 
voltage AC (400 kV or more) over medium distance (a few hundred 
kilometres) is typically the most cost-effective solution. As AC 
systems develop, there are increases in transmission voltage. Typically,
doubling the voltage quadruples the power transfer capability.
Consequently, the evolution of grids in most countries is characterised 
by the addition of network layers of higher and higher voltages.
Today, the highest HVAC voltage used is around 800 kV for 
overhead lines. The Canadian company Hydro Quebec, for instance,
operates a massive 735 kV transmission system using overhead 
lines, the first line was put into operation in 1965. 1000 kV and 1200 kV AC has been tested in several test-installations and even 
short-term commercial applications but is not currently used in any 
commercial application.26 There are several challenges involved in 
building such lines and new equipment to be developed includes 
transformers, breakers, transformers, and switches.
The major advantage of an AC-based system is the flexibility with 
which loads and generation along the route can be connected. This 
is especially important if the transmission route passes through a 
highly populated area and if many local generation facilities are 
located at many places along the route. The disadvantage of HVAC 
systems are the comparatively high costs for transmission of large 
capacity (> 1000 MW) over very long distances (> 1000 km) due 
to the additional equipment required for keeping the voltage level
on the overhead lines, for instance. 
3.2.2 HVDC LCC 
The advantage of line commutated converter (LCC) based high 
voltage DC (HVDC) connections is certainly its proven track 
record. The first commercial LCC HVDC link was installed in 1954 
between the island of Gotland and the Swedish mainland. The link 
was 96 km long, 20 MW rated and used a 100 kV submarine 
cable. Since then, LCC based HVDC technology has been installed 
in many locations in the world, primarily for bulk power 
transmission over long geographical distances and for 
interconnecting power systems, e.g. the different island systems in 
Japan or New Zealand. Other well-known examples for conventional
HVDC technology are: 
•The 1,354 km Pacific Interie DC link with a rating of 3,100 MW 
at a DC voltage of ± 500 kV; 
•The Itaipu link between Brazil and Paraguay, rated at 6,300 MW 
at a DC voltage of ± 600 kV (2 bipoles x 3,150 MW).
The total conversion efficiency from AC to DC and back to AC 
using the two converters lies in the range of 97 to 98% and 
depends on design details of the converter stations. A system design 
with a 98% efficiency will have higher investment costs compared 
to a design with lower efficiency. The advantages of an LCC HVDC 
solution are comparatively low losses – in the order of 2-3% for a 
500 MW transmission over 100 km, including losses in converters 
and transmission. In addition, the higher transmission capacity of a 
single cable compared to the HVAC transmission or the voltage 
source converter based transmission can be an advantage when 
transmitting large capacities. The disadvantage of the HVDC LCC 
design is the lack of power system support capability. Typically, a 
strong HVAC network is required on both sites of the HVDC LCC 
connection. Hence, to build an entire HVDC back-bone network 
using HVDC LCC technology that has to support the underlaying 
HVAC network is technically challenging and only possible with the 
installation of additional equipment such as Statcoms.27 3super grid – the interconnection of smart grids |SUPER GRID TRANSMISSION OPTIONS 
references 
25 HVAC CABLE SYSTEMS ARE CURRENTLY LESS ATTRACTIVE AS CABLE LOSSES ARE 
HIGHER AND TRANSMISSION CAPACITY IS LESS THAN WITH HVAC OVERHEAD LINES.
26 IN 1986 A 1200 KV AC TRANSMISSION LINE, CONNECTING RUSSIA AND KAZAKHSTAN,
WAS PUT INTO OPERATION. THE LINE, HOWEVER, WAS TAKEN OUT OF OPERATION IN 1996.
27 STATCOM = STATIC SYNCHRONOUS COMPENSATOR.
28 ALSO KNOWN AS FORCED COMMUTATED CONVERTER.

3super grid – the interconnection of smart grids |COMPARISON OF TRANSMISSION SOLUTIONS 
The total efficiency of a VSC-based HVDC system is slightly less than 
that of a LCC HVDC system, but it is expected that the efficiency will
improve in the future due to future technical development. Also, rating 
per converter is presently limited to approximately 400-500 MW, while 
the cable rating at +/-150 kV is 600 MW. More cable and converter 
stations are required for a VSC based HVDC solution compared to a 
LCC based HVDC solution, however, manufacturers are already 
working on converter stations with higher ratings and increased cable 
ratings. The significant advantages of VSC-based HVDC solutions are 
its power system support capabilities such as independent control of 
active and reactive power. In addition, a VSC-based HVDC link does 
not require a strong AC network, it can even start up against a non- 
load network. Building up a VSC based HVDC back-bone network will
be technically easier than using LCC based HVDC technology. However,
Multi-terminal VSC HVDC systems are also new for the power system 
industry, so there will be a learning curve to achieve that.
3.2.4 other technical solutions 
In principal other technical transmission solutions are possible, for 
instance, using 
•Gas insulated transmission lines (GIL), or 
•AC transmission systems with lower network frequency, or 
•Four or six-phase bipolar HVAC systems.
The development of these transmission technologies is, however less 
advanced than the three technologies described in the previous 
sections. In the long-run, some of those technologies might become 
an important option when replacing overhead lines with cable 
systems (hence reduced environmental impact). 3.2.3 HVDC VSC 
The voltage source converter (VSC) 28 based HVDC technology is 
capturing more and more attention. This comparatively new 
technology has only become possible due to advances in high power 
electronics, namely Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistors (IGBTs).
This way Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) can be used for the VSC 
converter, as opposed to thyristor based line-commutated converters 
used in the conventional HVDC technology. 
The first commercial VSC-based HVDC link was installed by ABB 
on the Swedish island of Gotland in 1999. It is 70 km long, with 
60 MVA at ± 80 kV. The link was mainly built in order to provide 
voltage support for the large amount of wind power installed in the 
South of Gotland. 
Today about 10 VSC-based HVDC links are in operation world-wide.
Key projects are: 
•In 2000, the Murraylink was built in Australia with a length of 
almost 180 km. This connection was the longest VSC-based 
HVDC link in the world until 2009. It has a capacity of 220 
MVA at a DC voltage of ±150 kV. 
•The Bard Offshore 1 Project BorWind in Germany connects a 
400 MW offshore wind farm to the onshore grid using a 203 km 
long cable, operating at a DC voltage of ±150 kV. 
•The longest HVDC VSC project is the Caprivi link in Namibia. 
It is 970 km long and operates at ±350 kV, which is the highest 
voltage level used so far for HVDC VSC projects, to transmit a 
capacity of 300 MW. 
43 table 7: overview of the three main transmission solutions 
HVAC 
Cable system: 
• 200 MW at 150 KV; 
• 350 MW at 245 KV; 
Overhead lines: 
• 2000 MW at 800 KV 
• 4000 MW at 1000 kV 
(under development) 
Cable system: 
• Up to 245 kV realistic, short 
cables up to 400 kV possible 
Overhead lines: 
• Up to 800 kV 
• 1000 kV under Development 
Yes 
Distance depending 
(Yes) 
Limited 
SmallLCC HVDC 
Cable system: 
• ~ 1200 MW 
Overhead lines: 
• 3150 MW at ± 600 kV 
• 6400 MW at ± 800 kV 
(under development) 
Cable system: 
• Up to ± 500 kV 
Overhead lines: 
• Up to ± 600 kV 
• ± 800 kV under development 
No 
2 - 3% 
No 
Limited 
Depending on capacity.
Converter larger than VSC.Maximum available capacity per system 
Voltage level
Transmission capacity distance depending? 
Total system losses 
Black start capability 
Technical capability for network support 
Space requirements for substation.VSC HVDC 
Cable/Overhead: 
• 400 MW 
• 500 - 800 MW announced 
Cable:Up to ± 150 kV, higher 
voltages announced 
Overhead lines:Up to ± 350 kV 
No 
5 – 10% 
Yes 
Large range of possibilities.
Depending on capacity. Converter 
smaller than LCC but larger than 
HVAC substation.
source ENERGYNAUTICS 
© ALEXANDER HAFEMANN image ELECTRICITY STATION PYLONS. 

44 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
3.3 comparison of transmission solutions 
Table 7 compares the three standard transmission solutions. The 
technical capabilities of each system can probably be improved by 
adding additional equipment to the overall system solution.
The cost of transmitting electricity is dominated by the investment 
cost of the transmission lines and by the electricity losses during 
transmission. At present, overhead lines are predominant since costs 
of overhead lines are about 20% of that for underground cables.
The transmission losses of HVAC overhead lines are roughly twice 
as high as those of HVDC. On the one hand, the cost of overhead 
lines is similar for the lower voltage level, but at 800 kV HVDC 
lines are much less expensive than comparable AC lines. On the 
other hand, AC/DC converter stations for HVDC technology are 
considerably more expensive than the transformer stations of AC 
systems. Therefore, for shorter distances and lower voltages AC is 
typically the most economic solution, while HVDC lines are applied 
at distances well over 500 km (see Figure 20). 
The most economic system design is typically a combination of 
HVAC and HVDC technology. HVAC is a cost-effective and flexible 
solution over medium distances (up to 1000 km), for instance to 
distribute power along the route to different load centres or to 
collect locally distributed generation and transmit the surplus 
electricity to other regions. HVDC technology can be used as an 
overlaying network structure to transmit bulk power, i.e. large 
capacity, over long distances to the areas where the energy is 
needed. An HVDC super grid will have only a very limited number 
of connection points, because the substation (converter station) 
costs are significant. 
In addition, an HVAC solution will require significantly more lines 
than HVDC solutions. The transmission of 10,000 MW or 10 GW, for instance, can be achieved with two lines using 800 kV and applying 
LCC HVDC technology, while transmitting the same power with 800 
kV AC would require five lines. For a given transmission capacity of 
10 GW, the space requirement of HVDC overhead lines can be four 
times lower than that of HVAC lines (Figure 21). While an 800 kV 
HVAC line would require a width of 425 metres over the total length 
of a power link of 10 GW, a HVDC line of the same capacity would 
only require a band of 100 metres width. This leads to considerable 
differences in the environmental impact of both technologies. 
A final advantage of using HVDC technology is that it is easier to 
move the entire HVDC super grid underground by using HVDC 
cables. This approach will be more costly, but following existing 
transporting routes, e.g. laying the cables along motorways, railway 
tracks or even in rivers will allow a fast roll-out of the HVDC super 
grid infrastructure and reduce the visual impact of the installation. 
3.4 regulatory and energy policy issues / policy 
recommendations 
The planning, design, realisation and operation of a European super 
grid requires a European-wide effort with close coordination between 
the various connected power systems. In addition, the onshore super 
grid must be coordinated with the development of the offshore super 
grid as well as the developments in North Africa and the ongoing 
electricity market harmonisation in Europe. To quickly achieve and 
develop this infrastructure, a European-wide regulatory authority is 
required to moderate between and coordinate the different European 
transmission system operators (TSOs), national governments as well
the different electricity markets. The regulatory authority must also 
develop economic incentives so that the electricity industry 
undertakes the relevant investments in the upgrade of the HVAC 
system and the construction of the HVDC super grid. 3key results |GLOBAL 
Distance Investment cost break even distance total DC cost total AC cost 
500-1,000 km 
DC line cost 
DC terminal cost 
AC line cost 
AC terminal
cost figure 20: comparison of AC and DC investment costs using 
overhead lines. BREAK EVEN POINT IS TYPICALLY BETWEEN 500 TO 1000 KM.
800 kV AC figure 21: comparison of the required number of parallel
pylons and space to transfer 10 GW of electric capacity 
425 m 
Distribution Company
Distribution Company
Distribution Company
Distribution Company
Distribution Company
600 kV HVDC 
150 m 
Distribution Company
Distribution Company
Distribution Company
800 kV HVDC 
100 m 
Distribution Company
Distribution Company


45 
super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe 
EUROPE GRID MODEL 
APPROACH EXTREME EVENTS 
ADDITIONAL SIMULATIONS 
WITH REDUCED PV SUPER GRID PROPOSAL 
ESTIMATION OF COSTS 
LITERATURE 
“we know that
there are enough 
resources to power
the whole continent
with renewables.”
GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL 
CLIMATE CAMPAIGN 
image BIOGAS FACILITY “SCHRADEN BIOGAS” IN GROEDEN NEAR DRESDEN, GERMANY. 
© LANGROCK/ZENIT/GP 4

4.1 introduction 
Extreme situations in power systems can happen for a variety of 
reasons, independent of the actual power generation resources or 
the power system design. 
The Swedish power system, for instance, is based on hydro and 
nuclear power generation. Hydro power generation depends mainly 
on the water inflow into the water reservoirs. The inflow in a dry 
year can be 40% lower than in a wet year, causing significant 
changes in hydro power generation from one year to another, 
see also Figure 22.In 2006, water levels in the water reservoirs were rather low (see 
Figure 22). In addition, in August 2006 three out of ten Swedish 
nuclear reactors were shut down due to safety concerns following an 
incident at Forsmark Nuclear Power Plant. Another reactor in 
Forsmark and a fifth at Ringhals nuclear power plant were offline due 
to planned maintenance work. Hence suddenly five of the ten Swedish 
reactors were not in operation (about 5100 MW out of 8961 MW of 
nuclear generation capacity), reducing the Swedish generation 
capacity significantly (nuclear power typically generates between 45 to 
50% of the Swedish demand). Because the levels in the water 
reservoirs were also very low, Swedish electricity security of supply 
relied heavily on foreign imports, a situation which continued for 
almost two months until the safety concerns were removed.
But also fast demand changes can be a challenge for a power system.
For instance, the first game of the Brazil national soccer team at the 
2006 FIFA World Champion Cup caused a major drop in electricity 
demand because all industrial activities went to a virtual standstill.
After the game, the demand increased rapidly, from approximately 
43.5 GW nation-wide to 55 GW in 15 minutes (11.5 GW in 15 
minutes). Even though these are extreme cases, the power system 
must be designed to cope with such events. This document describes 
the model as well as its basic assumptions and data, which have been 
derived from different sources. The results identify the necessary 
actions to strengthen the existing interconnections.
4.1.1 summary of results 
To evaluate the frequency of occurrences of extreme events, the study 
analysed the wind data of the last 30 years for all Europe. As 
simulations showed, the extreme events can be expected during winter 
time, when electricity demand is high and solar production low.
During the last 30 years, the potential power production from 
wind during winter time throughout Europe in the Energy 
[R]evolution scenario would have only dropped below 50GW 
0.4% of the time, equivalent to once a year if the average 
duration of the event is 12 hours.
This study selected key ‘extreme events’, with regard to balance of 
wind and solar power production on the one hand, and high demand 
on the other hand, and created a model of power supply based on 
the E[R] energy mix. The results were: 
•In an extreme summer event of high demand and extremely low 
wind (as in August 2003), the available power from locally 
distributed PV is enough to compensate for the lack of wind 
power; therefore no change to the existing grid would be needed 
under a renewable energy scenario.
46 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |INTRODUCTION 
figure 22: storage levels in the regulating reservoirs 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0
•MAX/MIN 1950-2005 •2006 •AVERAGE 
source HTTP://WWW.SVENSKENERGI.SE/UPLOAD/OM%20EL/EL%C3%A5RET/FILER/
ELARET%202006_ENGLISH.PDF, PAGE 18.jan feb mar apr may jun july aug sep oct nov dec %The following case study looks at extreme weather events to 
work out what kind of grid technology is needed to achieve a 
secure power supply based on the Energy [R]evolution energy 
mix in Europe. Technically, we know that there are enough 
resources to power the whole continent with renewables – 
solar in the Southern nations, wind in the North, and 
geothermal, biomass, and combined heat and power making up 
the bulk of the energy needed. Smart grids will connect 
distributed energy sources and consumers with the forward- 
looking use of information and communications technology,
virtual power plants, and control technology that helps the 
system to follow the load. The technical design aspects needs to 
account for the rare events when weather-based renewable 
energy in certain geographic areas drops below the supply 
capacity needed. Interconnections of smart grid systems will
add up to a ‘super grid’ which provides more transport capacity 
for large-scale renewables such as offshore wind and 
concentrated solar power stations. 

47 •In an extreme winter event of high demand, low solar power 
production in most parts of Europe due to low solar radiation 
combined with low wind power production in Central and 
Northern Europe (as in January 1997), Central-Europe and 
Great Britain have a higher demand than they can supply 
whereas North and South of Europe have higher productions 
than demand. In this situation electricity has to be transported 
from Northern Europe (mainly hydro power) and from Southern- 
Europe (mainly solar power) to Central-Europe. For this to be 
achieved by renewable energy, the interconnections between Spain 
and France, Italy and France, Romania and Poland, Sweden and 
Poland, and Ireland and Great Britain have to be strengthened 
(see Figure 45) and a super grid must be built (Figure 48).
•In an extreme autumn event (as in November 1987) with very 
low sun radiation and low wind production, the reinforcement of 
the HVAC grid as well as the installation of the super grid as 
proposed would be sufficient to also cope with this event.
4.1.2 recommendations for grid improvements 
To be able to provide reliable, secure power supply to Europe,
taking into account extreme weather and high demand scenarios,
this study proposes: 
•Strengthening 34 HVAC interconnections between neighbouring 
countries in Europe: 5,347 km of upgrades at a cost of 
approximately 3 billion.
•17 new or strengthened HVDC interconnections within Europe : 
5, 125 km of upgrades at a cost of approximately €16 billion 
(see Figure 45).
•Up to15 new HVDC ‘super grid’ connections, 
- Within Europe: up to 11 connections with a total of up to 
6,000 km at a cost approximately €100 billion 
- Between Europe and Africa: The capacity of interconnections 
needed depends largely on the amount of imported CSP 
electricity and on the availability of storage capacity within 
Europe. Without further optimisation and storage capacity, 4 
HVDC connections with a total length of 5,500 to 6,000 km at a 
cost of approximately €90 billion 
All together the proposal would cost around €209 billion or 
€5.225 billion per year till 2050. Assuming the level of electricity 
consumption in Greenpeace’s Energy [R]evolution, this would 
increase costs of every kWh by 0.15 cent over 40 years. However,
the real costs for the required grid need further research, especially 
the availability of storage capacity within Europe, e.g. from electric 
vehicles. To exploit further optimisation potential in the energy 
generation mix can significantly reduce grid expansion costs and 
could reduce the links needed between North Africa and Europe.4.1.3 assumptions 
The study is based on a given E[R] energy mix provided by 
Greenpeace and doesn’t look at economic optimisation between 
local and large-scale generation. It was assumed that High 
Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) technology was used for the 
transmission over long distance and HVAC for medium distances 
(outlined in Section 3). 
The simulation is a first indication of the possible design and costs 
of the required transmission network redesign, but further studies 
will be required to identify the economic optimal design. We did not 
look at overall economic optimisation between upgrading the 
existing HVAC system and building a new HVDC system. 
Greenpeace and energynautics recommend further research to 
optimise this concept economically and technically via the use of 
advanced storage technologies or slight changes in the energy mix. 
The simulation study focuses on the redesign of the onshore grid.
The offshore super grid connecting the offshore wind farms in the 
North Sea using HVDC technology is based on the results of the 
Greenpeace report ‘A-North-Sea-electricity-grid-(r)evolution’.29 
4.2 grid model 
The model to do the load flow calculations has been built in 
DIgSILENT PowerFactory. It is a simplification of the European 
power system and comprises Central, East and Southern Europe 
(UCTE) as well as Scandinavia (Nordel), Britain (UKTSOA), and 
Ireland (ATSOI). The following figure shows the map of the grid 
model for Europe and represents the situation today.4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |GRID MODEL 
© GWEC / WIND POWER WORKS image CONSTRUCTING WINDTURBINES IN 
HE ́TOMESNIL, PICARDIE, FRANCE.
reference 
29 SOURCE: HTTP://WWW.GREENPEACE.ORG/RAW/CONTENT/EU-UNIT/PRESS- 
CENTRE/REPORTS/A-NORTH-SEA-ELECTRICITY-GRID-%28R%29EVOLUTION.PDF, 
A SUMMARY OF DIFFERENT PROPOSALS FOR THE OFFSHORE SUPER GRID IS GIVEN IN 
THE EWEA REPORT: “OCEANS OF OPPORTUNITIES” AVAILABLE AT: 
HTTP://WWW.EWEA.ORG/FILEADMIN/EWEA_DOCUMENTS/DOCUMENTS/PUBLICATIONS/RE 
PORTS/OFFSHORE_REPORT_2009.PDF 

48 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |GRID MODEL 
figure 23: map of the high voltage network of europe with the overlaying 
simplification of the european power system 
source UCTE, NORDEL & ENERGYNAUTICS LEGEND 
HIGH VOLTAGE 
AC-LINE 
HIGH VOLTAGE 
DC-LINE 

49 
 A© GP/SIMANJUNTAK image GREENPEACE DONATES A SOLAR 
POWER SYSTEM TO A COASTAL VILLAGE 
IN ACEH, INDONESIA, ONE OF THE WORST 
HIT AREAS BY THE TSUNAMI IN 
DECEMBER 2004. 
4
4.2.1 modelling generation 
The generation scenario is based on the energy mix presented by 
Greenpeace in the Energy [R]evolution 30 report. However, this 
report does not show how the different energy resources are 
allocated to each region or country within Europe. Energy 
[R]evolution reports have been available individually for some 
countries. This has been taken into account when distributing the 
renewable resources within Europe.
A detailed split up of different renewable sources within Europe 
can be found in the MED-CSP 31 study conducted by the German 
Aerospace Centre (DLR). However, this study is much more focused on concentrating solar power (CSP), whereas in the E[R] scenario 
photovoltaics play a major role. Thus, the MED-CSP scenario has 
been scaled to match the figures provided in the E[R] report.
Further adjustment has been carried out by including the results of 
the TradeWind 32 study as well as performing a reasonability check 
(e.g., the share of solar power has been reduced in Scandinavia and 
increased in the Mediterranean area).
The following table gives an overview over the resources in each 
country as it was used for this study.
In the following sections, each resource will be described in detail.
table 8: installed capacity and maximum demand (both in GW) based on E[R] scenario for 2050 
COUNTRY 
Europe 
Slovenia 
Ireland 
Greece 
Finland 
Netherlands 
United Kingdom 
Denmark 
Slovak Republic 
Czech Republic 
Portugal
Hungary 
Bulgaria 
Belgium 
Poland 
Romania 
Austria 
Italy 
Germany 
France 
Spain 
Sweden 
Macedonia 
Serbia & Montenegro 
Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Croatia 
Switzerland 
Norway WIND 
378.1 
0.9 
6.2 
12.5 
6.5 
8.5 
53.6 
6.3 
0.6 
1.9 
9.0 
2.4 
1.6 
5.7 
40.8 
4.0 
2.3 
18.0 
62.1 
49.7 
45.3 
21.0 
0.0 
0.5 
0.0 
5.6 
1.1 
12.0 PHOTOVOLTAICS 
383.3 
4.0 
10.0 
16.1 
3.0 
6.5 
36.3 
5.5 
7.0 
7.0 
12.0 
7.3 
11.0 
5.0 
29.0 
11.0 
10.9 
40.0 
50.0 
40.0 
49.5 
7.0 
2.1 
3.2 
2.1 
2.9 
3.7 
1.3 GEOTHERMAL 
38.5 
0.1 
0.0 
1.7 
0.0 
0.4 
0.1 
0.0 
0.9 
0.0 
1.6 
5.3 
0.2 
0.0 
0.5 
0.2 
1.1 
6.8 
8.2 
4.1 
6.6 
0.4 
0.0 
0.4 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 BIOMASS 
115.7 
0.7 
1.4 
0.8 
4.0 
2.9 
7.1 
1.4 
1.2 
2.1 
2.6 
1.2 
1.0 
2.2 
10.4 
5.5 
2.8 
11.0 
21.8 
6.3 
12.0 
11.5 
0.3 
1.4 
0.9 
1.0 
0.8 
1.4 CSP PLANTS 
31.0 
0.0 
0.0 
2.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
2.9 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
13.0 
0.0 
0.0 
12.8 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 WAVE/TIDAL 
27.3 
0.0 
0.8 
0.8 
0.4 
0.2 
12.5 
0.5 
0.0 
0.0 
1.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.2 
0.0 
0.0 
2.0 
1.5 
2.5 
2.7 
0.4 
0.0 
0.3 
0.0 
0.4 
0.0 
0.6 HYDROPOWER 
190.8 
1.4 
0.5 
2.8 
3.4 
0.0 
3.9 
0.0 
2.6 
2.2 
5.6 
0.0 
2.9 
0.1 
1.0 
5.3 
11.7 
21.0 
6.5 
29.4 
19.0 
16.4 
1.0 
5.0 
3.9 
2.5 
13.2 
29.3 GAS 
113.8 
0.0 
1.8 
1.0 
3.3 
6.6 
22.0 
3.8 
0.9 
1.2 
1.7 
0.9 
1.5 
1.4 
2.3 
5.9 
0.7 
11.0 
15.1 
15.6 
5.7 
2.8 
0.7 
4.6 
0.3 
0.8 
0.0 
2.4 COAL 
3.6 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.3 
0.1 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.7 
0.3 
0.1 
0.0 
0.6 
1.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 TOTAL 
1282.2 
7.2 
20.8 
38.0 
20.6 
25.2 
135.8 
17.5 
13.2 
14.5 
36.9 
17.0 
18.2 
14.5 
84.4 
31.9 
29.4 
122.9 
165.9 
147.9 
153.6 
59.4 
4.8 
16.4 
7.2 
13.2 
18.8 
47.1 MAX DEMAND 
545.1 
2.2 
4.8 
9.8 
13.8 
17.8 
59.2 
6.4 
4.4 
10.0 
9.1 
6.5 
6.8 
13.8 
22.6 
8.7 
9.3 
55.9 
82.8 
87.9 
43.4 
24.5 
1.6 
7.2 
2.0 
3.0 
10.0 
21.6 
source GREENPEACE 
references 
30 HTTP://WWW.ENERGYBLUEPRINT.INFO/
31 HTTP://WWW.DLR.DE/TT/MED-CSP 
32 HTTP://WWW.TRADE-WIND.EU/super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |MODELLING GENERATION 

50 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
wind power 
Besides PV, wind power has the highest share of installed capacity 
within this study and by far the highest share of energy produced,
thus wind power plays a major role in the scenario.
To determine the amount of wind power produced during the time 
frame of investigated scenarios, the approach described in the 
TradeWind study has applied. For each region the wind speed is 
taken from the reanalysis data source from the National Centre for 
Environmental Prediction (NCEP).33 
Figure 24 shows the wind speed from the reanalysis source 
in comparison to the measured site data. A good match can 
be observed.
The wind speed has to be further processed to calculate the 
relevant power output of all wind turbines within each region. 
This is done according to the equivalent regional power curves in 
Figure 25.
photovoltaics (PV) 
PV has along with wind power the highest share of installed 
capacity in Europe. However, due to its production characteristic,
i.e., no production at night, partial production in the morning and 
evening, the amount of energy produced is only one third of the 
energy generated by wind power.
Due to its highly fluctuating characteristics, it is important to have 
a higher sampling rate than wind power. Although NCEP-2 
reanalysis data provide solar data, the time resolution is with 6 
hour values not sufficient. A better data set is provided by S@tel- 
Light.34 This source provides half hour values for all over Europe.
However, it is limited to the years 1996 to 2000.geothermal 
Geothermal power does not have the highest share of capacity due 
to limited resources in Europe. Typically, geothermal power plants 
always run at full load, because there is no heat storage included 
(like CSP) or fuel to be saved (like Biomass). To account for 
maintenance work and failures in geothermal power plants, 
the power output is set to 90% of rated capacity.
concentrating solar power (CSP) 
CSP plays an important role within this study, as it is to a certain 
extent a controllable source, due to its heat storage. The calculation 
of the available power is done according to the approach described 
for PV, but taking only direct sunlight into account. In addition to the 
installed capacity within Europe, another 60 GW will be installed in 
North Africa for power export to Europe via HVDC lines.
ocean energy 
Wave and tidal power has only a small share within the E[R] 
scenario, thus a detailed analysis of the prevailing waves or tides 
during the time frame of the event has not been carried out. Instead 
a typical mean value of 30% of the installed capacity is taken.
hydropower 
Hydropower has to be divided into power plants with and without a 
reservoir. Run-of-river power plants typically do not have a capacity 
for energy storage and are therefore not controllable; whereas 
those with reservoir can be considered controllable. The power 
output of run-of-river power plants can vary; depending on the 
region, the river has either more water in summer due to melting 
snow (e.g. the Alps) or less in summer, especially when it is a dry 
summer and there is no rainfall (e.g. Spain). 
figure 25: equivalent regional power curve 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0
source TRADEWIND 02468 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 Power [% of rated] 
Wind speed [m/s] figure 24: comparison of NCEP-2 reanalysis data 
and site data, 19th and 20th january, 2004.
20 
15 
10 50
•SITE DATA •REANALYSIS DATA POINTS •LINEAR INTERPOLATION 
source TRADEWIND 00:00 06:00 12:00 18:00 00:00 06:00 12:00 Wind speed (m/s) 
references 
33 NCEP-2 REANALYSIS DATA PROVIDED BY NOAA/OAR/ESRL PSD, BOULDER, COLORADO,
USA, HTTP://WWW.CDC.NOAA.GOV 
34 HTTP://WWW.SATELLIGHT.COM 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |MODELLING GENERATION 
19 January 2004 
Time of day 20 January 2004 

51 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |BIOMASS / NATURAL GAS 
biomass 
Biomass can be considered as power on demand, therefore it plays 
an important role in the study. These power plants are applicable 
almost all over Europe, as the following map shows. The availability 
of biomass power plants has been taken into account with a 
share of 95%.natural gas 
Gas power plants can be used for control purposes. In the study, 
the non renewable plants are strategically placed where there is a 
high demand and low amount of renewable sources. These plants 
are only used as backup system in times when the amount of 
renewable power production is too low.
© MARKEL REDONDO/GP image WORKERS EXAMINE PARABOLIC TROUGH 
COLLECTORS IN THE PS10 CONCENTRATING SOLAR TOWER 
PLANT. EACH TROUGH HAS A LENGTH OF 150 METERS AND 
CONCENTRATES SOLAR RADIATION INTO A HEAT- 
ABSORBING PIPE IN WHICH A HEAT-BEARING FLUID 
FLOWS THAT IS THEN USED TO HEAT STEAM IN A 
STANDARD TURBINE GENERATOR.
-10° -20° -30°
0°0°
10°10° 20°
20°30°
30°40° 5 0° 60°
40°40°50°50°60°60°
05 00  1  00 0  1  500 Km figure 26: biomass potential in europe 
source EUROPEAN ENVIRONMENT AGENCY - 2008 35 
reference 
35 HTTP://WWW.EEA.EUROPA.EU/LEGEND (DATA 2007) •HIGHLY SUITABLE •MODERATELY SUITABLE •MARGINALLY SUITABLE •UN SUITABLE •OUTSIDE DATA COVERAGE 

52 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
4.2.2 modelling demand 
According to the E[R] report, the energy demand in 2050 within 
Europe will not increase in comparison to today’s demand, due to 
higher efficiency in energy use required to keep greenhouse gas 
emissions stable. In the model, the power demand of today is used as 
input. To determine the amount of power demand of each country, the 
so called ‘vertical load’ is taken. The European Network of 
Transmission System Operators for Electricity (entso-e 36 ) provides 
hourly values of the vertical load in each country (Figure 27).
To further allocate the load to each node within the model, the 
population density is taken. According to Zhou and Bialek 37 there is a 
good correlation between consumption and population density, as in most 
cases a high population is where there is employment and thus industry.
The population density can be found in the statistics database of 
the European Commission (Eurostat 38 ). The following map shows 
the population density within Europe.
As it is expected that there will be higher use of demand-side 
management and local storage (see smart grid report) in the future 
power system with high amounts of fluctuating sources, this is 
taken into account by adapting the load to a certain extent to the 
available power production.
figure 28: map of the population density by regions in 2007 INHABITENTS PER KM 2
source EUROSTAT figure 27: vertical load in germany on 7 june 2009 
36,000 
34,000 
32,000 
30,000 
28,000 
26,000 
24,000 
22,000 
20,000 
source ENTSO-E 1:00 
2:00 
3:00 
4:00 
5:00 
6:00 
7:00 
8:00 
9:00 
10:00 
11:00 
12:00 
13:00 
14:00 
15:00 
16:00 
17:00 
18:00 
19:00 
20:00 
21:00 
22:00 
23:00 
00:00 MW 
Time of day 
•D-1 FORECAST (MW) •REALISED LOAD (MW) 
references 
36 HTTPS://WWW.ETSOVISTA.ORG/
37 ZHOU, BIALEK “APPROXIMATION MODEL OF EUROPEAN INTERCONNECTED SYSTEM 
AS A BENCHMARK SYSTEM TO STUDY EFFECTS OF CROSS-BORDER TRADES”, IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, MAI 2005 
38 HTTP://EPP.EUROSTAT.EC.EUROPA.EU/PORTAL/PAGE/PORTAL/POPULATION/INTRODUCTION 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |MODELLING DEMAND 
LEGEND (DATA 2007) •2.5 - 50.0 •50.0 - 100.0 •100.0 - 200.0 •200.0 - 500.0 •500.0 - 9,158.8 •N/A 

53 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |APPROACH 
© GP/DEAN SEWELL image OCEANLINX IS 
COMMERCIALISING WAVE POWER 
TECHNOLOGY WHICH USES A COLUMN OF 
WATER TO DRIVE A TURBINE, PRODUCING 
ZERO EMISSIONS. 
4.3 approach 
The following approach has been taken to determine the needs of a 
future power grid with a high share of renewable energies.
4.3.1 non-controllable renewable energy source 
In the model, priority is given to electrical power from sources that 
can only be controlled by not using the available power to the full
extent (e.g. by pitch control of wind turbines). These sources are 
‘downward controllable’ – as compared to fossil fuels where 
production can be ‘ramped up’ to meet demand. They are 
fluctuating sources like wind, PV and ocean but also run-of-river as 
well as geothermal power plants. The amount of power produced by 
these sources at each node of the model is used first to meet the 
demand at each node. 
4.3.2 demand-side management 
To take advantage of demand-side management and local storage 
the resulting power difference between production and generation is 
smoothed over the time. The following figure shows the operation of 
such a demand-side management: depending on the available local
source, in this case PV, the demand is increased or decreased. 4.3.3 optimal power flow 
The next step is to perform a DC load flow calculation and power 
flow optimisation. The result of this calculation is the necessary 
amount of additional power (within given limits) at each node to 
keep the high voltage network within allowed operation limits. 
This additional power is provided by controllable sources such as: 
•CSP 
•Hydropower (storage) 
•Biomass 
•Natural gas 
Renewable sources are prioritised.
In case there is a surplus of power, the power will be fed into 
the high voltage grid, in case there is a lack of power, it will be 
withdrawn from the grid. 
4.3.4 evaluation 
With the help of the load flow calculations described in the previous 
section it can be determined where the grid will be overloaded due to 
high production at one point and high demand at another point of the 
network. Depending on the distance between these points, it is either 
reasonable to strengthen the HVAC grid in between or in case the 
distance is too high to build an HVDC line or even a super grid 
consisting of several HVDC lines.
In case there is no further demand but still excessive amount of 
variable power, there are two options, either to store the available 
power and to use it at another time or to curtail it. From an 
economic point of view it might be more economic to oversize and 
occasionally regulate down the wind farms than to build expensive 
electric storage systems. 
This study was done to find out how the electrical network has to 
be strengthened to allow 24/7 power supply with a very high share 
of renewables also in extreme situations as described in the next 
section. More information on super grids is provided in Section 3 
of this report.figure 29: operation of demand-side management 
and local storage 
1,800 
1,600 
1,400 
1,200 
1,000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
MW 0
•DEMAND •DEMAND DSM •PHOTOVOLTAICS 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 00:00 
02:00 
04:00 
06:00 
08:00 
10:00 
12:00 
14:00 
16:00 
18:00 
20:00 
22:00 
00:00 
02:00 
04:00 
06:00 
08:00 
10:00 
12:00 
14:00 
16:00 
18:00 
20:00 
24:00 
00:00 
reference 
39 HTTP://WWW.ENTSOE.EU/_LIBRARY/PUBLICATIONS/CE/OH/POLICY3_FINAL.PDF 1 August 2003 
Time of day 2 August 2003 Definition of N-1 security: A system is N-1 secure if any 
element in the system may fail without overloading any other 
element.39 As the model does not represent exactly each 
physical HVAC line in the network, but instead aggregates a 
number of lines, the N-1 security cannot be assured by 
evaluating each single line. Instead, a maximum loading of 
80% on the lines has been allowed to account for N-1 
security. On the other hand, the HVDC lines and thus the 
super grid are represented by physical lines, thus each HVDC 
connection has been evaluated for N-1 security.

54 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
4.4 extreme events 
Several extreme events on a short, medium and long-term basis 
have been investigated to determine the necessary layout of a future 
power system with a high share of renewable energy sources.
4.4.1 long-term issues 
As renewable resources can vary from year to year, this study 
focuses on extreme events on a long-term basis. In effect this study 
evaluates the Energy [R]evolution Scenario to see whether it would 
have an impact on the security of supply. 
The variation of different sources from year to year has been 
analysed. As wind energy has by far the highest share in 
energy production in the E[R] Scenario, it has been chosen 
for further investigations. 
The lowest values found were around 20% below the long-term 
average (An example for Germany can be found in Figure 30), this 
is an amount the portfolio in the E[R] Scenario can easily cope 
with and will not influence the layout of the future power system.4.4.2 medium-term issues 
Variable renewable energy sources like wind and solar power as 
well as the demand vary within the range of minutes to hours, and 
generation and consumption has to be balanced at all times, while 
electrical storages are limited and expensive. For these reasons the 
medium-term issues are the most critical and dimensioning 
situation for the power system. 
For this purpose three extreme events have been identified 
and analysed: 
•Extreme summer event in August 2003 
•Extreme winter event in January 1997 
•Extreme autumn event in November 1987 
4.4.3 evaluation of occurrences of extreme events 
Renewables 24/7: A mix of different renewable energy sources such 
as solar PV, wind, biomass, geothermal, hydro – and ocean energy 
in the future – guarantees a secure around the clock power supply – 
even though the wind is sometimes not blowing or the sun won’t 
shine! The extreme weather event as described here appear very 
seldom and last only for a short period. 
figure 30: yearly wind energy yield in comparison 
to long-term average; example germany 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 0
source 
WINDMONITOR / ISET 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 %20% figure 31: available wind power (in GW) according 
to energy [r]evolution scenario in november 1987 
compared to 30 years average (6 hour values)
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
GW 0
•NOVEMBER 1987 •30 YEAR AVERAGE 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 1 NOV 00:00 
1 NOV 18:00 
2 NOV 12:00 
3 NOV 06:00 
4 NOV 00:00 
4 NOV 18:00 
5 NOV 12:00 
6 NOV 06:00 
7 NOV 00:00 
7 NOV 18:00 
8 NOV 12:00 
6 NOV 06:00 
10 NOV 00:00 
10 NOV 18:00 
11 NOV 12:00 
12 NOV 06:00 
13 NOV 00:00 
13 NOV 18:00 
14 NOV 12:00 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |EXTREME EVENTS 
Time of day 

55 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |EXTREME EVENTS 
© ALEX HOFFORD image PUBLIC BATH HOUSE THAT USES 
SOLAR THERMAL TECHNOLOGY IS SEEN 
BESIDE A FARM. THE CITY OF DEZHOU IS 
LEADING THE WAY IN ADOPTING SOLAR 
ENERGY AND HAS BECOME KNOWN AS 
THE SOLAR VALLEY OF CHINA. 
To evaluate the frequency of occurrences of extreme events, we 
have analysed the wind data of the last 30 years. As simulations 
showed, the extreme events can be expected during winter time,
when the electricity demand is high and the solar production low.
During the last 30 years the potential power production from wind 
during the winter time within Europe in the E[R] Scenario would 
have been only dropped below 50GW 0.4% of the time. Taking an 
average duration of an extreme event of 12 hours, this is equivalent 
to once a year.
The following two figures show the wind power production in 
Europe during the two simulated extreme winter events: 
November 1987 and January 1997 
The next figure shows the PV production during the extreme January 
event. During January 1997 there are some days (5th to 10th),
where the production is considerably lower than the long-term 
average. Together with a high demand (Figure 34) and low wind 
power production (Figure 32), this is a critical situation for the 
European power system. (see also Figure 35) 
source ENERGYNAUTICS figure 33: available solar pv power (in GW) according 
to energy [r]evolution scenario in january 1997 
compared to 5 years average (1 hour values)
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
GW 0
•JANUARY 1997 •5 YEAR AVERAGE 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 4 JAN 00:00 
5 JAN 09:00 
5 JAN 18:00 
6 JAN 03:00 
6 JAN 12:00 
6 JAN 21:00 
7 JAN 06:00 
7 JAN 15:00 
8 JAN 00:00 
8 JAN 09:00 
8 JAN 18:00 
9 JAN 03:00 
9 JAN 12:00 
9 JAN 21:00 
10 JAN 06:00 
10 JAN 15:00 
11 JAN 00:00 
11 JAN 09:00 
11 JAN 18:00 
12 JAN 03:00 
12 JAN 12:00 
12 JAN 21:00 
13 JAN 06:00 
13 JAN 15:00 
14 JAN 00:00 
14 JAN 09:00 
14 JAN 18:00 
figure 32: available wind power (in GW) according 
to energy [r]evolution scenario in january 1997 
compared to 30 years average (6 hour values)
200 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
GW 0
•JANUARY 1997 •30 YEAR AVERAGE 5 JAN 00:00 
5 JAN 12:00 
6 JAN 00:00 
6 JAN 12:00 
7 JAN 00:00 
7 JAN 12:00 
8 JAN 00:00 
8 JAN 12:00 
9 JAN 00:00 
9 JAN 12:00 
10 JAN 00:00 
10 JAN 12:00 
11 JAN 00:00 
11 JAN 12:00 
12 JAN 00:00 
12 JAN 12:00 
13 JAN 00:00 
13 JAN 12:00 
14 JAN 00:00 
14 JAN 12:00 figure 34: demand (in MW) during january 1997 event
compared to all time high, yearly average and 
minimum (1 hour values)
600,000 
500,000 
400,000 
300,000 
200,000 
100,000 
MW 0
•DEMAND •ALL TIME HIGH •YEARLY AVERAGE •YEARLY MINIMUM 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 5 JAN 00:00 
5 JAN 10:00 
5 JAN 20:00 
6 JAN 06:00 
6 JAN 16:00 
7 JAN 02:00 
7 JAN 12:00 
7 JAN 22:00 
8 JAN 08:00 
8 JAN 18:00 
9 JAN 04:00 
9 JAN 14:00 
10 JAN 00:00 
10 JAN 10:00 
10 JAN 20:00 
11 JAN 06:00 
11 JAN 16:00 
12 JAN 02:00 
12 JAN 12:00 
12 JAN 22:00 
13 JAN 08:00 
13 JAN 18:00 
14 JAN 04:00 
14 JAN 14:00 
Time of day Time of day 
Time of day 

56 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
extreme summer event (august 2003)
This extreme event is characterised by two weeks of no or very 
little wind in the North Sea (Figure 36).
As the following table shows, the highest demand is around 68% 
of the all time high, which is typical for the load during summer.
The amount of PV power produced is very high due to lots of 
sunshine during August. Further characteristics are presented 
in the following table. figure 35: overview extreme january event: wind and solar
production as well as demand (in MW) during january 
200 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
GW 0•JANUARY 1987 •30 YEAR AVERAGE 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
GW 0•JANUARY 1997 •5 YEAR AVERAGE 
600,000 
500,000 
400,000 
300,000 
200,000 
100,000 
MW 0
•DEMAND DSM •ALL TIME HIGH •YEARLY AVERAGE •YEARLY MINIMUM wind 
solar pv 
demand low production 
low production 
high demand 
~ 5th january 
18:00 figure 36: wind speed in the north sea during august
2003 (extreme summer event)
14 
12 
10 
8
6
42
0
source 
NCEP-2 1 Aug 3 Aug 5 Aug 7 Aug 9 Aug 11 Aug 13 Aug 15 Aug Wind speeds [m/s] 
2003: North Sea, Location: 5E 55N 5 m/s 
table 9: characteristic of extreme summer event
(available power in MW)
HIGH 
366,959 
68% 
408,570 
45% 
119,603 
31% 
296,661 
77% AVERAGE 
287,666 
53% 
193,881 
21% 
43,661 
11% 
91,130 
24% LOW 
203,092 
38% 
82,743 
9% 
17,538 
5% 
0
0% Demand 
% of all time high 
Non Contr. RES 
% of inst. cap 
Windpower 
% of inst. cap 
Photovoltaics 
% of inst. cap 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |EXTREME EVENTS 
5 JAN 00:00 
5 JAN 12:00 
6 JAN 00:00 
6 JAN 12:00 
7 JAN 00:00 
7 JAN 12:00 
8 JAN 00:00 
8 JAN 12:00 
9 JAN 00:00 
9 JAN 12:00 
10 JAN 00:00 
10 JAN 12:00 
11 JAN 00:00 
11 JAN 12:00 
12 JAN 00:00 
12 JAN 12:00 
13 JAN 00:00 
13 JAN 12:00 
14 JAN 00:00 
14 JAN 12:00 
Time of day 4 JAN 00:00 
5 JAN 09:00 
5 JAN 18:00 
6 JAN 03:00 
6 JAN 12:00 
6 JAN 21:00 
7 JAN 06:00 
7 JAN 15:00 
8 JAN 00:00 
8 JAN 09:00 
8 JAN 18:00 
9 JAN 03:00 
9 JAN 12:00 
9 JAN 21:00 
10 JAN 06:00 
10 JAN 15:00 
11 JAN 00:00 
11 JAN 09:00 
11 JAN 18:00 
12 JAN 03:00 
12 JAN 12:00 
12 JAN 21:00 
13 JAN 06:00 
13 JAN 15:00 
14 JAN 00:00 
14 JAN 09:00 
14 JAN 18:00 
Time of day 5 JAN 00:00 
5 JAN 10:00 
5 JAN 20:00 
6 JAN 06:00 
6 JAN 16:00 
7 JAN 02:00 
7 JAN 12:00 
7 JAN 22:00 
8 JAN 08:00 
8 JAN 18:00 
9 JAN 04:00 
9 JAN 14:00 
10 JAN 00:00 
10 JAN 10:00 
10 JAN 20:00 
11 JAN 06:00 
11 JAN 16:00 
12 JAN 02:00 
12 JAN 12:00 
12 JAN 22:00 
13 JAN 08:00 
13 JAN 18:00 
14 JAN 04:00 
14 JAN 14:00 
Time of day 

57 results 
Results of load flow calculations show that during an extreme 
summer event, the available power from PV is enough to 
compensate for the lack of wind power. Therefore it is not necessary 
to improve the current design of the European grid or to install
additional HVDC lines. The necessary power is mainly provided by 
distributed PV, which is well available during August.
The following table gives an overview over the share of different 
sources during the event. The amount of wind power and run-of- 
river is obviously fairly small whereas the amount of PV and 
Biomass is high. Only 10% have to be provided by conventional
power plants.
There was almost no storage included in the study, and an analysis 
of the calculation results reveals a high amount of renewable 
energy supplies has to be curtailed – or better – is available for 
storage to be used e.g. in electric vehicles, this is mainly PV. For 
this we use the term ‘surplus power’ for power generation which 
must be ‘curtailed’ if there is no storage capacity available. Figure 
37 shows the used versus the available PV power.table 10: (medium) generated power in MW and share 
of different sources during extreme summer event
14,558 
14,232 
65,914 
32,208 
60,561 
17,549 
6,604 
11,425 
36,976 
30,299 
290,327 5% 
5% 
23% 
11% 
21% 
6% 
2% 
4% 
13% 
10% 
100% Wind Onshore 
Wind Offshore 
Photovoltaics 
Geothermal
Biomass 
CSP Plants 
Wave / Tidal
Hydro run-of-river 
Hydro Storage 
Conventional
Total 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 
figure 37: surplus PV capacity available for storage (sample for a region in austria, august 2003)
1,800 
1,600 
1,400 
1,200 
1,000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
MW 0
source ENERGYNAUTICS 00:00 
02:00 
04:00 
06:00 
08:00 
10:00 
12:00 
14:00 
16:00 
18:00 
20:00 
22:00 
00:00 
02:00 
04:00 
06:00 
08:00 
10:00 
12:00 
14:00 
16:00 
18:00 
20:00 
22:00 
00:00 
02:00 
04:00 
06:00 
08:00 
10:00 
12:00 
14:00 
16:00 
18:00 
20:00 
24:00 
00:00 
•AVAILABLE PV •USED PV 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |EXTREME EVENTS 
1 August 
Time of day 2 August 3 August 4 August 
© HU WEI / GP image A WORKER ENTERS A TURBINE 
TOWER FOR MAINTENANCE AT 
DABANCHENG WIND FARM. CHINA HAS 
HUGE WIND RESOURCES, WHICH COULD 
BE EASILY AND PROFITABLY EXPLOITED 
BY SWITCHING INVESTMENT FROM 
CLIMATE DESTROYING FOSSIL FUELS 
INTO HARVESTING THIS CLEAN,
ABUNDANT ENERGY RESOURCE.

energy production during extreme january event 
Figure 38 gives an overview on the different sources during this 
extreme January event. To keep the lights on, the demand has to be 
met at all times. 
For comparison, the power production for August 2003 is shown in 
the Figure 39. During summer there is a lower demand than in 
winter and far more PV production.
58 WORKING FOR THE CLIMATE 
RENEWABLE ENERGY & THE GREEN JOB [R]EVOLUTION 
table 11: maximum of surplus power in MW during 
different hours of the extreme event in august 2003 
19,469 
44,866 
117,474 
161,749 Max Wind Onshore 
Max Wind Offshore 
Max Photovoltaics 
Max Total 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 
table 12: characteristic of extreme winter event
january 1997 (available power in MW)
HIGH 
491,064 
91% 
378,419 
42% 
200,795 
53% 
197,032 
51% AVERAGE 
406,098 
75% 
195,426 
22% 
96,818 
25% 
33,313 
9% LOW 
311,837 
58% 
108,067 
12% 
32,533 
9% 
0
0% Demand 
% of all time high 
Non Contr. RES 
% of inst. cap 
Windpower 
% of inst. cap 
Photovoltaics 
% of inst. cap 
source ENERGYNAUTICS extreme winter event (january 1997)
This event is characterised by a very high demand on one hand and 
a low solar power and medium to low wind power production on the 
other hand (Table 12). 
It is typical to have the highest demands of electricity in Europe 
during winter. Sunlight in the daytime is reduced and the angle of 
incident is low, thus the amount of solar power is also low during 
winter time. Together with these two facts, there were also times 
when there was hardly any wind during January 1997 making this 
a critical situation for proposed future power supply.figure 38: power production (in MW) from different
sources and overall demand in europe during extreme 
january event, 1997 
600,000 
500,000 
400,000 
300,000 
200,000 
100,000 
MW      0
•PHOTOVOLTAICS •CSP •WIND OFFSHORE •WIND ONSHORE •BIOMASS •HYDRO STORAGE •CONVENTIONAL •RUN-OF-RIVER •OCEAN •GEOTHERMAL 
DEMAND DSM 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 5 JAN 00:00 
5 JAN 10:00 
5 JAN 20:00 
6 JAN 06:00 
6 JAN 16:00 
7 JAN 02:00 
7 JAN 12:00 
7 JAN 22:00 
8 JAN 08:00 
8 JAN 18:00 
9 JAN 04:00 
9 JAN 14:00 
10 JAN 00:00 
10 JAN 10:00 
10 JAN 20:00 
11 JAN 06:00 
11 JAN 16:00 
12 JAN 02:00 
12 JAN 12:00 
12 JAN 22:00 
13 JAN 08:00 
13 JAN 18:00 
14 JAN 04:00 
14 JAN 14:00 
figure 39: power production (in MW) from different
sources and overall demand in europe during extreme 
august event, 2003 
400,000 
300,000 
200,000 
100,000 
MW      0
•PHOTOVOLTAICS •CSP •WIND OFFSHORE •WIND ONSHORE •BIOMASS •HYDRO STORAGE •CONVENTIONAL •RUN-OF-RIVER •OCEAN •GEOTHERMAL 
DEMAND DSM 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 1 AUG 09:00 
1 AUG 23:00 
2 AUG 13:00 
3 AUG 03:00 
3 AUG 17:00 
4 AUG 07:00 
4 AUG 21:00 
5 AUG 11:00 
6 AUG 01:00 
6 AUG 15:00 
7 AUG 05:00 
7 AUG 19:00 
8 AUG 09:00 
8 AUG 23:00 
9 AUG 13:00 
10 AUG 03:00 
10 AUG 17:00 
11 AUG 07:00 
11 AUG 21:00 
12 AUG 11:00 
13 AUG 01:00 
13 AUG 15:00 
14 AUG 05:00 
14 AUG 19:00 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |EXTREME EVENTS 
Time of day 
Time of day 

59 
 © GP / VINAI DITHAJOHN image WORKERS IN THAILAND INSTALL 
A WIND TURBINE IN THEIR COMMUNITY.
THE IMPACTS OF SEA-LEVEL RISE DUE 
TO CLIMATE CHANGE ARE PREDICTED TO 
HIT HARD ON COASTAL COUNTRIES IN 
ASIA, AND CLEAN RENEWABLE ENERGY 
IS A SOLUTION.
4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |EXTREME EVENTS 
As the power production and demand is not balanced at each 
location at all times, the electrical network has to transport the 
energy from one location to another. 
The following figures show the power production from different 
sources during the extreme January event at three different 
locations. Depending on the available renewable energy supply, the 
power can both be exported and transported via the grid to other 
locations or has to be imported. (See also Figure 43) 
figure 40: power production (in MW) from different
sources and local demand during extreme january event
at a location in south germany, 1997. there is a surplus 
of power production, so power can be exported 
1,400 
1,200 
1,000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
MW      0
•PHOTOVOLTAICS •CSP •WIND OFFSHORE •WIND ONSHORE •BIOMASS •HYDRO STORAGE •RUN-OF-RIVER •WAVE & TIDAL •GEOTHERMAL 
DEMAND DSM 
source ENERGYNAUTICS figure 41: power production (in MW) from different sources 
and local demand during extreme january event at a second 
location in south germany, 1997. there are times with 
surplus of power production and times with lack of power
1,200 
1,000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
MW      0
•PHOTOVOLTAICS •CSP •WIND OFFSHORE •WIND ONSHORE •BIOMASS •HYDRO STORAGE •RUN-OF-RIVER •WAVE & TIDAL •GEOTHERMAL 
DEMAND DSM 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 
figure 42: power production (in MW) from different
sources and local demand during extreme january event
at a location in the netherlands, 1997. this location has 
to import power at all times during the event
2,000 
1,500 
1,000 
500 
MW      0
•PHOTOVOLTAICS •CSP •WIND OFFSHORE •WIND ONSHORE •BIOMASS •HYDRO STORAGE •RUN-OF-RIVER •WAVE & TIDAL •GEOTHERMAL 
DEMAND DSM 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 5 JAN 00:00 
5 JAN 10:00 
5 JAN 20:00 
6 JAN 06:00 
6 JAN 16:00 
7 JAN 02:00 
7 JAN 12:00 
7 JAN 22:00 
8 JAN 08:00 
8 JAN 18:00 
9 JAN 04:00 
9 JAN 14:00 
10 JAN 00:00 
10 JAN 10:00 
10 JAN 20:00 
11 JAN 06:00 
11 JAN 16:00 
12 JAN 02:00 
12 JAN 12:00 
12 JAN 22:00 
13 JAN 08:00 
13 JAN 18:00 
14 JAN 04:00 
14 JAN 14:00 
Time of day 
5 JAN 00:00 
5 JAN 10:00 
5 JAN 20:00 
6 JAN 06:00 
6 JAN 16:00 
7 JAN 02:00 
7 JAN 12:00 
7 JAN 22:00 
8 JAN 08:00 
8 JAN 18:00 
9 JAN 04:00 
9 JAN 14:00 
10 JAN 00:00 
10 JAN 10:00 
10 JAN 20:00 
11 JAN 06:00 
11 JAN 16:00 
12 JAN 02:00 
12 JAN 12:00 
12 JAN 22:00 
13 JAN 08:00 
13 JAN 18:00 
14 JAN 04:00 
14 JAN 14:00 5 JAN 00:00 
5 JAN 10:00 
5 JAN 20:00 
6 JAN 06:00 
6 JAN 16:00 
7 JAN 02:00 
7 JAN 12:00 
7 JAN 22:00 
8 JAN 08:00 
8 JAN 18:00 
9 JAN 04:00 
9 JAN 14:00 
10 JAN 00:00 
10 JAN 10:00 
10 JAN 20:00 
11 JAN 06:00 
11 JAN 16:00 
12 JAN 02:00 
12 JAN 12:00 
12 JAN 22:00 
13 JAN 08:00 
13 JAN 18:00 
14 JAN 04:00 
14 JAN 14:00 
59 

60 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |EXTREME EVENTS 
5 JAN 00:00 
5 JAN 10:00 
5 JAN 20:00 
6 JAN 06:00 
6 JAN 16:00 
7 JAN 02:00 
7 JAN 12:00 
7 JAN 22:00 
8 JAN 08:00 
8 JAN 18:00 
9 JAN 04:00 
9 JAN 14:00 
10 JAN 00:00 
10 JAN 10:00 
10 JAN 20:00 
11 JAN 06:00 
11 JAN 16:00 
12 JAN 02:00 
12 JAN 12:00 
12 JAN 22:00 
13 JAN 08:00 
13 JAN 18:00 
14 JAN 04:00 
14 JAN 14:00 5 JAN 00:00 
5 JAN 10:00 
5 JAN 20:00 
6 JAN 06:00 
6 JAN 16:00 
7 JAN 02:00 
7 JAN 12:00 
7 JAN 22:00 
8 JAN 08:00 
8 JAN 18:00 
9 JAN 04:00 
9 JAN 14:00 
10 JAN 00:00 
10 JAN 10:00 
10 JAN 20:00 
11 JAN 06:00 
11 JAN 16:00 
12 JAN 02:00 
12 JAN 12:00 
12 JAN 22:00 
13 JAN 08:00 
13 JAN 18:00 
14 JAN 04:00 
14 JAN 14:00 5 JAN 00:00 
5 JAN 10:00 
5 JAN 20:00 
6 JAN 06:00 
6 JAN 16:00 
7 JAN 02:00 
7 JAN 12:00 
7 JAN 22:00 
8 JAN 08:00 
8 JAN 18:00 
9 JAN 04:00 
9 JAN 14:00 
10 JAN 00:00 
10 JAN 10:00 
10 JAN 20:00 
11 JAN 06:00 
11 JAN 16:00 
12 JAN 02:00 
12 JAN 12:00 
12 JAN 22:00 
13 JAN 08:00 
13 JAN 18:00 
14 JAN 04:00 
14 JAN 14:00 Time of day The following figure demonstrates the necessary transport between 
the different locations within the power system 
lack figure 43: power production (in MW) at three different
locations. demonstration of necessary transport of power
between the locations 
1,400 
1,200 
1,000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
MW      0
1,200 
1,000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
MW      0
2,000 
1,500 
1,000 
500 
MW      0•PHOTOVOLTAICS •CSP •WIND OFFSHORE •WIND ONSHORE •BIOMASS •HYDRO STORAGE •RUN-OF-RIVER •WAVE & TIDAL •GEOTHERMAL 
DEMAND DSM 
•PHOTOVOLTAICS •CSP •WIND OFFSHORE •WIND ONSHORE •BIOMASS •HYDRO STORAGE •RUN-OF-RIVER •WAVE & TIDAL •GEOTHERMAL 
DEMAND DSM 
•PHOTOVOLTAICS •CSP •WIND OFFSHORE •WIND ONSHORE •BIOMASS •HYDRO STORAGE •RUN-OF-RIVER •WAVE & TIDAL •GEOTHERMAL 
DEMAND DSM surplus power 
surplus 
surplus lack of 
power transport 
power transport 
via grid 
transport 
lack of 
power 

61 
 © DAVISON/GREENPEACE image CONSTRUCTION OF OFFSHORE WIND TURBINES.
4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |EXTREME EVENTS 
results 
The simulations of this event show that the currently installed grid 
and the available power during this event make it necessary: 
•to strengthen the grid in certain parts of Europe and •to transport further power (from e.g. CSP or Hydro) via HVDC 
lines directly to the centres of highest demand 
The following figure shows which regions would supply excess power 
and which region would lack power (have excess demand) during 
the January event. Arrows indicate the resulting load flow.
figure 44: areas of lack and surplus of power during extreme january event
source UCTE, NORDEL AND ENERGYNAUTICS LEGEND 
HIGH VOLTAGE 
NETWORK 
SURPLUS 
DEMAND 

62 During this event, Central-Europe and Great Britain would have a 
higher demand than they can supply whereas Northern and 
Southern Europe would have higher production than demand. 
Thus the load-flow is mainly from Northern Europe (mainly hydro 
power) and from Southern Europe (mainly solar power) to CentralEurope. Due to this load flow, the interconnections between Spain 
and France, Italy and France, Romania and Poland, Sweden and 
Poland, and Ireland and Great Britain would have to be 
strengthened (Figure 45). 
figure 45: european high voltage network with marked reinforcements of interconnections 
source UCTE, NORDEL AND ENERGYNAUTICS 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |EXTREME EVENTS 
LEGEND 
HIGH VOLTAGE 
NETWORK 
REINFORCEMENTS 

63 
 © PAUL LANGROCK / ZENIT / GP image GEO-THERMAL RESEARCH 
DRILLING IN THE SCHORFHEIDE DONE 
BY THE GEOFORSCHUNGSZENTRUM 
POTSDAM IN COOPERATION WITH THE 
GERMAN MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT 
AND VATTENFALL.
4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |EXTREME EVENTS 
Due to the widespread lack of power within Central Europe, a 
further reinforcement of the HVAC grid seems not to be the best 
solution; instead the power should be transported directly from the 
source to the centres of demand via HVDC lines. This is the basis 
of the super grid, described in Section 3, with connections to 
sources in North Africa (Concentrating Solar Power) and 
Scandinavia (Hydro). 
The following table gives an overview over the medium generated 
power of different sources during the extreme January event. Wind 
power and PV have a fairly low proportion. Still 84% are provided 
by renewable energy supplies with a high share of biomass and 
hydro power. Only 16% has to be provided by conventional power.
Again there is some surplus power which is available for storage.
The following table gives an overview of maximum surplus power 
during this event. This time the amount of surplus PV power is 
lower in comparison to the previous investigated events.
table 14: maximum of surplus power in MW during 
different hours of the extreme event
30,856 
58,049 
28,695 
117,600 Max Wind Onshore 
Max Wind Offshore 
Max Photovoltaics 
Max Total 
source ENERGYNAUTICS table 13: (medium) generated power in MW and share 
of different sources during extreme event
36,260 
30,469 
22,220 
32,469 
83,510 
38,592 
7,214 
24,020 
65,295 
66,313 
406,362 9% 
7% 
5% 
8% 
21% 
9% 
2% 
6% 
16% 
16% 
100% Wind Onshore 
Wind Offshore 
Photovoltaics 
Geothermal
Biomass 
CSP Plants 
Wave / Tidal
Hydro run-of-river 
Hydro Storage 
Conventional
Total 
source ENERGYNAUTICS figure 46: wind speed in the north sea during oct/nov 
1987 (extreme winter event)
20 
18 
16 
14 
12 
10 
86
420
source 
NCEP 27 Oct 29 Oct 1 Nov 3 Nov 5 Nov 7 Nov 9 Nov 11 Nov Wind speeds [m/s] 
1987: North Sea, Location: 5E 55N 
October- November 1997: North Africa (Tunis) figure 47: solar radiation in north africa (tunis) during 
oct/nov 1997 (extreme winter event)
700 
600 
500 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0
source SATEL-LIGHT 23.10 23.10 23.10 23.10 23.10 23.10 23.10 23.10 23.10 23.10 Solar radiation W/m 2extreme autumn event (november 1987)
The proposed improved grid is tested in a third extreme event,
which has been identified for November 1987.
In November solar power is considerably reduced due to the low 
path of the sun in the sky. During this event in November 1987,
there was also a period of over twelve days, where there was hardly 
any wind. Both energy sources form the backbone of the E[R] 
scenario, therefore this is a critical situation for the whole power 
supply proposed.
5 m/s 

64 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
table 15: characteristic of extreme november event
(available power in MW)
HIGH 
441,199 
82% 
444,999 
49% 
236,075 
62% 
200,106 
52% AVERAGE 
358,810 
67% 
212,189 
24% 
94,871 
25% 
44,264 
12% LOW 
257,437 
48% 
112,415 
12% 
34,910 
9% 
0
0% Demand 
% of all time high 
Non Contr. RES 
% of inst. cap 
Windpower 
% of inst. cap 
Photovoltaics 
% of inst. cap 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 
table 16: (medium) generated power in MW and share 
of different sources during extreme november event
34,508 
26,654 
33,130 
29,166 
73,670 
9,284 
6,803 
22,057 
50,709 
58,394 
344,375 10% 
8% 
10% 
8% 
21% 
3% 
2% 
6% 
15% 
17% 
100% Wind Onshore 
Wind Offshore 
Photovoltaics 
Geothermal
Biomass 
CSP Plants 
Wave / Tidal
Hydro run-of-river 
Hydro Storage 
Conventional
Total 
source ENERGYNAUTICS table 17: maximum of surplus power in MW during 
different hours of the extreme november event
42,922 
69,541 
66,400 
153,253 Max Wind Onshore 
Max Wind Offshore 
Max Photovoltaics 
Max Total 
source ENERGYNAUTICS Further characteristics are presented in the following table. Although there are regions with lack of power, in other regions 
there is a power surplus. The following table gives an overview over 
the maximum surplus power of different sources.
results 
The reinforcement of the HVAC grid as well as the installation of 
the super grid as proposed in the previous section are sufficient to 
also cope with this event. No further actions have to be taken to 
keep the lights on during this extreme event.
The following table gives an overview over the share of different 
sources during the event. The amount of wind power and PV is 
obviously fairly small whereas the amount of biomass is high. In this 
case 17% of the power is provided by conventional power plants.4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |EXTREME EVENTS 


65 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |EXTREME EVENTS 
table 18: characteristic of extreme winter event
january 1997 – reduced PV (available power in MW)
HIGH 
491,064 
91% 
304,312 
42% 
184,042 
48% 
81,909 
39% AVERAGE 
406,098 
75% 
180,864 
25% 
96,236 
25% 
11,435 
5% LOW 
311,837 
58% 
108,067 
15% 
34,407 
9% 
0
0% Demand 
% of all time high 
Non Contr. RES 
% of inst. cap 
Windpower 
% of inst. cap 
Photovoltaics 
% of inst. cap 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 4.5 additional simulations with reduced PV (2030 
scenario) with no storage capacity available 
Additional to the 2050 scenario, the extreme events have been 
simulated with a reduced installation capacity of PV (2030 
scenario) from 383GW down to 211GW in order to reduce the 
amount of surplus PV power if there is no further storage capacity 
available. By systematic reduction at certain locations, where there 
are enough other renewable energy supplies available, the proposed 
power system including reinforcements and super grid can still cope 
with this situation during the extreme events.
Simulation results show that further increasing PV installations 
above 211GW only makes sense if large-scale storage is available.
These should be sized for about 12 hours’ storage to shift the power 
production during the day into evening and night hours. The usage of 
storages to this extent lies not within the scope of this study but 
should be investigated together with optimal placements of renewable 
energy generators and grid enhancements in further studies. 
extreme january event (1997) – reduced PV 
To further test the function of the grid, we took the extreme winter 
event described in Section 6 and modelled the available power with 
reduced PV (a small percentage of installed capacity operating).
In comparison to the base simulation (Table 12) with 191GW there 
is at maximum 82GW PV available during this event.The following table gives an overview over the medium generated 
power of different sources during the extreme January event. 
The following table gives an overview of maximum surplus power 
during this event. The amount of surplus PV is in comparison to the 
non-reduced scenario reduced from 27GW to only 5GW.table 19: (medium) generated power in MW and share 
of different sources during extreme event
36,954 
30,394 
11,129 
33,220 
85,930 
41,427 
7,266 
24,557 
68,362 
67,172 
406,412 9% 
7% 
3% 
8% 
21% 
10% 
2% 
6% 
17% 
17% 
100% Wind Onshore 
Wind Offshore 
Photovoltaics 
Geothermal
Biomass 
CSP Plants 
Wave / Tidal
Hydro run-of-river 
Hydro Storage 
Conventional
Total 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 
table 20: maximum of surplus power in MW during 
different hours of the extreme event
31,112 
58,265 
4,909 
102,414 Max Wind Onshore 
Max Wind Offshore 
Max Photovoltaics 
Max Total 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 
© GP / PIERRE GLEIZES image HIGH VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL PYLON OVER 
CHAMPAGNE VINEYARDS. IF TEMPERATURES INCREASE 
BEYOND 2°C, FRANCE WILL BE FACED WITH A RUNAWAY 
GEOGRAPHICAL DISPLACEMENT OF BOTH ITS NATURAL 
AND CULTIVATED ECOSYSTEMS, AND THE EFFECTS ON 
THE SUSTAINABILITY OF WINE PRODUCTION WILL BE 
CATASTROPHIC FOR THE LOCAL INDUSTRY.

66 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
extreme august event (2003) – reduced PV 
This extreme event has been described in the main document. 
For this simulation the installed PV capacity has been reduced 
from 383GW to 211GW. 
The following table shows the characteristic of this event 
with reduced PV.The following table gives an overview of maximum surplus power 
during this event. The amount of surplus PV is in comparison to the 
non-reduced scenario reduced from 117GW to 51GW. As described 
in the beginning of this section, a high amount of this power could 
be fed into storage systems and used at a later time. Doing this, the 
amount of conventional power can be further reduced.
short-term issues 
The proposed super grid would be designed so that the interruption of 
one onshore interconnection (onshore super grid) or loss of a 5,000 
MW wind farm (offshore super grid partially down) can be 
compensated by the other interconnections within the super grid (N-1).
That means that in such a situation, energy supply will continue.
Besides the (N-1)-security, the super grid will continue to function for 
an extreme event described in the previous sections which is likely to 
happen only once every 40 years. To have a situation with both an 
extreme event and an interruption of an interconnection is very unlikely.
4.6 the super grid proposal
The scenarios modelled in this report lead to a proposal for 
strengthening existing European grid interconnections (HVAC) and 
creating a new super grid of HDVC that takes power straight from 
its source to the population centres, without having to travel via 
existing networks. 
Interconnections to be strengthened are those between Spain and 
France, Italy and France, Romania and Poland, Sweden and 
Poland, and Ireland and Great Britain (Figure 45). A full list and 
costs are provided in Section 4.7.The following table gives an overview over the medium generated 
power of different sources during the extreme August event. 
table 22: (medium) generated power in MW and share 
of different sources during extreme event
14,606 
13,253 
36,586 
31,404 
67,751 
13,459 
22,315 
62,012 
51,232 
40,077 
352,696 4% 
4% 
10% 
9% 
19% 
4% 
6% 
18% 
15% 
11% 
100% Wind Onshore 
Wind Offshore 
Photovoltaics 
Geothermal
Biomass 
CSP Plants 
Wave / Tidal
Hydro run-of-river 
Hydro Storage 
Conventional
Total 
source ENERGYNAUTICS table 23: maximum of surplus power in MW during 
different hours of the extreme event
19,954 
44,479 
51,394 
102,317 Max Wind Onshore 
Max Wind Offshore 
Max Photovoltaics 
Max Total 
source ENERGYNAUTICS table 21: characteristic of extreme summer event
august 2003– reduced PV (available power) in MW 
HIGH 
355,584 
66% 
271,333 
37% 
119,603 
81% 
146,509 
69% AVERAGE 
207,067 
38% 
148,631 
20% 
43,661 
29% 
45,881 
22% LOW 
0
0% 
82,709 
11% 
17,538 
12% 
0
0% Demand 
% of all time high 
Non Contr. RES 
% of inst. cap 
Windpower 
% of inst. cap 
Photovoltaics 
% of inst. cap 
source ENERGYNAUTICS 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |THE SUPER GRID PROPOSAL 


67 
 © COURTESY OF ABB image SUBMARINE CABLE 
WITH OPTICAL FIBRE.
4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |THE SUPER GRID PROPOSAL 
figure 48: map of the proposed super grid 
source UCTE, NORDEL ENERGYNAUTICS The super grid is an HVDC grid in Central-Europe with connections 
to sources in North Africa (Concentrating Solar Power) and 
Scandinavia (Hydro). The following figure shows the proposed super grid, which includes the North Sea offshore grid proposed by 
Greenpeace in an earlier study.40 A full list of new HDVC 
connections and costs are provided in the following section.
reference 
40 HTTP://WWW.GREENPEACE.DE/FILEADMIN/GPD/USER_UPLOAD/
THEMEN/ENERGIE/OFFSHOREWINDGRID_FINAL.PDF LEGEND 
HIGH VOLTAGE 
NETWORK 
NORTH SEA   
OFFSHORE GRID 
SUPER GRID 

68 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
4.7 estimation of costs 
The following table lists the interconnections which have to be 
strengthened (see also Figure 42) and gives an overview over 
the necessary additional capacity and distance.
The overall costs of the reinforced interconnections are 
approximately €3 billion.The next table gives an overview over the necessary additional
capacity and distances of the North Sea Offshore grid plus some 
selected HVDC connections (Table 23). The total costs have been 
estimated at approximately €16 billion, which is in line with the 
E[R] offshore grid study by Greenpeace.
The overall costs of the new or strengthened HVDC connections are 
approximately €15.9 billion.4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |ESTIMATION OF COSTS 
table 24: strengthened HVAC interconnections 
ADD CAPACITIY / MW 
3,400 
1,700 
1,700 
5,100 
3,400 
1,700 
1,700 
3,400 
3,400 
1,700 
3,400 
1,700 
5,100 
1,700 
1,700 
1,700 
5,100 
1,700 
1,700 
500 
1,700 
1,700 
1,700 
1,700 
58,300 DISTANCE / KM 
131 
100 
118 
450 
312 
93 
125 
237 
250 
175 
325 
250 
531 
250 
250 
93 
260 
218 
218 
562 
106 
125 
75 
93 
5,347 Austria – Czech Republic 
Belgium – The Netherlands 
Czech Republic - Poland 
France – Spain (1) 
France – Spain (2) 
Germany – The Netherlands 
Inside Czech Republic 
Inside France (1) 
Inside France (2) 
Inside France (3) 
Inside France (4) 
Inside Italy (1) 
Inside Italy (2) 
Inside Italy (3) 
Inside Romania 
Inside Slovakia 
Italy – France 
Italy - Switzerland 
Norway - Sweden 
Norway- Finland 
Romania – Ukraine 
Slovakia - Poland 
Slovakia - Ukraine 
Switzerland – France 
source ENERGYNAUTICS table 25: new or strengthened HVDC Connections 
ADD CAPACITIY / MW 
1,000 
1,000 
1,500 
2,500 
500 
3,500 
3,000 
3,000 
1,000 
1,500 
1,000 
3,500 
1,000 
1,000 
600 
760 
1,200 
27,560 DISTANCE / KM 
200 
250 
125 
200 
250 
375 
675 
875 
550 
325 
200 
125 
250 
225 
125 
125 
250 
5,125 Belgium - France 
Belgium - GB 
Belgium – The Netherlands 
Denmark – Germany 
East West Interconnector 
GB – Germany 
GB – Norway (1) 
GB – Norway (2) 
Germany – Norway 
Germany – The Netherlands 
Inside GB (1) 
Inside GB (2) 
Inside Germany (1) 
Inside Germany (2) 
Inside Germany (3) 
Moyle Interconnector 
SwePol
source ENERGYNAUTICS 

69 The capacity and distances of the European super grid togetherwith 
the estimated costs are given below. The costs are calculated for 
HVDC VSC (also referred to as HVDC light or HVDC plus), this 
technology is slightly more expensive but has the main advantage 
that it can contribute to system stability by providing reactive 
power to the HVAC grid and is more applicable for an HVDC grid.
However, more research is needed to determine the real costs for 
the needed grid. Especially the availability of storage capacity 
within Europe, e.g. from electric vehicles. Further optimisation 
potential in the energy generation mix can significantly reduce grid 
expansion costs and could reduce the needed links between North 
Africa and Europe. An optimisation study would be required to find 
out if some money would be better invested in additional storage 
capacity or additional HVDC connections.
Without further optimisation, the maximum transport capacity from 
North Africa to Central Europe is 55GW. This is slightly lower than 
the 60GW mentioned in the Energy [R]evolution scenario. During the 
extreme event a maximum of 35GW CSP power from Africa is used.
Part of the surplus production has to be provided to compensate for 
the losses on the lines and in the converters. Part of the installed 
capacity will not produce at rated capacity due to maintenance and 
cloudy weather. An estimation of the necessary installed CSP power 
can be done by evaluating the n-1-security: There are three major 
HVDC interconnections (Spain, Italy, Greece) and three major 
production areas (Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt).
•Up to 15 new HVDC ‘super grid’ connections, 
•Within Europe: up to 11 connections with a total of up to 6000 
km at a cost approximately €100 billion.
•Between Europe and Africa: The capacity of the required 
interconnections depends largely on the amount of imported CSP 
electricity and on the availability of storage capacity within 
Europe. Without further optimisation and storage capacity, 
4 HVDC Connections with a total length of 5,500 to 6,000 km 
at a cost of approximately €90 billion.
or €5,225 billion per year till 2050. Assuming the level of 
electricity consumption in Greenpeace’s Energy [R]evolution, 
this would cost about 0.15 c/ kWh over 40 years.
The costs are more like to be the maximum of the needed 
investments. With an optimisation process via a slight change of the 
overall energy mix and/or the use of more storage capacity, the 
need for grid expansion can go down. 
© LANGROCK/ZENIT/GP image WINDTURBINES AND 
ELECTRICITY CABLES.
4.8 literature 
1energy [r]evolution report 2009,
www.energyblueprint.info/fileadmin/media/documents/energy_revolu 
tion2009.pdf 
2MED-CSP report,
www.dlr.de/tt/Portaldata/41/Resources/dokumente/institut/system/p 
rojects/MED-CSP_Full_report_final.pdf 
3Trade-Wind: Integrating Wind - Developing Europe’s power 
market for the large-scale integration of wind power, 
www.trade-wind.eu/fileadmin/documents/publications/Final_Report.pdf 
4NCEP-2 Reanalysis data provided by NOAA/OAR/ESRL PSD,
Boulder, Colorado, USA, www.cdc.noaa.gov 
5Solar radiation data provided by S@tel-Light, www.satellight.com 
6Biomass potential in Europe,
http://dataservice.eea.europa.eu/atlas/viewdata/viewpub.asp?id=2132 
7ETSOVista: ENTSO-E - European Network of Transmission 
System Operators for Electricity, www.etsovista.org 
8Zhou, Bialek ‘Approximation Model of European Interconnected 
System as a Benchmark System to Study Effects of Cross-Border 
Trades’, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Mai 2005 
9European Commission: Eurostat - Population,
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/population/introduction 
10 Operational Security,
www.entsoe.eu/_library/publications/ce/oh/Policy3_final.pdf 
11 energy [r]evolution: a north sea electricity grid report,
www.greenpeace.de/fileadmin/gpd/user_upload/themen/energie/offsh 
orewindgrid_final.pdf 
12 Wind power to combat climate change - How to integrate wind 
energy into the power system, published by Energinet.dk, the Danish 
TSO, www.energinet.dk/NR/rdonlyres/3097FD4E-F82A-43D0- 
BBD9-8BF07C349474/0/Windpowermagazine.pdf 
13 Wind Power in Power Systems, Editor: Thomas Ackermann,
Wiley & Sons, 2005. www.windpowerinpowersystems.info 4super grid: simulation of the energy [r]evolution for europe |EXTREME EVENTS 


70 5appendix 
GLOBAL DEFINITIONS 
GRID CODES NEW WIND TURBINE 
CONTROL FUNCTIONS 
DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT OVERVIEW OF NEW ELECTRIC 
ENERGY STORAGE OPTIONS 
“the largest potential for
demand-side control is in 
heat or cooling activities 
within households 
and industry.”
GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL 
CLIMATE CAMPAIGN 5

71 5appendix |DEFINITIONS 
© DAVISON/GREENPEACE image WINDTURBINE 
CONSTRUCTION YARD, UK.
appendix 1: definitions 
Power System Control and Power system Operation: Control
generally means the process of maintaining the instantaneous 
balance of a power system, keeping the system balance. Operation is 
typically a set of short-term actions taken by power system 
equipment aimed at reducing internal and external disturbances 
affecting the desired operating point. Examples. A voltage regular 
takes a control action by adjusting the output voltage in order for 
the terminal voltage to equal the desirable value, in response to a 
deviation at the terminal of a synchronous generator. A typical
operational aspect of the power system would be to deliberately 
change the set point of a generator.
Power quality is a measure of how well the available supply serves 
the connected premises. It is commonly measured by harmonic 
oscillations, voltage fluctuations, supply frequency, power surges,
voltage dips or interruptions.
Electricity system reliability has two components, adequacy and 
security. Adequacy is the ability of the system to supply the energy 
requirements of the customers at all times, taking into account 
scheduled and unscheduled outages of system facilities. Security is 
the ability of the system to withstand sudden disturbances such as 
electric short circuits or unanticipated loss of system facilities.
Reliability is commonly measured in terms of duration and 
frequency of sustained outages experienced in a year.
Security of supply resembles system reliability and usually 
consists of the same two aspects: Operational security of the power 
system, i.e. ensuring a secure day-to-day operation and long-term 
security of supply, which mainly aims at securing an adequate long- 
term generation and transmission capacity.Ancillary services maintain the physical balance and safeguard the 
quality of electricity in a power system at all times. There are three 
categories of ancillary services: 
Frequency Control Ancillary Services (FCAS) maintain power 
system frequency, keeping supply and demand in balance. 
Normal operation reserves are a type of FCAS used to maintain 
normal operation at all times. Used, for instance, to balance the 
difference between forecasted wind power production and the 
actual wind power production. Typically normal operation reserves 
must be operating at full capacity after 15 to 30 minutes of order.
Operational disturbance reserves , are a type of FCAS used in 
emergency situations to restore the electricity system to a secure 
state of operation within a reasonable time after a disturbance such 
as a trip of a power line or power plant. The amount of operational
disturbance reserves is based on the worst-case fault e.g. loss of 
one of the largest production units. Typically operational
disturbance reserves are always spinning so they are immediately 
available after a system disturbance.
Network Control Ancillary Services (NCAS) is related to aspects 
of quality of supply other than frequency, e.g. voltage control. Most 
of NCAS is a service that can only be supplied locally. In 
distribution systems, this service is typically performed entirely by 
specific equipment, e.g. voltage control by special transformer or 
capacity banks, as local generation and local customers seldom are 
able to perform this service. In the transmission systems, currently 
large conventional power plants provide the NCAS. 
System Restoration Ancillary Services (SRAS) , are related to 
system restoration or re-starts following major blackouts.
Currently, mainly large conventional power plants are used to 
provide the SRAS.

72 [R]ENEWABLES 24/7 
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO SAVE THE CLIMATE 
5appendix |GRID CODES 
appendix 2: grid codes 
The relationship of transmission system operators (TSOs) and/or 
distribution network operators (DSOs) with their customer 
(generators, consumers, etc.) is outlined in different grid codes. 
The objectives of the grid codes are to secure efficient and reliable 
power generation, distribution and transmission, and regulate rights 
and responsibilities of the entities acting in the electricity sector. 
Grid codes for generators typically include: 
•Control of ramp rates, i.e. generators should not ramp up or 
down too fast; 
•Support the restoration of frequency in case of a system 
imbalance between demand and supply; 
•Fulfil certain power quality standards, e.g. keep given 
voltage levels; 
•Support voltage control to keep the system voltage within 
predefined standards; 
•Stay connected to the power system in case of a fault 
(fault-ride-through). 
For wind power plants, such requirements were introduced in most 
countries over the past five to ten years and today new wind power 
plants can typically comply with these requirements. A key element 
for compliance with some of the grid codes requirements are the 
new control functions presented listed in Appendix 1. 
One of the key issues related to wind power plants and grid codes is 
the fault-ride-through requirement. Fault ride-through is the ability 
of a generator to stay connected to the grid even when the grid is 
experiencing a fault condition so that once the fault is cleared 
(which is normally done in less than 400 milliseconds) the wind 
power plant will resume the delivery of power. Similar requirements 
exist in most countries for conventional power plants. This 
requirement is extremely important for power systems with high 
shares of wind power, otherwise a small fault in the power system 
causing a regional voltage drop could result in the disconnection of 
all wind turbines in a large area. 
The following figure shows the fault-ride-through requirement for 
the German high-voltage network, which basically means: 
•A voltage drop due to a disturbances in the network, which is in 
depth and duration above borderline 1 (Figure 49) must not lead 
to a disconnection of the wind turbine from the grid. 
•In case a voltage drop happens, which is located between 
borderline 1 and borderline 2, a short-time disconnection from 
the network is permitted by agreement with the network operator.
•Below borderline 2 a short-time disconnection of the wind turbine 
from the grid is always permitted. appendix 3: new wind turbine control functions 
New wind turbine control functions mean that wind turbines can 
operate with a certain constant reserve capacity in relation to their 
momentarily possible power production capacity. The advantage of 
such control is that reserve capacity is available and can be used 
very quickly for ramping up in order to provide balancing or 
frequency control action (see also Figure 50 on the following 
page). Using pitch control, wind power becomes one of the fastest 
regulating generating resources currently available. The 160 MW 
Horns Rev offshore wind farm in , for instance, can ramp up from 
zero production to 160 MW in approximately 8 seconds, assuming 
sufficient wind conditions. Such ramp rates are similar to - if not 
faster than - most conventional gas power stations. on the following 
page). Using pitch control, wind power becomes one of the fastest 
regulating generating resources currently available. The 160 MW 
Horns Rev offshore wind farm in Denmark, for instance, can ramp 
up from zero production to 160 MW in approximately 8 seconds,
assuming sufficient wind conditions. Such ramp rates are similar to 
- if not faster than - most conventional gas power stations.
The advantage of this approach is that wind power plants gain 
similar technical characteristics as conventional power plants. The 
drawback is reduced efficiency because up-regulation can only be 
achieved if wind is spilled before the actual ramping situation.figure 49: fault-ride-through requirements for wind 
turbines for the German high-voltage network 
100 
95 
90 
85 
80 
75 
70 
65 
60 
55 
50 
45 
40 
35 
30 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5
0
source TRANSMISSION CODE 2007, NETWORK AND SYSTEM RULES OF THE GERMAN 
TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OPERATORS, VDN, AUGUST 2007 0150 700 1,500 3,000 
moment of fault occurence borderline 1 
borderline 2 lower value of the 
voltage range largest value of the 
three line to line 
network voltages U/U N%
Time in ms range where only a disconnection 
through system automatics 
is admissible 
selective disconnection of 
generators depending on 
their state 

73 5appendix |NEW TURBINE CONTROL FUNCTIONS 
figure 50: new wind turbine control schemes 
OBJECTIVE 
Protection function that shall be able to 
perform automatic down-regulation of 
the power production to an acceptable 
level for electrical network. In order to 
avoid system collapse it should act fast.
All production units shall contribute 
to the frequency control.
Wind farm shall keep the production on 
the actual level even if it is an increase 
in the wind speed.
The power production shall be adjusted 
downwards or upwards in steps at 
constant levels.
Sets how fast the power production can 
be adjusted upwards on downwards.
Limit the maximum production level in 
the PCC in order to avoid the 
overloading of the system.
The wind farm shall operate with a 
certain constant reserve capacity in 
relation to its momentary possible power 
production capacity.PRIMARY CONTROL OBJECTIVE 
Automatic control of power production based 
on frequency measurement to re-establish 
the rated frequency.CONTROL TYPE 
System protection 
Frequency control
Stop control
Balance control
Production rate 
Absolute production 
limit 
Delta control
source ECOGRID WP4 REPORT, PAGE 219, HTTP://WWW.ENERGINET.DK/NR/RDONLYRES/B57A4B4A-AC10-41C4-AB31-AFA55634FD31/0/WP4REPORTMEASURES_2009.PDF. PERMISSION 
TO USE THE FIGURE NEEDED, SUGGEST THAT ORDER OF CONTROL TYPES SHOULD BE CHANGED, DELTA CONTROL SHOULD BE FIRST).actualpossible 
time power SYSTEM PROTECTION TWO-REGULATION 
actualpossible 
time power STOP REGULATION 
actualpossible 
time power BALANCE CONTROL 
actualpossible 
time power POWER GRADIENT CONSTRAINT 
actualpossible 
time power ABSOLUTE PRODUCTION CONSTRAINT 
actualΔpossible 
time power DELTA CONTROL 

74 WORKING FOR THE CLIMATE 
RENEWABLE ENERGY & THE GREEN JOB [R]EVOLUTION 
5appendix |DEMAND-SIDE MANAGEMENT 
appendix 4: demand-side management
Demand-Side Management (DSM) means taking active control of 
the demand by the electricity industry, including customers, to 
influence the amount and timing of electricity use. However, DSM 
usually does not include interruptible loads used for example, in an 
emergency situation for system balancing. DSM is usually driven by 
economic reasons and not controlled by the independent System 
Operator (ISO) or transmission system operator (TSO).
DSM can be used by industrial and residential customers. The main 
aim is to make the consumption more flexible to be able to better react 
to what the power system is doing. DSM can help balance the power 
system, for instance in case of forecast errors for variable renewable 
power generation, but also for providing ancillary services such as 
spinning reserve (switching on/off electrical devices is the fastest way 
of balancing the power system in case of a frequency deviation). 
The largest potential for demand-side control is in heat or cooling 
activities within households and industry. In effect, the devices can be 
operated as short-term thermal storage devices. For instance, a freezer 
or large industrial cold storage building can be cooled down several
degrees more in the morning to avoid operation during times with 
reduced availability of variable renewable energy sources (which will
result in high electricity prices in a market-based electricity system). 
For room heating or cooling there is some degree of flexibility in 
operations, as long as the room temperature and humidity stays 
within a human comfort zone. For instance, air-conditioning units 
within a building can be coordinated so that total demand from a 
building is reduced during certain times. These two examples would 
rely on a central control unit that could turn adjust heating or 
cooling up and down by degrees, depending on conditions in the 
grid. Not all devices in homes and offices can be operated 
depending on the availability of renewable energy resources, 
but the potential is still very high. 
Table 26 presents an overview of the residential electricity 
consumption in the US, Japan and Germany as well as the share of 
that consumption that could be controlled. Between 28.5% and 
55% of the installed capacity could be controlled, which represents 
about 7.6% to 19.2% of the total consumption. The significant 
difference between the countries is due to different local effects, for 
example, in Japan electric heating is not as common as in the US 
or Germany. While in the US electric heating might also be used 
during peak times, Germany already uses mainly night storage 
heating systems which therefore cannot be used for load shifting to 
reduce the peak demand. presents an overview of the residential
electricity consumption in the US, Japan and Germany as well as 
the share of that consumption that could be controlled. Between 
28.5% and 55% of the installed capacity could be controlled,
which represents about 7.6% to 19.2% of the total consumption.
The significant difference between the countries is due to different 
local effects, for example, in Japan electric heating is not as 
common as in the US or Germany. While in the US electric heating 
might also be used during peak times, Germany already uses mainly 
night storage heating systems which therefore cannot be used for 
load shifting to reduce the peak demand.Share of residential consumption: 
Share of residential consumption: 
Share of residential consumption: table 26: overview of potential residential 
electricity consumption 
JAPAN 
26.9% 
(252 TWh) 
3.8% 
3.1% 
2.6% 
3.8% 
2.9% 
1.9% 
9.4% 
15.5% 
--
11.9% 
54.9% 
-
1% 
2.5% 
0.9% 
-
4.4% 
17.2% 
---
23.5% 
-
40.7% 
10.9% 
12.1% USA 
35% 
(1,124 TWh) 
-
3% 
---
11% 
3% 
9% 
2% 
9% 
-
37% 
-
1% 
6% 
1% 
-
8% 
11% 
3% 
-
10% 
13% 
18% 
55% 
19.2% 
22% GERMANY 
26.7% 
(130 TWh) 
-
7.9% 
3% 
---
5.9% 
7.1% 
--
20% 
44.2% 
2.7% 
3.6% 
2.4% 
2.8% 
14.8% 
26.3% 
8.1% 
8.8% 
8.8% 
--
2.8% 
28.5% 
7.6% 
14.6% Residential share of total
electricity consumption 
Not controllable: 
a
Electric kotatsu 
Cooking 
Vacuum cleaner 
Heated toilet seats 
Electronics 
TV, audio, video, PC 
Television 
Light 
Furnace fans 
Motor 
Fans 
Other 
Sum not controllable: 
Limited controllable: b
Water boiler kitchen 
Washing machine 
Dryer 
Dishwasher 
Night Electric heating 
Sum limited control: 
Controllable: c
Refrigerator 
Freezer 
Water boiler bath 
Water heating 
Air conditioning 
Electric heating 
Sum controllable: 
Sum control in % of 
total consumption 
Controllable plus limited 
controllable load in % of 
total consumption 
source DISTRIBUTED RESOURCES IN A REREGULATED MARKET ENVIRONMENT, PH.D.
THESIS T. ACKERMANN, ROYAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN 2004.notes 
a. CONSUMERS WILL MOST LIKELY NOT ACCEPT ANY DEMAND-SIDE CONTROL FOR 
THOSE APPLIANCES.
b. CONSUMERS WILL SOMETIMES ACCEPT DEMAND-SIDE CONTROLFOR THOSE APPLIANCES.
c. CONSUMERS WILL ACCEPT DEMAND-SIDE CONTROL FOR THOSE APPLIANCES IF 
INTERRUPTION IS WITHIN THE STORAGE CAPACITY.

75 5appendix |OVERVIEW OF NEW ELECTRIC ENERGY STORAGE OPTIONS 
appendix 5: overview of new electric energy 
storage options 
Among the technologies available for electrical energy storage, the 
relationship between peak power and energy is critical. Figure 49 shows 
the types of energy storage devices available, and their typical energy 
volume indicated by the time to completely fill the empty storage device 
as well as the typical power ratings. For flow batteries, the energy 
volume and the time can be designed independently of the power 
capacity, but for economic reasons, the typical time is limited to a 
maximum of one day. Table 27 provides a more detailed comparison of 
storage technology including current cost levels. With a wider 
implementation of storage technology, the costs would drop significantly.
shows the types of energy storage devices available, and their typical
energy volume indicated by the time to completely fill the empty storage 
device as well as the typical power ratings. For flow batteries, the energy 
volume and the time can be designed independently of the power 
capacity, but for economic reasons, the typical time is limited to a 
maximum of one day. Table 28 provides a more detailed comparison of 
storage technology including current cost levels. With a wider 
implementation of storage technology, the costs would drop significantly.
provides a more detailed comparison of storage technology including 
current cost levels. With a wider implementation of storage technology,
the costs would drop significantly.
Figure 51 also shows that electrical energy storage will only be 
suitable for balancing variable generation for a day or so, i.e. by 
“moving” surplus wind energy generated during a storm to a day 
without wind. However, the electrical energy storage technologies 
listed here would not be able to store surplus wind energy generated in 
the winter for compensating long periods with low or no wind in the 
summer. also shows that electrical energy storage will only be suitable 
for balancing variable generation for a day or so, i.e. by “moving” 
surplus wind energy generated during a storm to a day without wind.
However, the electrical energy storage technologies listed here would 
not be able to store surplus wind energy generated in the winter for 
compensating long periods with low or no wind in the summer.Currently, such storage is only possible using a large number of 
hydro dams with significant water storage capacity. The 
Scandinavian hydro-power system, for instance, can store sufficient 
water to cover total electricity demand in Scandinavia for 6 
months. However, this requires significant changes in the water level
of the hydro reservoirs. In some cases the difference between a full
and empty reservoir would amount to 15 meters causing severe 
environmental issues. 
figure 51: overview of operation range of different
energy storage technologies. SMES = superconducting 
magnetic energy storage 
source ECOGRID PHASE 1 WP4 REPORT, AVAILABLE AT: 
HTTP://WWW.ENERGINET.DK/NR/RDONLYRES/B57A4B4A-AC10-41C4-AB31- 
AFA55634FD31/0/WP4REPORTMEASURES_2009.PDF, PAGE 16 1 kW 10 kW 100 kW 1 MW 10 MW 100 MW 1,000 MW seconds  minutes  hours   days/months 
flower batteries compressed air pump storage 
lead acid batteries 
flywheels 
SMES supercaps 
table 27: short comparison of different energy storage technologies 
POWER CAPACITY 
(MW) 
< 10 
5 - 400 4
0.005 - 500 2
< 20 
0.2 - 4 ENERGY CAPACITY 
(MW) 
< 250 
2,600,000+ 
40,000 
400,000 
< 5 
< 5 
n/a ENERGY STORAGE 
TECHNOLOGY 
Flywheel
Compressed air 
Conventional battery 
Redox flow battery 
Superconducting magnetic 
energy storage (SMES) 
Supercapacitors 
Hydrogen ENERGY COST 
(€/KWH/YR) 
77 
1.5-3 
24-117 
9.4-12.5 
3x10 5
570 
6.8 POWER COST 
(€/KWH/YR) 
0.88 
34.16 
73 - 351 
70 - 144 
47 
4.8 
128 ELECTRICICAL 
EFFICIENCY 
80+ 
55 - 75 
75 - 85 
65 - 75 
95 
85 - 98 
75 - 80 
source ECOGRID PHASE 1 WP4 REPORT, AVAILABLE AT: HTTP://WWW.ENERGINET.DK/NR/RDONLYRES/B57A4B4A-AC10-41C4-AB31-AFA55634FD31/0/WP4REPORTMEASURES_2009.PDF, PAGE 20 
image HELIOSTATS MIRRORS AT THE PS10 
CONCENTRATING SOLAR TOWER PLANT IN SPAIN.
© GP / MARKEL REDONDO 

Greenpeace is a global organisation that uses non-violent direct 
action to tackle the most crucial threats to our planet’s biodiversity 
and environment. Greenpeace is a non-profit organisation, present 
in 40 countries across Europe, the Americas, Asia and the Pacific. 
It speaks for 2.8 million supporters worldwide, and inspires many 
millions more to take action every day. To maintain its 
independence, Greenpeace does not accept donations from 
governments or corporations but relies on contributions from 
individual supporters and foundation grants.
Greenpeace has been campaigning against environmental
degradation since 1971 when a small boat of volunteers and 
journalists sailed into Amchitka, an area west of Alaska, where 
the US Government was conducting underground nuclear tests. 
This tradition of ‘bearing witness’ in a non-violent manner continues 
today, and ships are an important part of all its campaign work.
Greenpeace International
Ottho Heldringstraat 5, 1066 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
t +31 20 718 2000  f +31 20 514 8151 
sven.teske@greenpeace.org 
www.greenpeace.org european renewable energy council - [ EREC] 
Created on 13 April 2000, the European Renewable Energy Council
(EREC) is the umbrella organisation of the European renewable 
energy industry, trade and research associations active in the 
sectors of bioenergy, geothermal, ocean, small hydro power, solar 
electricity, solar thermal and wind energy. EREC represents thus 
40 billion € turnover and provides jobs to around 350,000 people! 
EREC is composed of the following non-profit associations and 
federations: AEBIOM (European Biomass Association); eBIO 
(European Bioethanol Fuel Association); EGEC (European 
Geothermal Energy Council); EPIA (European Photovoltaic Industry 
Association); ESHA (European Small Hydro power Association); 
ESTIF (European Solar Thermal Industry Federation); EUBIA 
(European Biomass Industry Association); EWEA (European Wind 
Energy Association); EUREC Agency (European Association of 
Renewable Energy Research Centers); EREF (European Renewable 
Energies Federation); EU-OEA (European Ocean Energy Association); 
ESTELA (European Solar Thermal Electricity Association) and 
Associate Member: EBB (European Biodiesel Board) 
EREC European Renewable Energy Council
Renewable Energy House, 63-67 rue d’Arlon, 
B-1040 Brussels, Belgium 
t +32 2 546 1933  f+32 2 546 1934 
erec@erec.org  www.erec.org the energy 
[r]evolution 
© GP/MARKEL REDONDO 
image AERIAL PHOTO OF THE PS10 CONCENTRATING SOLAR THERMAL POWER PLANT OUTSIDE SEVILLA, SPAIN. THE 11 MEGAWATT SOLAR POWER TOWER PRODUCES ELECTRICITY WITH 
624 LARGE MOVABLE MIRRORS CALLED HELIOSTATS. THE SOLAR RADIATION, MIRROR DESIGN PLANT IS CAPABLE OF PRODUCING 23 GWH OF ELECTRICITY WHICH IS ENOUGH TO SUPPLY 
POWER TO A POPULATION OF 10,000.