# Archivo original: roadmap-to-recovery-a-global.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:16 -03 2025

3
Roadm ap to Reco very:
A global network of marine reserv es
Callum M.Rober ts,Leann e Mason and Julie P.Hawkins
Contributing authors: Elizabeth Masden, Gwilym Rowlands, Jenny Storey and Anna Swift
Environment Depar tment, University of York,York,YO10 5DD,UK
Correspondence to:cr10@york.ac.uk
©Greenpeace/Åslund

4

51.Summ ary 7
2.Introduction 9
3.Aims of this repor t 11
4.Life on the high seas 11
4.1  The pelagic realm 11
4.2  The deep sea 13
5.Histor y of exploit ation of the high seas 16
6.Present status and threats to life on the high seas 17
6.1  Fishing 17
6.2  Global warming 18
6.3  Disposal of CO2 18
6.4  Oil and mineral exploitation 18
6.5  Bioprospecting 20
6.6  Noise 20
7.Designing a global marine reserv e network for the high seas 20
7.1  Marine reser ves and why they are needed 20
7.2  Will marine reser ves protect species on the high seas? 21
7.3  Identif ying candidate sites for protection 23
7.4  The grid 25
8.Principles of marine reserv e networking 25
8.1  Site selection 25
8.2  Networking and connectivity 26
8.3  Level of replication 26
8.4  Spacing of marine reser ves 26
8.5  Size of marine reser ves 26
8.6  Coverage of marine reser ves 27
9.Procedure used for computer -assisted design of a network 28
of marine reserv es
9.1  Features and targets used for Marxan analyses 29
Oceanographic Features 29
Physical features 29
Biological data 29
Expert consultation 31
10.Design of a network of high seas marine reserv es 31
11.Features of selected areas identif ied for protection 33
12.Implementing the network 39
13.Literature cited 41
14. Ackno wledgements 43
Appendix 1:Data layers used 43
Appendix 2:Respondents to the expert consultation on 51
high seas marine reser ves.
Appendix 3:Results of the expert consultation 54contentRoadm ap to Reco very:
A global network of marine reserv es

6©Greenpeace/Grace
©Greenpeace/Davison© Greenpeace/Davison

The high seas lie beyond the 200 nautical
mile limits that define the extent of 
national sovereignty by countries of the
world. They cover 64% of the area of the
oceans, and nearly half the surface of the
planet. They are a global commons, under
the stewardship of the United Nations Law
of the Sea for the benefit of all nations. 
But human pressures on the high seas are
increasing fast, and urgent action is needed
to protect them from harm. Recent
research shows that industrial fishing has
reduced populations of large, predator y
fish, like tunas and billfish, by ninety 
percent or more in the last fifty years.
Some particularly vulnerable species, like
sharks, have been reduced by factors of a
hundred, or even a thousand. In the process
of capturing these fish, industrial fishing
methods are killing untold numbers of other
wildlife, endangering birds, turtles and
marine mammals. In the deep sea, heavy
bottom trawling gears are destroying
seamount habitats that have taken 
thousands of years to develop and may be
irreplaceable on human timescales. Much
of this activity is illegal, unregulated or
goes unreported.
In this report we present a design for a
global network of high seas marine
reser ves. Marine reser ves are highly 
protected areas that are off limits to all
extractive and destr uctive uses, including
fishing. They are the most power ful tool
available for the conser vation of ocean
wildlife and may also benefit fisheries by
promoting recover y and reproduction of
exploited species. The network we propose
aims to protect places that are biologically
rich, supporting outstanding concentrationsof animals and plants. It also seeks to 
protect places that are particularly 
threatened or vulnerable to present or 
possible future human impacts, like fishing
or seabed mining. Our overarching aim is
for a network that is representative of the
full variety of life in the sea.
To achieve these aims, we brought together
many different kinds of biological, physical
and oceanographic data. Data on 
oceanographic features like water 
temperature gradients and upwelling areas,
together with fisher y and tracking data on
oceanic megafauna, enabled us to identif y
places that are hotspots of activity on the
high seas for large-bodied and vulnerable
species. They included tunas and billfish,
albatrosses, turtles, pinnipeds (seals and
sea lions) and penguins, animal groups
whose ranges cover the seas from pole to
pole. To this we added maps of cetacean
diversity . To ensure that our network is 
representative, we used data on the 
distribution of different biogeographic
areas, depth zones, seabed sediment types
and ocean trenches to represent the variety
of habitats and their variation across the
globe. We paid particular attention to 
highly sensitive deepwater habitats, using
maps of seamount distribution and 
bathymetr y to identif y places vulnerable to
harm by bottom fishing. We also used
bathymetric data to calculate seabed 
complexity , which helps in identif ying 
biologically rich places in the deep sea. 
All data were mapped using a geographic
information system and gridded into 5o
latitude by 5olongitude cells, the size of
the smallest marine reser ves that we 
considered to be viable in the high seas.1.Summ ary
7 ©Greenpeace/Grace ©Greenpeace/Culley

An effective reser ve network must be 
large enough to sustain species and 
ecological processes in perpetuity . Research
indicates that protecting between twenty
and fifty percent of the sea will maximise
benefits to fisheries. It will also enable the
creation of networks of reser ves that 
represent the full spectr um of life and 
replicate it in different reser ves. Larger 
figures in this range are warranted for
environments that support highly mobile
species and where habitats are particularly
sensitive to damage. To be viable over the
long term, populations protected by
reser ves must be large enough to be 
self-sustaining or must interconnect with
others in the network. These factors argue
for a high level of protection on the high
seas, and we set a target of protecting forty
percent of the area of all habitats and 
biogeographic zones. We also set a series of
subsidiar y targets for inclusion of places
identified as important for different species
groups. We used the computer program
Marxan to help develop network designs
that met these targets with the minimum
coverage of marine reser ves. The designpresented in this report includes 
twenty-nine separate marine reser ves that
together encompass 40.8% of the area of
the world’s oceans. This network met all
the targets set and is representative of 
biodiversity on the high seas. All the
marine reser ves identified incorporate
places that are biologically important based
on available data. However , their 
boundaries may be refined as more data
become available.
It is our view that this network of marine
reser ves is essential to safeguard life on the
high seas for the sake of our own and
future generations. Implementing the 
network represent a challenge to the will
and cooperative spirit of the world’s
nations. But time is short as the scale and
severity of harm are growing day by day. In
order to reverse the precipitous decline of
the life in our oceans and fulfill the targets
set by the Convention on Biological
Diversity (CBD), we call on the United
Nations to take urgent action to establish
and protect a global network of marine
reser ves on the high seas.
8©Greenpeace/Newman

2.Introduction
Our Earth is an ocean planet.The sea covers nearly three quarters of its surface .Long
ago,before tribes wrestled control of patches of land from one another ,and before tribes
gave way to nations, people were free to roam the world,taking what they needed where
they found it.The land was a commons for use by all.Today,the land has long since been
privatised and fenced, and few places remain where such freedom applies. But on the
oceans – beyond the 200 nautical mile limits of nation al waters – the seas are still a 
global commons. The high seas, as these regions are known,cover 64% of the area of
the oceans, and nearly half of the planet’s surface .On the high seas, our freedom to
exploit still takes precedence over our duty to protect.
The high seas are the least regulated and least protected places in the world. Lying beyond
the limits of national jurisdiction, they are gover ned by the United Nations Law of the
Sea. This convention only came into force in 1994, and has yet to be signed by some of
the most influential nations in the world. The Law of the Sea enshrines the right of access
and use of the high seas for all. It allows for nations to fish, lay submarine cables and
pipelines, or create other installations such as rigs and even artificial islands, for example.
While signator y nations are obliged to conser ve and manage the resources they exploit,
including fish, in reality few exercise much control over their high seas fleets. Many do not
monitor fishing operations, leaving their fleets to exploit high seas resources unhindered,
to the detriment of all.
High seas fisheries have grown rapidly in the last thirty years as a result of declining
nearshore stocks and the escalating value of prime fish like tuna on world markets. Those
fisheries have had dramatic impacts on populations of large, ocean-going fish like 
swordfish, tuna, marlin and sharks. Populations of these open water predators have 
plummeted, falling on average to one tenth of their abundance in the 1950s (Myers and
Worm 2003). Some species, like the large oceanic whitetip shark (Carcharhinus 
longimanus) could be a hundred to a thousand times less common than they were fifty
years ago (Baum and Myers 2004). 
Fisheries have also moved into the deep sea. Trawls and gillnets now penetrate to depths
of 2000m, while longlines can fish to 3000m. In the cold stillness and dark of the deep,
these fisheries are targeting species that live slowly and reach great ages. Because their
population growth rates are so slow, deep-sea fish are extremely vulnerable to overfishing,
far more so than their shallow water counterparts that support traditional fisheries near
our coasts. High seas fishing fleets are more accurately characterised as mining vessels
since they are removing fish at rates far beyond those at which populations can replace
themselves. In the process of removing these animals they are doing untold damage to
seabed habitats, tearing up corals, sponges and seafans and levelling myriad other species.
An increased awareness of these
problems has resulted in some
positive developments. In 1992
the United Nations global 
moratorium on high seas 
driftnets came into force, so
ending the horrendous collateral
damage inflicted every year on
thousands of marine mammals,
seabirds and turtles by these 
so-called ‘walls of death’. 
9
© Greenpeace/Behring-Chisholm

10©Greenpeace
©Greenpeace/Aslund
©Greenpeace/Kantor

More recently the value of marine reser ves as a key tool in preventing the loss of marine
biodiversity has been widely recognised.  The UN Millennium Project calls for 10% of the
oceans to be covered by marine reser ves in the short to medium term, with a long-ter m
goal of 30%. Further more in 2004, echoing pledges taken at the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (WSSD), the Convention on Biological Diversity’s 7th
Conference of the Parties (CoP 7) committed to the establishment of a global network of
marine protected areas by 2012 (Decision VII/28).
These are admirable targets but given the current rate of designation there is little to 
suggest that they will be achieved. A recent study indicated that the World Parks Congress
target of creating a global system of marine protected area networks by 2012 – including
‘strictly protected areas’ amounting to at least 20-30% of each habitat will not be
reached until at least 2085. The 2085 date is even more alarming given that it is based
on an assumption that all marine protected areas from now on will be strictly protected
i.e. no-take marine reser ves and that all existing marine protected areas will be converted
to strictly protected marine reser ves. Similarly the Convention on Biological Diversity
2012 target will not be met until 2069 (MPA News 2005).
The current rate of progress is simply not going to deliver what the world’s gover nments
have already agreed is needed to protect our oceans and the marine life that they harbour .  
3.Aims of this repor t
The collapse of life in the high seas has led to calls for urgent action to reverse the
decline, including the establishment of a global network of high seas marine protected
areas (World Parks Congress Resolution 23, Gjerde 2003, Balmford et al. 2004). In this
report we present plans for such a network. Our objective is to identif y candidate sites for
a representative network of marine reser ves that would afford protection to the full 
spectr um of life on the high seas. Marine reser ves are places that are protected from all
fishing and other extractive use (Roberts and Hawkins 2000). They are the most effective
means available for the conser vation of marine life, but have yet to be used on the high
seas. In fact, as yet there are few marine protected areas of any kind on the high seas, and
none that are effective. Urgent action is needed if we are to reverse loss of biodiversity
across the world’s oceans.
4.Life on the high seas
4.1  The pelagic realm
Obser ved from a boat, the high seas can seem like an endless waste of barren water ,
empty but for the occasional bird or flying fish. Far from land the ocean is clear blue of
startling intensity . The clarity is because there is so little matter , either living or inert, 
suspended in the water . Without nutrients plankton doesn’t grow, and without plankton
nothing else can survive. But amid the rolling plains of blue emptiness, there exist oases
where nutrients brought to the surface enrich the sea. These fuel plankton that feed 
glittering shoals of tiny baitfish and armadas of squid. Upon them large and swift 
predators are able to sate their hunger . 
In the Pacific Ocean, west of the Galapagos, in years when there is no El Niño, a current
flows west along the equator . Passing by the islands, it kicks up spinning eddies and
entrains nutrient-rich water brought up from the deep. Flowing west, planetar y rotation
twists water to the right, north of the equator , and left, south of the equator . Known as the
Coriolis force, this parting of the surface draws up water and nutrients from below .
Satellite images of the Pacific reveal a streak of plankton growth along this line of
upwelling. In the early 19thcentur y, these waters supported vast groups of sperm whales
11

(Physeter macrocephalus) , sometimes five hundred strong, and attracted whalemen in
search of fortune from the other side of the world. Today the upwelling still attracts 
animals: tuna, albatross, terns, billfish and pods of dolphins all travel vast distances to
exploit this rich feeding ground.
Convergence zones where warm and cold currents press together and mix also trigger 
dramatic plankton blooms. East of South Africa, the Agulhas Current spills down the west
of the continent from the tropics, mixing as it does with the cool, dense water of the
Souther n Ocean in a region known as the Subtropical Convergence. These seas are the
haunts of souther n elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) , several species of albatross, penguin
and dozens of other seabirds. 
In the North Atlantic there is an immense circling current gyre powered in the west by
that great ‘river in the sea’, the Gulf Stream. In the east, the Canar y Current flows south
along the African coast before turning west above the equator and heading for the West
Indies. Coriolis forces push water to the right from these circling currents, piling it up to
the left of centre of the gyre in a region known as the Sargasso Sea. This sea is a giant
convergence zone that accumulates drifting material from coast and main. It is named
after the floating strings of Sargassum weed that dot its surface and sometimes coalesce
into vast floating mats. Species like logger head (Caretta caretta) and green turtles
(Chelonia mydas) ride the gyre and feed among the relative bounty of the Sargasso.
In 1992, astronauts in the space shuttle spotted a line in the sea drawn across the 
mid-P acific. By chance, oceanographers were in the region and able to investigate. They
found a convergence zone that had concentrated plankton in a streak ten kilometres wide
and several hundreds long. The line marked the boundar y between the North and South
Equatorial Currents. At sea, it was visible as a region of breaking, turbulent waves and
bright green water rich in diatoms. William Beebe, the explorer and naturalist of the early
20thcentur y described crossing such a convergence zone in the Pacific in his book The
Arcturus Adventure (Beebe 1926):
“At seven-thirty, after sounding, temperatures, and breakfast, I went on the bridge and
saw a very distinct line in the water to the north. The captain said we had been steaming
parallel to it since dawn. I had the Arcturus turned toward it at once, and found the
Sargasso Sea of the Pacific, only in this instance it was a wall of water, against which all
the floating jetsam for miles and miles was drifted and held. ...When we first detected the
rip we were in 2o36' North Latitude, and 85oWest Longitude, which placed us about two
hundred miles southeast of Cocos Island. 
When I approached within the possibility of more accurate examination, I saw that the
line, which stretched from horizon to horizon, extended in a northeast and southwest
direction. On our side, the south, the water showed dark and rough, but much lighter and
smoother to the north. When the Arcturus was at last actually astraddle of the rip, I saw
it as a narrow line of foam, zigzagging across the placid sea, with spouting white-caps
shooting up through the froth that marked the meeting place of the great ocean currents.”
12©Greenpeace/Mizukoshi

Today convergence zones like this also concentrate less natural debris. A person sailing
through a convergence zone would see bobbing chunks of hardened tar, plastic bottles, 
discarded rubber shoes and lumps of Styrofoam. Although such rubbish is troubling, it
seems benign compared to the great floating bales of monofilament netting that were once
drift nets, and endless kilometres of twisted longline bristling with hooks. Some of this
junk still remains lethal to marine life, entangling and often killing birds, mammals, 
turtles and fish.
Hotspots of life on the high seas attract fishers who home in on places teeming with fish in
search of a good catch. Boris Worm and his colleagues from Dalhousie University in
Canada have analysed data from the Japanese longline fisher y to see what they tell us
about the distribution of animals in the high seas (Worm et al. 2005). They reveal 
concentrations of marine life, picking out regions where animals are abundant and diverse.
Not surprisingly , some of these places coincide with regions where productivity gets a
boost, such as convergence zones between warm and cold currents. The findings of
Worm’s team are shown in Appendix 1, Figure 6. But the places with the greatest variety
of big fish are not necessarily the same as those with the most fish. Productivity and 
variety are not closely coupled. According to these authors, this offers a way of finding
places to protect that are critical to high seas species without needing to shut down the
fisheries that exploit them. Examples of biodiversity hotspots include the wester n
Sargasso Sea north of the Bahamas; the region south of Hawaii; the southeast Pacific,
and the northwest Pacific bounded by the Kuroshio Current. Later in this report, we use
Worm et al.’s findings to help design our global network of marine reser ves.
4.2  The deep sea
The deep sea is the most widespread habitat on Earth. Waters more than a thousand
metres deep cover 62% of the planet, or 87% of the sea (Gage and Tyler 1991). Creatures
that inhabit the deep sea live in permanent inky darkness. Many of them communicate
with flashes of light produced by bioluminescent organs, which makes this form of 
communication, according to the oceanographer Sylvia Earle, the most common means of
animal signalling on the planet. Much of the deep sea is blanketed in sediment. Sediments
accumulate in areas close to continents where rivers pump mud into the sea. They also
build up as a result of the sinking bodies of organisms that live in the sunlit surface waters
where photosynthesis takes place. Beneath regions where surface productivity is high 
sediment can build up relatively fast. But some areas – especially far offshore over the
vast abyssal plains – have extremely slow rates of sediment accumulation, amounting to
only a few millimetres per million years.
13©Greenpeace

Animals that live in mud dominate the deep sea. Endless ranks of delicate crinoids wave
their primordial tentacles across grey ooze. Sea cucumbers creep over the bottom, sifting
mud for nourishment like submarine earthwor ms. Countless worms – flat ones, round
ones, feathered ones and serrated – conduct their business unseen beneath the monotonous
surface. The supremacy of mud is only broken occasionally; where mountains rise from the
ocean floor, along the spreading ridges where oceans are created, and in hotspots where
volcanoes break through the crust. In these places sediment yields to rock. At seamounts,
normally sluggish deep-sea currents accelerate as they pass over and around the obstacles.
These currents keep the slopes clear of sediment, exposing rocks that are colonised by
corals, sponges, seafans, hydroids and multitudes of other encrusting invertebrates.
Illuminated by the beams of a submersible, these coral gardens wrap the rocks in 
gorgeous cloaks of great antiquity .
Life in the deep is slow. With few exceptions, animals that live on the deep-sea bed are
dependent on scraps trickling down from sunlit waters far above. This rain of organic 
matter affords them meagre fare. The water in which they live is icy cold, a few degrees
above zero at most, and their metabolic rates are correspondingly slow. Growth rates are
glacial, but for most creatures, their creeping pace of life is compensated by great 
longevity . Seafans and corals attached to seamounts may only grow millimetres per year,
but ages of hundreds sometimes thousands of years have been estimated for corals that
tower metres above their rocky plinths.
As well as providing for coral growth, seamounts have a great influence over other life in
the high seas. Where they rise near to the surface they can throw off circling current gyres
that drag nutrients from the deep toward sunlit waters. This stimulates plankton growth,
and these patches of high production attract fish, birds and marine mammals to feed.
Tunas use seamounts as waypoints and refuelling stations in their transoceanic crossings.
For deepwater animals too, seamounts provide a boost to productivity . The continuous flow
of water over their slopes and summits brings nutrients and food that can sustain large
populations of firm-fleshed fish.
Under water hot springs – hydrother mal vents – are often found in close association with
seamounts along spreading ridges where new rock wells to the surface, like that in the
mid-Atlantic. Hydrother mal vents shocked scientists when they were first discovered near
the Galapagos in 1977. Spewing fountains of black, mineral laden water super heated to
300oC, they create extreme conditions amid the frigid sea. The greatest surprise of these
toxic oases was the abundance of life they support. Crabs and shrimps seethe among the
belching chimneys while tall waving worms with blood red gills, stark white clams and
mussels crust the rock. Such animals prove an exception to the rule that there is no
primar y production in the deep sea, as they harness microbes to synthesise energy from
the breakdown of hydrogen sulphide. 
14 ©Greenpeace ©Greenpeace/Newman

15©NOA and MBARI
©Greenpeace/Newman
©Greenpeace/W esterskov

Since the discover y of hydrother mal vents, scientists have found other exotic habitats.
They include methane seeps where microbes harness energy from methane to sustain
extraordinar y communities of creatures. In norther n seas, cold-water coral reefs and
sponge beds have amazed researchers by their richness, supporting as many species of
coral as reefs in the tropics. The new discoveries have turned on its head the long held
idea that the deep sea supports only a few species and that they are very widespread.
Sampling of seamounts in the southwester n Pacific showed that a quarter to a third of
species were unique to closely spaced mountain ranges (Richer de Forges et al. 2000).
Different seamount ranges, hydrother mal vent fields and deep ocean trenches all support
unique collections of species, many with narrowly restricted distributions.
The time has come to end the popular misconception that the high seas are a barren salt
wilder ness. We now know that they support extraordinar y communities of creatures,
bizar re, beautiful, grotesque, diverse, alarming and succulent. The high seas are places
that are worthy of protection and should be cherished for our own and for future 
generations.
5.Histor y of exploit ation of the high seas
For most of human histor y, the high seas have been of little interest to fishers. While there
were plenty of fish in shallow seas close to coastlines, there was little point in venturing
into the open oceans to fish. Why risk the danger , not to mention the greater expense of
fishing far out at sea, especially when the rewards were generally less than could be
obtained closer to home? The high seas were places to cross, not to go fishing.
Nevertheless, some animals were hunted there. 
The first high seas fisheries were for great whales. These began in the late 18th centur y
once coastal populations had been depleted around the norther n rim of the Atlantic Ocean.
United States whalers operating from New England were the first to venture into the 
mid-Atlantic in pursuit of sperm whales. By the end of the 1700s voyages lasted three to
four years, as boats literally circled the planet to fill their holds with oil, whalebone and
ambergris. For most of the 19thcentur y, whalers scoured the high seas in search of their
quarry. But then whales grew scarce and with the development of cheap mineral oils and
gas in the late 1800s, the industr y began to decline. However , the rise of steam power and
diesel in the late 19thand early 20thled to a revival of whaling by enabling boats to
increase their speed and so catch the faster swimming fin whales, which had previously
been inaccessible. Subsequently , the whaling industr y embarked on a suicidal course of
eliminating its quarry, species by species, place by place, until a halt was called to all
commercial whaling in 19861.
Catching fish from the high seas only became commercially viable with the development of
canning technology in the late 19thcentur y. The early fisheries were conducted seasonally
when migrator y species like tunas and swordfish came near to coasts to feed and breed. In
Califor nia and New England, the fisheries targeted animals like bluefin tuna and albacore.
Zane Grey, the American author and avid big game fisher man, described the scenes
around Califor nia’s Santa Catalina Island in the summer of 1917:
“Barracuda and white sea-bass showed up in big schools; the ocean
appeared to be full of albacore; yellowtail began to strike all along the
island shores and even in the bay of Avalon; almost every day in July
sight of broadbill swordfish was reported, sometimes as many as ten in a
day; in August the blue-fin tuna surged in, school after school, in vast
numbers; and in September returned the Marlin, or roundbill swordfish
that royal-purple swashbuckler of the Pacific.” (Grey 1919)
1The global moratorium on commercial whaling came into effect in 1986. Japan and
more recently Iceland, have undertaken limited commercial whaling since then under
the guise of scientific research. Norway holds an objection to the moratorium and
continues to hunt commercially .
16
©Greenpeace

But in Zane Grey’s time, it was for sporting interest rather than for meat that big fish
were highly prized. It is hard to believe today , when individual blue-fin tuna can sell for
tens of thousands of dollars, that the meat then fetched only a few cents per pound and
was often used for pet food. The real spread of fishing into the high seas came after the
Second World War when post-war food shortages bit hard. Soviet and Japanese wartime
shipping fleets were converted for high seas fishing, and began to fan out across the
Pacific in pursuit of tuna, swordfish and marlin. By the mid-1950s the Japanese fleet
fished the entire wester n Pacific, from the Sea of Japan to the Australian coast, east to
Hawaii and French Polynesia. By 1960, they had crossed the Indian Ocean and penetrated
the Atlantic, fishing a swathe of equatorial water from Brazil to West Africa. By 1970
they fished the entire globe, spanning the Pacific from west to east, the Indian Ocean, and
the Atlantic from Newfoundland to the Falkland Islands.
Surface living fish were not the only ones to attract interest. During the 1960s and 1970s,
Soviet and Japanese fleets experimented with deep water fishing technology . Specially
adapted trawls probed deep slopes flanking the edge of continents and raked the summits
of seamounts in waters more than a thousand metres deep. Deepwater fishing proved
hugely lucrative, and at its peak, trawl fleets landed tens of thousands of tonnes per year
of valuable species like pelagic armorhead (Pseudopentaceros wheeleri) and orange roughy
(Hoplostethus atlanticus) . Over the last twenty years of the 20thcentur y, deepwater 
bottom trawling expanded across the planet. Bottom trawlers were joined by deepwater
longliners and gillnetters, allowing fishers to penetrate into new areas and catch new
species.
6.Present status and threats to life on the high
seas
6.1  Fishing
Fishing is by far the greatest threat to biodiversity on the high seas today . Since the end of
the Second World War, the high seas have been subject to increasing levels of fishing.
Both bottom fish in deep water and shallow water pelagic species like tuna and billfish
have been targeted and stocks of both have plummeted. Tuna and billfish numbers have
collapsed, falling by 90% or more since the 1950s (Myers and Worm 2003). A recent
assessment showed that the high seas are being impoverished and the diversity of these
fish has declined by between 10 and 50% since the 1950s, depending on the area (Worm
et al. 2005).
All over the planet, deep seamounts and continental slopes now bear scars marking the
passage of trawls. Seamounts subjected to bottom trawling have been stripped of rich and
delicate coral and sponge forests that may have taken thousands of years to develop. In
the case of these hard bottom habitats, the damage done is extremely slow to recover and
it may be centuries before the scars heal. Even over muddy bottoms, biological and 
physical processes operate so slowly in the deep sea that scars are apparent for years or
decades. Devine et al. (2006) recently found that declines in deep-sea fish stocks had been
so severe since the onset of fishing off the Canadian east coast that many target species
qualif y as being Critically Endangered according to criteria developed by The World
Conser vation Union (IUCN).
Fisheries on the high seas are gover ned by a bewildering array of Regional Fisher y
Management Organisations (RFMOs). These organisations have different remits in terms
of the fish species and depth range over which they have jurisdiction. Some have a 
mandate to manage stocks from the surface to the seabed, while others are only tasked
with managing migrator y species such as tunas. Some areas of the high seas lack any 
gover nance by a RFMO . The performance of RFMOs in protecting even the fisheries they
17

are tasked with managing, has been disappointing,
on the whole. For example, the International
Commission for the Conser vation of Atlantic Tunas
has presided for the last twenty-seven years over a
more than ninety percent decline in the abundance
of bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus) . 
Most RFMOs suffer from serious problems of 
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing within
their areas. Vessels flying flags of convenience
compromise efforts to conser ve fish stocks, and it
has been estimated that as much as half of the
total catch of species like the Patagonian toothfish
(Dissostichus eleginoides) may be taken illegally . 
It is surprising then that some RFMOs have
repeatedly failed to prosecute known infringements
by vessels operating under their oversight.
Management by many RFMOs is failing to 
safeguard either fisheries or the environment.
6.2  Global warming
Global change is affecting the high seas like every
other habitat on the planet. Rising temperatures
and changing salinity patter ns are leading to 
alteration of ocean currents. For example, 
increasing freshwater runoff into the Arctic Ocean
north of Europe and Russia is reducing sinking of seawater into the deep planetar y 
circulation and weakening the Gulf Stream. Changes in current patter ns like this may
have major feedback effects on climate, but they are also certain to affect marine life.
Another impact of great concer n is the acidification of the ocean as a result of rising 
concentrations of CO2in the atmosphere. Higher acidity could interfere with calcification
by zooplankton, with unpredictable but probably detrimental consequences. Marine
reser ves will not prevent such impacts occur ring but they may mitigate some of the 
negative consequences. Protection from exploitation may help organisms maintain larger
populations that can offset the added stress or mortality from global change processes. It
may also be possible for us to move marine reser ves over time, tracking shifts in current
patter ns and other oceanographic features, as we discuss below .
6.3  Disposal of CO2
Worryingly some countries have proposed dumping liquid CO2in the deep ocean as a
technical solution to curbing the levels of CO2entering the atmosphere, despite no real
idea of how this will impact the marine environment. What we do know is that any CO2
dumped in the ocean will eventually make its way back to the atmosphere, it’s just a 
question of when. This could take thousands of years or happen almost immediately .
6.4  Oil and mineral exploit ation
Until very recently , deep-sea areas, which mean most of the high seas, have been too
expensive to exploit for their mineral wealth. For mining and petroleum companies, there
seemed little point looking for minerals and oil in deep water while more accessible
resources were readily available from continental shelves. But many oil and gas fields on
continental shelves, like those of the North Sea, are nearing the end of their productive
lives and other sources must be found. Oil companies are also taking an interest in new
resources from the deep sea that could supply energy , like methane gas hydrate deposits. 
18
©Greenpeace/Behring

19© Greenpeace/Grace© Greenpeace/Grace
©Greenpeace/R eynaers

It may soon become cost effective to mine from the deep sea when terrestrial sources of
minerals become scarce. In particular , mining companies have their eyes set on 
hydrother mal vent fields. Ancient hydrother mal vents uplifted from the ocean floor, in
places like Canada and Cyprus, represent some of the richest sources of metals in the
world. Under water vent fields, both active and inactive, are tempting targets.
6.5  Bioprospecting
Recent technological advances have caused bioprospecting – the exploitation of genetic
resources for both scientific and commercial purposes – to take off in the marine context
with a special interest being taken in the properties of those organisms inhabiting the
depths of the high seas. Many of these deep sea species have developed unique biological
and physiological characteristics that enable them to survive in very cold, dark and highly
pressurised environments. The biochemicals found in these animals and micro-organisms
could prove to be integral in developing new products for use in the health, pharmacology ,
environmental and chemical sectors. However these organisms and ecosystems are highly
vulnerable to potential detrimental impacts including over-harvesting, pollution and 
habitat disturbance.
6.6  Noise
Noise levels in the sea have increased by several orders of magnitude since just a centur y
ago. Where sailing ships once caught the wind, today’s ships throb their way across the
waves, booming out low frequency noise that travels tens or hundreds of kilometres. Sonar
pings – much louder than the term suggests – fill the oceans. Oil and gas companies
explode seismic charges in intermittent barrages that can kill or permanently deafen
marine mammals, and perhaps other species, that come too close. The world’s navies are
testing ever more power ful sonar to detect submarines, with little thought for the 
consequences to marine life. Even if an animal is not exposed to injurious levels of noise,
the sheer background clamour may interfere with communication or smother signals that
may be critical to navigation or survival. Nowhere in the oceans is free of human 
generated noise any more and marine reser ves will not change that. However , reser ves
could provide havens from which the most injurious forms of sound production are 
excluded.
7.Designing a global marine reserv e network for 
the high seas
7.1  Marin e reserv es and why they are needed
Fully protected marine reser ves are places that are protected from all fishing and other
extractive or harmful human uses, such as mining and drilling for oil. They are also 
protected from harm by other causes, so far as it is possible, such as pollution.
Recreational boating, passage of shipping etc. are permitted up to levels that do not harm
the environment. Marine reser ve status does not interfere with the right of innocent 
passage embodied in the UN Law of the Sea. However , reser ves may require additional
restrictions on shipping where such areas are also designated as Particularly Sensitive Sea
Areas. High seas marine reser ves are unlikely to attract much recreational use since they
are generally inaccessible and lack the easily approachable animal life that shallow
coastal seas often possess. The main source of harm that high seas marine reser ves must
offer protection against is fishing, in both its legal and illegal, unreported and unregulated
(IUU) forms. In future, as more accessible oil, gas and mineral resources are depleted,
they will also need to offer protection from drilling and mining. There are, however , some
kinds of harm that marine reser ves cannot counter , such as global warming and highly
mobile pollutants from distant sources. It will require action at regional or global scales
to benefit species and habitats occur ring in the high seas, though healthier ecosystems
20

such as those protected by large-scale marine reser ves are likely to be more resilient.
As outlined in Sections 5 and 6.1, fishing impacts on the high seas and deep sea are
severe and growing. Since the onset of industrial scale fishing a little over fifty years ago,
high seas fish stocks have been plundered. Fewer than one in ten of the big, pelagic fish at
large on the high seas at the end of the Second World War are present today . Figures are
closer to one in a hundred, and even one in a thousand for the most severely depleted
species. The same scales of loss apply in the deep sea. The isolation of the high seas and
deep sea no longer put these environments beyond human harm. They urgently need 
protection.
Some decision makers, fisheries managers and scientists have questioned whether marine
reser ves are the right way to protect life and habitats on the high seas. Would other
measures that restrain fishing be better? For example, the United Nations implemented a
global moratorium on the use of drift nets on the high seas that came into effect in 
19922. A large number of conser vation organisations, including Greenpeace, have joined
together in the last two years to call for a global moratorium on bottom trawling on the
high seas (www .savethehighseas.org). Their contention, supported by extensive and
detailed evidence, is that this fishing method is destr uctive and wasteful. A global 
moratorium on deep sea bottom trawling would indeed be better than protecting some
areas in marine reser ves and trawling the rest to oblivion. However , the response to this
proposal at the United Nations has been mixed. Some countries favour a moratorium,
while pro-fishing nations such as Iceland and Japan oppose it. In the centre ground, some
nations favour a partial ban. This would prohibit bottom trawling on a case-by-case basis
in areas of the high seas proven to have habitats that are vulnerable to damage by 
trawling, and in places where there is no competent regional fisheries management 
organisation that can regulate deep-sea fishing. Such a proposal would essentially mean
identif ying vulnerable areas for protection as partial marine reser ves. To make this 
proposal work would certainly mean introducing an interim moratorium on high seas 
bottom trawling while vulnerable areas are identified. If it were not, many sensitive areas
would be destroyed before protection could be given to them because the pace of damage
by trawling is so great.
One problem with implementing fishing restrictions like the UN drift net ban, is that they
can have unintended consequences. Since this ban came into force, the intensity of high
seas longline fishing has greatly increased with the result that it has  put leatherback and
logger head turtles at risk of extinction. So parlous is the plight of the leatherback that in
2005 some conser vationists called on the United Nations to introduce a moratorium on
high seas longlining to prevent its extinction. The call attracted sympathy from many
countr y delegations but was rejected due to concer n for and pressure from the fishing
industr y. In the case of longlining, arguments for a complete ban on the practice are less
clear-cut than for deep sea bottom trawling. Again, there is greater support for a partial
ban, which would mean identif ying areas where turtles are particularly vulnerable and 
giving them protection from fishing through time and area closures.
7.2  Will marine reserv es protect species on the high seas?
The most frequent criticism of using marine reser ves on the high seas is that species there
are too mobile to gain sufficient protection. Animals like tunas, for
example, are the ultimate planetar y wanderers. Bluefin and albacore
cross oceans and in the Pacific undertake an eighteen 
thousand kilometre round trip every year. Albatrosses wander the oceans
for half the year covering tens of thousands of kilometres. Single 
provisioning trips for their young may span several thousand kilometres.
Not all species are this mobile, but many range over hundreds to more
than a thousand kilometres. How then can anything other than 
impractically large marine reser ves offer sufficient protection?
21 ©Greenpeace/Grace2The moratorium applies to all drift nets greater than 2.5 miles long.

The key to success is to protect species in the places and times that they most need it. 
Marine reser ves can safeguard species where and when they are aggregated or are 
other wise particularly vulnerable to human impact, such as breeding sites, nurser y
grounds or migration bottlenecks. On land we are very familiar with the idea of using 
protected areas to safeguard highly migrator y species. Dozens of migrator y birds arrive
and depart each year as they move between breeding and over-wintering habitats. We 
protect their breeding sites and their resting and refuelling spots along the way. This 
strategy is also used in the sea. For nearly a centur y, fisher y managers have protected the
breeding sites of migrator y species like herring and capelin when they gather in coastal
shallows to spawn. They also protect juvenile nurser y habitats to ensure that animals are
able to grow undisturbed to marketable sizes.
Many high seas migrator y species come close to coasts at some stage of their lives. Birds,
turtles, seals and sea lions (pinnipeds) must come to land to breed. They can benefit from
protected areas in national waters and on land. But there are also places on the high seas
that support remarkable and predictable concentrations of life. Some of them are fixed,
such as zones of high productivity around seamounts. Others are mobile, snaking around
some general area of ocean at the whim of weather and currents or, like spinning eddies,
may simply drift off then dissipate. These areas, as we described in Section 4.1, can be
highly productive, such as upwellings and convergence zones between currents, and can
draw animals from far afield to feed or breed. In other places, phenomena like 
downwellings, may concentrate plants and animals passively . Drifting rafts of plants, 
flotsam and jetsam can become important features enhancing productivity , acting shelters
and nurseries for animals, which in turn attract others to feed on them.
Protecting mobile features on the high seas presents more of a challenge than protecting
fixed locations like seamounts or fields of hydrother mal vents. In some places it may be
feasible to create large enough marine reser ves to incorporate most of the temporal 
variability in the location of these features. In others, this may not be possible. However ,
today’s technologies provide the means by which we can both identif y and protect 
important places as they move. Satellite sensors highlight areas of high chlorophyll 
concentration that indicate blooming plankton. Measures of sea surface height pick out
currents and convergence zones, as do steep gradients in sea surface temperature.
Thermal data also show upwellings and coiling eddies. At present, satellite data are fed to
fishing fleets either by national gover nments or private companies to guide boats to the
places where it is known that fish will be concentrated. In the same way it would be a 
simple matter for gover nments to inform fishing fleets about that day, week or month’s
position of designated mobile high seas marine reser ves (Norse et al. 2005). In the same
way, mobile marine reser ves could be used to protect migrating species like turtles that
follow predictable routes across the oceans. Fixed and mobile marine reser ves would also
benefit species such as birds that risk being killed in places where fishing operations are
under way. In some places, marine reser ves may promote the creation of oceanic hotspots
of life, by allowing forage species to build in abundance and thereby attracting migrator y
animals to feed on them.
22 ©Greenpeace/Visser ©Greenpeace

Marine reser ves will meet some of the conser vation and management needs of highly
mobile and migrator y species, but in most cases will not be sufficient on their own. Where
species remain subject to moderate or high levels of threat outside protected areas, there
will need to be supplementar y management, such as additional fishing restrictions 
implemented by Regional Fisher y Management Organisations.
7.3  Identifying candidate sites for protection
In this report we identif y candidate sites for a global network of high seas marine
reser ves. In seeking suitable places to protect, our primar y objective has been to find and
prioritise for protection places with high intrinsic biological value. Complementing this
search for the places most prolific in quantity and variety of life, we sought to achieve 
representation of the full spectr um of biological diversity . To attain these ends, we
employed three main data gathering approaches:
(1) We assembled maps of physical and biological data and brought them into a 
common format using the ArcInf o 3.3 ® Geographic Information System (GIS) 
program;
(2) We created our own maps of use of the high seas by aquatic megafaun a,drawing
on data in numerous separate studies and reviews;
(3) We consulted with experts in marine science and management, requesting them 
to nomin ate sites they believe should be afforded protection.
All the above sources of information were used to identif y candidate sites for protection
and to design a global network of high seas marine reser ves. Full details of data layers are
given in Appendix 1. We offer a few comments on each approach below .
(1) Mapping physical and biological data
We have brought together information from a wide variety of sources pertaining to the
high seas. They include data showing species richness and species density of large pelagic
fish species (billfish and tunas, Worm et al. 2005), sea surface temperature gradient
(which identifies areas of mixing of cold and warm water masses), and the location of
upwelling and downwelling areas, and bottom sediment types. We also obtained data on
seamount distribution (www .seaaroundus.org), marine biomes and bathymetr y. From the
bathymetr y data we calculated bottom complexity , a measure of habitat heterogeneity
thought to relate to high benthic biodiversity (Ardron et al. 2002), and have identified
ocean trench habitats.
(2) Air-breathing aquatic megafaun a
Large and mobile animals seek out places on the high seas that are rich in their prey.
Their movements can guide us to concentrations of marine life. We gathered and mapped
data from dozens of studies of the movements of air-breathing aquatic megafauna, 
including albatrosses, pinnipeds, penguins and turtles. In particular , we sought data from
studies using satellite, radio-tracking or data loggers to reveal high seas movements of
these species. However , since there are insufficient data to be fully comprehensive, we 
concentrated on species for which there were good data and that spend significant
amounts of their time on the high seas. We also developed maps showing species richness
of cetaceans (whales, dolphins and porpoises) across the world.
(3) Exper t consult ation
We wrote to 404 experts on marine science and conser vation asking them to nominate one
or more candidate sites deser ving high priority for protection on the high seas. We also
requested they provided justification for their choice and send us supporting 
documentation, if any was available. We received replies from around sixty-six 
23

24©Greenpeace/Standbur y
©Greenpeace/R eynaers©Greenpeace/Loor

(Appendix 2). Experts nominated a wide range of sites (Appendix 3), but there was also
considerable consistency in their suggestions. In particular , seamounts and convergence
zones between currents received multiple nominations for protection.
7.4  The grid
We entered our data into the ArcInfo 3.3 ® GIS and gridded on a 5olatitude by 5o
longitude grid. We chose this grid size for two reasons. Firstly , we think that 5ox 5o
corresponds to the minimum viable area for a high seas marine reser ve, although we
accept that the area included in cells of this grid do vary with latitude. One grid cell 
corresponds to an area of approximately 560 x 560 km at the equator , or 314,000 km2,
with the longitudinal dimension diminishing towards the poles. Between 70oN and 75oN,
for example, each cell covers 93,600 km2. To facilitate easy identification, compliance
and enforcement, it is essential that reser ves on the high seas have straight edges and are
demarcated based on latitude and longitude. This way the boundaries can easily be located
with the global positioning systems used on boats. The only exceptions to this will likely be
in areas adjoining the exclusive economic zone(s) of one or more countries.
The second reason for choosing a 5ogrid is because some of the data layers we used have
a relatively coarse resolution. In addition, many processes important to generating 
biological patter ns on the high seas vary in space over time. Fine scale mapping, for
example on a 1ogrid, would be unjustified. The 5oresolution is relatively robust to data
errors and temporal variation.
At its edges, many cells of the grid incorporate parts of national exclusive economic zones.
In addition, we have included grid cells across large parts of the high seas that lie within
the exclusive economic zones of island nations or island dependencies of other countries.
We believe that much of the seas surrounding these islands are virtually indistinguishable
in biology from areas further offshore. Many of these islands, especially isolated and often
uninhabited places in the Souther n Ocean, are critical habitat for species that use the high
seas. Protecting these species will require conser vation strategies that include the islands
as well as regions of the high seas used by the species.
8.Principles of marine reserv e networking
A network (1) should be representative of the full range of biodiversity , (2) should 
replicate habitats in different marine reser ves, (3) should be designed so that populations
in different marine reser ves can interact and be mutually supporting, (4) should be 
sufficiently large to ensure long-ter m persistence of species, habitats, ecological processes
and services, and (5) should be based on the best available scientific, local and traditional
information.
8.1  Site selection
Protected area selection must aim for broad representation of the full spectr um of 
biodiversity . It should not be driven, as it has been to date, simply by the need to protect
threatened species or habitats. Habitat representation and protection of threatened species
are dual objectives for protected area networks, not mutually exclusive ones. Fishing and
other human activities have highly modified habitats and their associated ecological 
communities on the high seas and in the deep sea. Therefore, in selecting representative
sites, the emphasis must be on seeking to recover and restore those sites to a more 
natural, little disturbed state, not on maintaining them in their present condition. At the
network scale, the aim should be to provide the conditions for expansion in the ranges of
species that have previously been seriously depleted, and to accommodate changes in
range as environmental conditions change. 
25

8.2  Networking and connectivity
A protected area network needs to be greater than
the sum of its parts. The emphasis in coastal seas,
with a few notable exceptions such as the
Australian Great Barrier Reef, has so far been on
selecting sites to protect specific attributes with
little consideration given to how those sites
interact with others. Management has been site
specific rather than taking into account how a 
protected area affects and is affected by others. A
central objective for a network is to ensure 
ecological connectivity among protected area
units. For species that move or disperse widely ,
populations in marine reser ves should be mutually
supporting. Levels of coverage, replication, size
and spacing of marine reser ves need to be set 
taking connectivity considerations into account.
8.3  Level of replication
Habitats should be replicated in more than one
protected area in order to buffer against human or
natural catastrophes that may damage or destroy
populations in individual marine reser ves.
Further more, marine reser ves cannot be mutually
supporting unless there are similarities in the 
habitats and species they contain. The aims of
replication are to spread the benefits of protection throughout the region, to provide 
insurance against human and natural impacts, and to ensure ecological connectivity
among marine reser ves. How much replication is enough? At present this question has not
been adequately resolved by science. Roberts and Hawkins (2000) suggested that all 
habitats should be replicated in at least three marine reser ves. This level of replication
was adopted in the recent rezoning of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, and was
applied within three biogeographic subdivisions of the park. However , when very large
areas are involved, low levels of habitat replication in different marine reser ves will fail to
secure adequate connectivity . This is because the resulting marine reser ves will tend to be
very widely spaced and the distances between them may exceed the dispersal abilities of
most resident species. Clearly , however , there are constraints on replication. It may only
be possible to attain low levels of replication for rare and isolated habitats. Higher levels
of replication can be achieved by creating smaller marine reser ves, but this could be self
defeating if such areas are not sufficiently large to sustain populations of resident species
(see Size of Marine Reserves, below). 
8.4  Spacing of marine reserv es
Scales of ecological linkages in the high seas – i.e. the movement of juveniles and adult
organisms, dispersal of their offspring, and transport of materials – extend from metres to
thousands of kilometres. Seamount invertebrates, for example, may disperse only metres,
while migrator y tunas can undertake journeys of 20,000 kilometres in a year. To ensure
ecological connectivity in the network, marine reser ves with similar habitats should 
generally be spaced from a few hundreds to a few thousand kilometres apart.
8.5  Size of marine reserv es
There are no hard and fast rules gover ning protected area size. Protection goals, habitat
distribution, heterogeneity and patchiness, mobility of species, together with social 
26
©Greenpeace

constraints that limit options for protection, must all be considered in decisions on 
protected area size. However , sizes of marine reser ves must be matched to the scales of
mobility of the species in the habitats being considered. At a minimum, marine reser ves
must be large enough and numerous enough to support long-ter m viable populations of the
majority of species at a network level. For some species, populations will be viable at the
level of individual marine reser ves. For more mobile and widely dispersing species, the
aim is to achieve viability across the sum of marine reser ves making up the network. Two
rules of thumb are that marine reser ves should be as large as possible given social 
constraints, and they should generally increase in size from nearshore to offshore 
environments. High seas marine reser ves should therefore be at the large end of the size
spectr um to encompass movement scales of the organisms that inhabit the offshore realm.
In this study , we have adopted a minimum reser ve size of 5olatitude x 5olongitude. At
the equator , this represents a size of approximately 560km x 560km, or 314,000km2. We
recognize in doing this that the size of 5ox 5ocells will decrease approaching the poles.
While the latitudinal dimension remains unchanged regardless of latitude, the longitudinal
dimension decreases polewards. 
8.6  Coverage of marine reserv es
The World Parks Congress in 2003 recommended that at least 20-30% of all marine
habitats should be included in networks of marine reser ves (World Parks Congress
Recommendation 22, 2003). There are good scientific arguments for taking an even more
precautionar y approach, since higher levels of protection can be required to maintain the
integrity of marine ecosystem processes. Gell and Roberts (2003) reviewed nearly forty
studies examining how much of the sea should be protected. The majority of studies 
concluded that between 20 and 50% of the sea should be protected to achieve the 
conser vation of viable populations, support fisheries management, secure ecosystem
processes and assure sufficient connectivity between marine reser ves in networks. Given
the large scales of oceanic processes and species’ movements on the high seas, a high level
of protection is warranted. In this report, we have adopted the goal of protecting 40% of
all habitats on the high seas.
Some habitats will require greater proportional protection than others. A larger fraction
of habitat should be protected for isolated and regionally rare habitats, than for regionally
extensive and widespread habitats. This is because the former will be more dependent on
self-recruitment to sustain populations. If habitats are damaged or species’ populations
collapse, more widespread habitats have greater opportunities for recover y by 
recolonisation from distant source populations than do isolated or rare habitats. 
Some habitats warrant total protection. They include places for which the nature and
degree of threats to them mean that any areas left unprotected will be destroyed or 
damaged beyond recognition, and where the recover y time following damage is lengthy .
Deep-water habitats such as seamounts, ridges and canyons are among those that warrant
complete protection (Merrett and Haedrich 1997, Roberts 2002, MCBI 2004). Their
resources are currently being mined as if they were non-renewable resources. Any areas
left unprotected will be destroyed by present fishing practices. There is little prospect of
reforming deep sea fishing practices to try and achieve sustainability , since industrial
scale fisheries are so expensive to run that they would be unprofitable at the levels
required for a sustainable fishing effort (Roberts 2002).
Text in this section adapted from: Roberts, C.M., F.R. Gell, and J.P. Hawkins (2003) Protecting
Nationally Important Marine Areas in the Irish Sea Pilot Project Region. Report to the Department of
the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, UK. www.jncc.gov .uk/page-2847 
27

9.Procedure used for computer -assisted design of
a network of marine reserv es
Marxan is the most widely used computer program for designing networks of marine
reser ves and has been instrumental in rezoning the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park in
Australia and the Califor nia Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuar y in the United
States (Airame et al. 2003). Marxan works by selecting sites for protection to create 
networks that meet user-defined conser vation targets while trying to minimise costs. The
costs included are generally proxies for real financial costs and include measures of the
area and boundar y length of reser ves within the network. Costs increase with area to be
protected but there are economies of scale that can be achieved by creating fewer , larger
reser ves, compared to many small reser ves that cover the same area (Balmford et al.
2004). Adding the total boundar y length of marine reser ves in a network represents a
proxy for this economy since as reser ves increase in area, the boundar y length increases
less quickly . The less boundar y there is for a given total area protected, the more clumped
reser ves are and thus the less expensive the network is to create and manage. 
To use Marxan , the area being considered for protection has to be split into units of area,
referred to as planning units. Features that are to be represented in the reser ve network
are then mapped, such as seamounts, presence of species of conser vation interest, and 
biogeographic zones. Undesirable qualities can also be mapped, such as fishing intensity
or pollution levels. For each planning unit the amount of each feature is calculated. In
some cases direct area measures can be used, while for other features, such as use by
birds or turtles, scoring systems may be developed and each planning unit scored for the
feature (such as that used in this report for air-breathing aquatic megafauna). The
Marxan user then sets a target for how much of each feature is required in the network. 
If the network does not meet a particular target then a penalty is applied. Any penalties
are ultimately added to the total cost for a reser ve network. Hence network designs that
do not meet the conser vation targets can be considered as expensive options. 
Marxan works towards ‘good’ network solutions iteratively . It begins with a ‘seed solution’
which is usually a random pick of planning units. It then adds and subtracts planning units
in a pre-deter mined number of iterations (usually several thousand). For each iteration the
cost of the network is calculated, which is the area, plus the boundar y, plus any penalty
for not meeting the conser vation targets. Advantageous changes are retained. In this way
the program seeks to meet the conser vation targets with the smallest total area protected
and the smallest boundar y length. 
In Marxan a ‘Boundar y Length Modifier ’ can be set to limit the overall boundar y length
of sites that are selected. This forces the program to seek less expensive network solutions
with fewer , larger marine reser ves rather than many small areas. 
At the outset of a Marxan run, priority sites for protection can be locked in, and 
undesirable areas locked out. Marxan can be run many times to provide alternative
marine reser ve network designs for any given set of targets. From these, a selection 
frequency or ‘irreplaceability value’ can be calculated for each planning unit, indicating its
relative importance to meeting the given targets. This value may be useful in deciding
which planning units are high priorities for protection.
28 ©Greenpeace ©Greenpeace

9.1  Features and targets used for Marxan analyses
The aims of the network design process outlined below are to select sites that will protect
the richest and most vulnerable concentrations of high seas marine life, represent the full
spectr um of high seas biodiversity , represent all habitat types in different marine reser ves,
and include forty percent of the high seas in marine reser ves.
Oceanographic Features
1. Upwellings and downwellings: We calculated the area of three upwelling and 
downwelling types: major upwelling zones, areas where intermediate waters form 
and sink, and areas where deep and bottom waters form and sink.  We then set a 
target of representing 40% of the area of each type in the network.
2. Sea surface temperature gradient: used to identif y fronts, convergence zones and 
upwellings. We took the top 10% of cell scores for steepness of their temperature 
gradient, and then set a target of representing 40% of these cells in the network.
Physical features
1. Bathymetry: Depth data were divided into five strata: 0-200m (continental 
shelves/epipelagic zone); 201-1000m (mesopelagic zone); 1001-4000m 
(bathypelagic zone); 4001-6000m (abyssopelagic zone); > 6000m (hadalpelagic 
zone). We then set a target of representing 40% of each depth zone in the 
network.
2. Bathymetric complexity: We scored each cell for its bathymetric complexity then 
split the scores into four categories (high to low complexity) and identified all the 
cells that contained high complexity (see Ardron et al. 2002 for method). We then
set a target of representing 40% of the total number of high complexity cells in 
the network.
3. Seamounts: We calculated the number of seamounts in each cell then set a target 
of including 40% of all seamounts in the network.
4. Bottom sediments: We calculated the area of different bottom sediments in each 
cell and then set the target of representing 40% of the total area of each sediment
type in the network.
5. Ocean trenches: We calculated the area of ocean trenches (places > 6250 m 
deep) and aimed to represent 40% of their area in the network.
Biological data
1. At sea movements of albatrosses, turtles, pinnipeds and penguins: We scored each
cell for use by each of the four different taxa. The scores were then normalised to 
a range of 0-1, added across the four taxa, and then divided by the number of 
taxa contributing to that score. We then set a target of representing 40% of the 
top scoring 25% of cells in the network.
2. Biodiversity distribution of cetaceans: we scored each cell for species richness of 
three groups of cetaceans (baleen whales; toothed whales excluding dolphins; 
dolphins) and ranked them by score. We then set a target of representing 40% of 
the top scoring 25% of cells in the network for each taxon.
3. Billfish and tuna species richness: We identified cells within the top quartile of 
values for species richness and aimed to represent 40% of them in the network.
4. Billfish and tuna species density: We identified cells within the top quartile of 
values for species density and aimed to represent 40% of them in the network.
5. Marine biomes: We calculated the area of each of 12 marine biogeographic zones
in each cell. We set a target of representing 40% of the area of each biome in the
network.
29

30©Greenpeace/Davison
©Greenpeace/Culley©Greenpeace

Exper t consult ation
1. We used the results of the expert consultation to lock in certain areas at the out
set of the Marxan analyses.
For each network design calculated by Marxan we ran the simulated annealing model
1000 times. We repeated this 10,000 times to generate 10,000 different network designs.
They were then compared with each other to find the designs that met the targets set most
efficiently . At the end of each run of 10,000 network designs, we calculated the 
irreplaceability metric for each cell, i.e. the number of times that cell was picked to be
part of a network. We used this irreplaceability statistic to identif y high scoring cells
which should be locked in to the network prior to the next run of Marxan . In this way, we
ran Marxan iteratively , progressively working towards a final network design that met all
targets set. In the final step, locked in cells covered 36% of the oceans, and the program
was run to select cells to make up the final approximately 4% coverage needed to 
complete the network. For this final run, we also locked out a small number of cells to
prevent Marxan amalgamating nearby protected areas that we prefer red to keep separate.
10.Design of a network of high seas marine reserv es
Figure 1 shows the final design of the candidate network of marine reser ves. It covers
40.8% of the global oceans and includes twenty-nine separate candidate reser ves. These
cover every ocean and include representatives of all twelve ocean biogeographic zones. The
network met all of the targets we set (Table 1). 
In the Mediter ranean, the high seas begin at the boundar y of territorial waters, 6 or 12
nautical miles from the coast. We have identified two areas in the Mediter ranean Sea that
have particularly high biodiversity values, but they are not the only places that warrant
protection. To adequately protect Mediter ranean biodiversity a regional network of marine
reser ves will have to be developed at a finer scale. This is to take account of the finer
scale distribution of ecological features and associated human uses compared to the high
seas.
Like the Mediter ranean, Antarctica has no Exclusive Economic Zone, nor does it have 
territorial waters. The high seas thus begin adjacent to the coast. We have identified 
several areas of the Antarctic that are high priorities for protection based on their rich
marine wildlife. However , there is a case for extending protection to all waters south of
60oS, the area covered by the Convention on the Conser vation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources. Such a protected area could safeguard one of the most pristine environments
left on this planet for the benefit of all humanity . 
Figure 1: Proposed global network of marine reser ves. Numbers refer to descriptions
given in Section 11.
31


32Table 1: Targets set for the global network of marine reser ves and performance of the 
network show in Figure 1 against these targets.
Feature Target Amount Number of
included grid cells
in network with the feature
Ocean Area 40% of world ocean coverage 40.8% 549
Biogeographic Zones
Pacific westerly winds 40% of area 46.7% 59
Pacific trade winds 40% of area 37.2% 99
Pacific polar 40% of area 54.6% 3
Pacific coastal 40% of area 51.7% 29
Indian Ocean trade winds 40% of area 47.5% 50
Indian Ocean coastal 40% of area 49.5% 13
Atlantic westerly winds 40% of area 46% 39
Atlantic trade winds 40% of area 53.7% 72
Atlantic polar 40% of area 32.4% 66
Atlantic coastal 40% of area 56.8% 23
Antarctic westerly winds 40% of area 28.1% 91
Antarctic polar 40% of area 37.2% 139
Bottom types
Sediment Clays 40% of area 39.8% 146
Sediment Glacial deposits 40% of area 39.6% 105
Sediment Continental margins 40% of area 39.1% 134
Sediment Siliceous diatom ooze 40% of area 36.5% 86
Sediment Siliceous radiolarian ooze 40% of area 31.9% 13
Sediment Calcareous ooze 40% of area 43.9% 237
Depth 1-200m 40% of area 33.3% 140
Depth 201-1000m 40% of area 51.6% 237
Depth 1001-4000m 40% of area 51.1% 488
Depth 4001-6000m 40% of area 34.8% 437
Depth 6000m+ 40% of area 44.1% 79
Bathymetric complexity 40% of the top 25% of cell 401 cells 401
values (397 cells)
Ocean trench area 40% of area 42.3% 35
Seamounts 3829 seamounts = 40% 3862 363
of global total
Fauna
Tuna and billfish species richness 40% of the top 25% of cell 22 cells 22
values (21 cells)
Tuna and billfish species density 40% of the top 25% of cell 25 cells 25
values (24 cells)
Baleen whale diversity 40% of the top 25% of cell 102 cells 102
values (111 cells)
Toothed whale diversity (excl. dolphins) 40% of the top 25% of cell 97 cells 97
values (83 cells)
Dolphin diversity 40% of the top 25% of cell 51 cells 51
values (48 cells)
Importance for air breathing megafauna 
(albatross, turtles, penguins and pinnipeds) 40% of the top 25% of cell 112 cells 112
values (75 cells)
Oceanography
Sea surface temperature gradient 40% top 10% of cell values 9 cells 9
(10 cells)
Major upwellings 40% of area 46.7% 28
Zone of deep and bottom water formation 40% of area 47.9% 37
Zone of intermediate water formation 40% of area 43.2% 16

Deepwater fishing, as we discussed earlier , is one of the major threats to high seas 
biodiversity . To examine how effective the network would be in protecting deep-sea 
habitats from fishing we superimposed the 800 – 3000 m depth stratum over the map of
proposed marine reser ves. This represents the zone of greatest sensitivity to deepwater
fishing. Bottom trawls and gillnets regularly work to 2000m deep, while longlines 
penetrate to at least 3000m.
Figure 2: Distribution of places sensitive to deep-sea fishing impacts in relation to 
candidate marine reser ves. Red areas are places where the bottom depth lies 
between 800 and 3000m. Yellow areas are proposed marine reser ves.
11.Features of selected areas identif ied for 
protection
Greenland Sea (1): This candidate marine reser ve incorporates a swathe of the
Greenland Sea between Svalbard and Easter n Greenland. It supports high levels of 
summer productivity and is an important feeding area for a variety of whales, seals and
walrus, including hooded and harp seals (Crystophoca cristata) and (Phagophilus 
groenlandicus).
North Atlantic (2): This candidate marine reser ve spans the North Atlantic from 
wester n Britain to Easter n Canada, including a southward extension west of Spain and
Portugal. It includes a significant section of the mid-Atlantic ridge between 50oN and
60oN, incorporating the Charlie Gibbs Fracture Zone, making it important for deep-sea
bottom life. It also includes the Rockall, Hatton and Porcupine Banks, deepwater areas to
the west of the British Isles around 50oN to 60oN. Further south, it incorporates the
Josephine and Gorringe Banks off the coast of Spain. Josephine Bank is a current swept
seamount, rising from 3200 m from the abyssal plain to within 170 m of the surface. It
supports a diverse assemblage of fish, corals and other invertebrates and is a possible
stepping-stone in tuna and turtle migrations. Deep water trawling is seriously impacting
this and other deepwater banks and seamounts that support important deepwater coral
and sponge communities. Preliminar y video surveys are showing that some banks still
have pristine coral and other deep-water habitats but the fishing fleets are moving in fast
and there is a high risk of these habitats being destroyed imminently . 
33


The proposed reser ve also holds the sub-polar front, a rich summer feeding area for many
migrator y fish, birds and mammals, as well as leatherback turtles (Dermochelys coriacea) .
The reser ve includes two shallow water regions off Easter n Canada, the ‘tail’ of the Grand
Banks and Flemish Cap. The ‘tail of the bank’ is an important nurser y area for cod (Gadus
morhua) and other shallow water fish and currently supports a high intensity international
fisher y with significant removals of undersized fish. Flemish Cap is a shallow water shelf
covering a total area of 58,000 km2 situated outside the Canadian EEZ. It supports the
most heterogeneous offshore Atlantic cod population and is a foraging ground for 
northeaster n and wester n Atlantic bluefin tuna populations (Thunnus thynnus) . It is also
visited by sperm whales (Physeter macrocephalus) among others and may be an important
wintering area for great shear waters (Puffinus gravis) . Flemish Cap is currently 
intensively trawled.
Azores/Mid-Atlantic Ridge (3): This candidate reser ve includes a section of the 
mid-Atlantic ridge that is rich in deep seamounts. It also covers the Rainbow
Hydrother mal Vent Field which is located at 2270-2320 m depth. This comprises more
than thirty groups of active small sulphide chimneys over an area of fifteen square 
kilometres. About thirty-two different vent species have so far been recorded in the
Rainbow area. The small spatial extent and site-specific communities make the vent field
highly vulnerable to the increasing levels of scientific and commercial exploitation, 
including scientific sampling, bioprospecting and mining. Overlying waters of this region
also supports significant populations of whales and fish, including sperm whales.
Eastern Mediterran ean (4): The area to the south, east and west of Cyprus is 
important for logger head (Caretta caretta) and green turtles (Chelonia mydas) . The area
to the south, extending to the Egyptian coast, contains the Eratosthenes seamount, an 
isolated and near pristine mount with a likely highly endemic fauna. It also includes an
area of biologically important deepwater cold-seeps off the Nile Delta.
Central Mediterran ean (5): The Ligurian Sea between France, Norther n Italy and
Sardinia is already a multi-nationally managed marine protected area, the Pelagos reser ve
for marine mammals. The outstanding values and importance of this area for cetaceans
was recognised in designating it as the first high seas MPA in the Mediter ranean.
However , the cetaceans of the Ligurian Sea need to be protected from the impacts of 
fishing and other activities. To the immediate south, the Tyrrhenian Sea contains a 
significant concentration of seamounts, and has important migration routes for bluefin
tuna, and is thought to be a major spawning area for the species in the Mediter ranean.
Sargasso Sea/W estern Atlantic (6): The Sargasso Sea lies to the west of the centre
of the North Atlantic Gyre and is bounded on the west by the Gulf Stream. The Sargasso
is a region of light winds and little rain. Coriolis forces acting on currents in the North
Atlantic Gyre push water inward toward the centre of the gyre and planetar y rotation 
offsets it west. The Sargasso is thus a region of convergence of currents and gentle 
downwelling. It supports a high level of endemism among plankton species. Converging
currents bring together flotsam and jetsam and higher nutrients foster growth of seaweed
mats that can cover huge areas. The wester n Sargasso and adjacent Gulf Stream is a
hotspot for aquatic megafauna, including fish, turtles and marine mammals. Young 
34© Greenpeace/Davison ©Greenpeace/Baigent-Mercer

juveniles of several species of turtle spend their time on the high seas in the Sargasso,
feeding and sheltering among the seaweed mats. It is the breeding ground for threatened
European eels (Anguilla anguilla) and is a migration route for whales, fish and turtles.
Atlantic leatherback turtles migrate across the Sargasso from nesting beaches in Guyana
to feeding grounds off Nova Scotia. 
The souther n spur of this candidate reser ve also includes a section of the mid-Atlantic
ridge that holds the Logatchev Hydrother mal Vent Area. Logatchev-1 field is 
characterised by three distinct sites: (i) a large sulphide mound with smoking craters; (ii)
an active chimney complex called Irina-2; and (iii) an area with soft sediment and diffuse
flow.  These have a diversity of biotopes including thick bacterial mats, diffuse flow areas,
and two different types of smokers – ‘creeping’ or horizontal smokers, and the more 
common vertical structures that resemble chimneys.  Logatchev-1 also hosts an abundance
of fauna, including swarms of shrimp at black smokers, clam beds in the sediment
biotopes, mussels from the genus Bathymodiolus on sulphide chimneys and sulphide base
areas, as well as sea anemones. Logatchev-2  has six sulphide mounds and extensive 
massive sulphide deposits containing high concentrations of copper , gold, zinc, uranite 
(uranium), and the highest concentration of cobalt of any hydrother mal vent field recorded
to date. The main present threat is scientific research; future threats are mining and 
bioprospecting.
South-Central Atlantic (7): This proposed reser ve includes a large section of the 
mid-Atlantic ridge that is rich in seamounts, as well as a ridge spur that extends from the
coast of Brazil into the Atlantic, the Trindade ridge. This ridge extends west to east at a
latitude centred on 20oS, terminating at the islands of Trindade and Martin Vas. It has
high endemism of species such as fish and is currently being damaged by deep sea 
trawling. The proposed reser ve also includes a critical migration route for green turtles at
approximately 5oto 10oS, between breeding beaches in Ascension and feeding grounds
off South America. The candidate reser ve also supports exceptional species diversity of
tuna, billfish and toothed whales. The far souther n part of the region includes a transition
area between South Atlantic and Souther n Ocean waters and is a critical feeding area for
albatrosses, penguins and pinnipeds that breed on remote islands of the South Atlantic.
Antarctic-Pat agonia (8): This proposed reser ve incorporates the Antarctic Peninsula,
the entire Weddell Sea and Bellingshausen Seas, much of the Scotia Sea, and parts of the
South Atlantic. It includes the Patagonian Shelf edge, a region of exceptionally high 
productivity . This is the convergence zone between the south flowing warm Brazil current
and the northward-flowing cold water Malvinas-F alklands current. The proposed reser ve
incorporates transitional waters between the warmer souther n Atlantic and cold polar
seas, which also support high productivity . It is a key area for aquatic megafauna, 
including albatross, seals, penguins and whales. It supports eight species of baleen whales
and a further twenty species of toothed whale and dolphin. There is an important deep-sea
fisher y for Patagonian toothfish and a highly productive shallower water fisher y for squid
both of which have serious impacts on wildlife. 
Vema Seamount-Benguela (9): This proposed reser ve includes Vema Seamount
which lies approximately 500km off the coasts of Namibia and South Africa. It is an 
isolated seamount, rising from a deep abyssal plain that supports a high diversity of fish
and invertebrates, probably with significant endemism. It has suffered badly from 
overexploitation of rock lobsters. The reser ve also includes part of the Benguela current
ecosystem which sustains highly productive fisheries for pelagic and bottom living species,
but increasingly deepwater species like those on the seamount, are being targeted.
South Africa-Agulhas Current (10): This proposed reser ve incorporates the 
confluence between the warm, south-flowing Agulhas Current and cool, nutrient 
rich waters from the Souther n Ocean. The mixing area includes large warm core eddies
that propagate eastwards from the tip of South Africa, promoting high productivity
throughout the area. This productivity sustains many resident and migrator y species,
including souther n right whales (Eubalaena glacialis) , sharks, billfish, penguins and 
35

36 © Greenpeace/Newman©Greenpeace/Davison
©Greenpeace/Pullman

albatross. The proposed reser ve also includes migration routes for leatherback turtles that
nest on the South African and Mozambique coasts.
Southern Ocean (11): This proposed reser ve incorporates waters between 
approximately 45oS to the edge of Antarctica. These waters are dotted with small islands
that are critical breeding sites for seabirds and marine mammals, including the likes of
Prince Edward, Crozet, and Kerguelen. From the map of high seas use by air-breathing
megafauna shown in this report, it is clear that the region is very important to such
species. Hotspots of use of the ocean by these species are concentrated around several of
these sub-Antarctic islands. The region also has a complex of seamounts including the
Afrikaner II Rise (ca. 46oS, 42oE), which straddles the edge of the South African EEZ
boundar y. This is the site of a large amount of illegal fishing activity . It is also a favoured
foraging site for many top predators, especially albatrosses, breeding both on the Prince
Edward Islands and the Crozets. The area also contains the isolated Ob and Lena
Tablemounts.
Southern Ocean-Australia/Ne w Zealand (12): This region of the Souther n Ocean is
critical for wildlife. It includes the area between Australia, New Zealand and Antarctica,
centred on Macquarie Island. This incorporates Campbell Islands, The Antipodes Islands
and Balleny Islands as well as the wester n half of the Ross Sea. In addition, the proposed
reser ve covers a large area of seamounts that are subject to bottom fishing, including the
Macquarie Ridge and South Tasman Rise. Collectively the islands, several hundred
seamounts and the comparatively shallow surrounding seas represent a strong physical
barrier in oceanographic terms. The marine environment is thus one of a slow-moving
water mass rich in nutrients. The region shares similar features of high productivity and
high concentration of air-breathing megafauna as the Souther n Ocean Reserve, described
above. It supports five species of penguin, for example, of which two are endemic, the
snares (Eudyptes robustus) and royal (Eudyptes schegel) . It is also important for New
Zealand sea lions (Phocarctos hookeri) and has a rich but poorly described under water
biota, including fragile seamount communities. The Ross Sea is distinct from the wider
Antarctic marine ecosystem. Its highly productive and healthy food web includes such
charismatic megafauna as whales, seals and penguins, but it is imminently threatened by
the rapid growth of toothfish fishing and hunting of minke whales (Balaenoptera 
acutorostrata) . Potential threats may arise from bioprospecting, tourism and the 
introduction of invasive marine species from ship hulls.
Central Indian Ocean-Arabian Sea (13): This region incorporates the central-
wester n Indian Ocean. It includes the Saya de Malha Banks, a part of the Mascarene
Plateau between the Seychelles, Madagascar , Mauritius and Chagos. The proposed reser ve
supports deep and shallow water fauna, including diverse coral reefs. The area contains
the largest coral reef and seagrass habitat in the world in international waters and is a
stepping stone providing connectivity across the entire Indian Ocean. As such it is crucial
to gene flow and migrator y stocks. The area around Saya de Malha is a major whale 
calving ground. The proposed reser ve incorporates a region of high tuna and billfish 
diversity as well as major seamount areas such as the Ninetyeast Ridge, Broken Ridge and
the seafloor -spreading zone of the Mid-Indian Ridge. Much of the proposed reser ve is 
subject to high fishing intensities including trawling, longlining and purse-seining. Distant
water fleets from many nations, such as those of Europe, Sri Lanka and Asia, go there to
fish. The Chagos Islands, which the reser ve bounds, are uninhabited and almost unpolluted
and little affected by direct human impacts except fishing. The proposed reser ve surrounds
these and islands of the Maldives and Lakshadweep groups, providing an offshore 
conser vation buffer . The wester n part of the reser ve extends north into the Arabian Sea,
encompassing a region of seasonal upwelling driven by monsoon winds.
Bay of Bengal (14): This region supports a high diversity of large pelagic fishes,
including tunas, billfish and whale sharks. It is an important migration route for turtles
breeding on the coast of India’s Orissa coast and is intensively fished.
37

Northwestern Australia (15): This proposed reser ve incorporates a region of 
exceptional richness of tunas and billfishes. It is a spawning area for souther n bluefin tuna
(Thunnus maccoyii) . It is also a critical feeding and juvenile habitat for highly migrator y
whale sharks.
South Australia (16): This region supports very high productivity and is the meeting
place of the warm, south flowing coastal Leeuwin Current and the cool water of the
Souther n Ocean. The Leeuwin spills around Cape Leeuwin into the Great Australian Bight,
mixing as it does with cooler , nutrient rich water , fuelling plankton growth. This mixing
zone attracts large concentrations of aquatic megafauna to feed. It is home to over fifteen
species of toothed whale and dolphin, and eight species of baleen whale. 
Lord Howe Rise and Norfolk Ridge (17): This area supports extensive seamount
chains of the Lord Howe Rise and Norfolk Ridge. Recent scientific studies indicate they
support a highly endemic fauna, with a quarter to a third of species sampled found
nowhere else. Many appear to be relict species. Deepwater bottom trawlers intensively
exploit the seamounts. This region supports a high diversity of large pelagic fishes.
Coral Sea (18): This proposed reser ve incorporates a region of exceptional richness of
tunas, billfishes and other large pelagic animals, as well as being a global centre of
endemism for coral reef fauna. It contains significant deepwater seamount and slope
habitats, also supporting high levels of endemism.
Northern New Guinea (19): This area represents an important migration corridor for
critically endangered Pacific leatherback turtles. It also incorporates the Eauripik Rise, a
significant seamount area in one of the most biologically diverse regions of the world
oceans.
Western Pacif ic (20): This area is bounded by the Exclusive Economic Zones of
Federated States of Micronesia, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Kiribati,
Naur u and Marshall Islands. It represents an important spawning area for tunas,
including Bigeye Tuna (Thunnus obesus) .
Kuroshi-Oyashio Confluence (21): This proposed reser ve covers the area of 
convergence between the warm north-flowing Kuroshio Current and the cold south-flowing
Oyashio Current. It is a highly productive region that is rich in fish and aquatic 
megafauna, including whales, dolphins, tuna and albatross. These seas are a productive
fishing ground for sardines, squid, bonito, and mackerel. In deep water , the proposed
reser ve includes sections of the Japan and Kuril Trenches.
Sea of Okhotsk (22): The Sea of Okhotsk is a highly productive semi-enclosed sea that
supports large populations of fish and shellfish, together with high concentrations of
marine mega-fauna, including the critically endangered wester n population of Pacific gray
whales. It is an important bird and fish migration route, especially for salmon spawning in
rivers of easter n Russia. In winter , large areas of the sea are ice-bound, making for highly
seasonal productivity . Overfishing and illegal fishing are widespread, and the region is
being rapidly developed for oil production, threatening wildlife.
38© Greenpeace © Greenpeace/Noble

Gulf of Alaska (23): This region in the Gulf of Alaska is highly productive and is a key
area for migrating salmon, salmon sharks, whales e.g. gray whale, (Eschrichtius 
robustus) , fur seals (Callorhinus ursinus) and Steller ’s sea lions (Eumetopias jubatus) ,
among others. It also contains a significant concentration of seamounts.
Northeastern Pacif ic (24): This large equatorial/sub-equatorial area extends from to
the southwest towards the North American coast. It supports high pelagic fish diversities
and abundance and lies on a major trans-P acific pathway for tuna migration. It also 
contains key migration corridors for leatherback turtles across the Pacific from New
Guinea, and from nesting beaches in Califor nia and Mexico to feeding grounds that the
proposed reser ve largely includes. It also is important for logger head turtles, blackfooted
albatross (Phoebastria nigripes) and norther n elephant seals (Mirounga angustirotris) . In
deep water , the region includes the Clarion-Clipperton Fracture Zone, an area with high
concentrations of manganese nodules. These nodules support a hard substrate fauna on an
other wise sediment covered abyssal plain. Without protection they are likely to be 
impacted by future mining operations.
Southeastern Pacif ic (25): This proposed reser ve incorporates the region bounded by
Galapagos-Cocos-P anama-Costa Rica-Columbia-Ecuador . There is considerable potential
for cooperative protection of high seas areas adjacent to the EEZs of these countries and
an initiative is already under way, coordinated by Conser vation International, to secure
such cooperation. The Humboldt Current bounds this region to the east before flowing
away from the Peruvian coast toward the Galapagos. Consequently this is an area of high
aquatic productivity , but it is also a convergence between very different bodies of water ,
including North and South Equatorial Currents. The area is intensively fished but it 
supports a diverse and still abundant megafauna. It includes a migration route for the
critically endangered Pacific leatherback turtles from breeding beaches in Costa Rica to
feeding grounds (which the proposed reser ve largely encompasses). To the southwest, the
region is a hotspot of tuna and billfish diversity . The region also contains important and
vulnerable deepwater habitats, including the Galapagos Rise, Sala y Gomez Ridge and
Challenger Fracture Zone.
Represent ative areas (marked ‘R’): The global network of marine reser ves presented
here has been designed to be fully representative of high seas habitats and biodiversity .
Some of the areas included are not described separately here, and are simply marked ‘R’.
These areas include important representatives of particular ecosystems, such as bottom
types, depth zones and biogeographic regions, needed to achieve targets of coverage and
representation of habitats.
12.Implementing the network
Although the value of establishing a global network of marine reser ves is widely 
recognised, there is currently no mechanism under the existing international framework
provided by UNCLOS and the CBD for implementing such reser ves on the high seas. 
The CBD is the primar y instrument providing direction to states for the establishment of
marine protected areas and marine reser ves under their jurisdiction, and also explicitly
acknowledges the need for protective measures in areas beyond national jurisdiction.
Article 4 of the convention obliges Parties to apply the convention to all processes or
activities under their jurisdiction or control, including those taking place on the high seas.
However , the Convention on Biological Diversity does not oblige states to take collective
measures to protect the high seas and does not contain the necessar y provisions to 
implement its 2012 goal of a comprehensive global network.
39

It is Greenpeace’s view that in order to implement the CBD commitment and provide the
necessar y mandate to establish and manage marine reser ves on the high seas, a new
implementing agreement under UNCLOS is required. Such an implementing agreement
would not require any amendment to the text of the Convention and would be consistent
with article 22 (2) of the CBD which already obliges parties to implement the convention
“with respect to the marine environment consistently with the rights and obligations of
States under the Law of the Sea”. The agreement would provide formal recognition of the
need to protect biodiversity on the high seas, and a mandate to protect high seas areas for
conser vation purposes. Such an implementing agreement could be modelled on the UN
Fish Stocks Agreement – which was itself negotiated in order to implement some of the
Articles of UNCLOS, and could be used to address a number of gaps in the current 
gover nance of high seas biodiversity in addition to those relating to the establishment of
high seas marine reser ves.
Other advantages of developing such an implementing agreement under UNCLOS include:
• UNCLOS is regarded as the frame work agreement that delimits ocean areas and
details state rights and duties in the high seas and the ‘Area’, and it is recognised
as custom ary intern ation al law;
• UNCLOS’ broad remit alread y covers most or all of the activities that impact on 
marine biodiv ersity ,including emerging issues such as bioprospecting and noise 
pollution;
• UNCLOS provides a binding dispute settlement mechanism
Such an agreement would build on and provide for the implementation of existing 
provisions in UNCLOS relating to the protection and preser vation of the marine 
environment and the ‘Area’.  
40 © Innerspace Visions

13.Literature cited
Airame, S., J.E. Dugan, K.D. Lafferty , H. Leslie, D.A. McArdle and R.R. Warner. (2003)
Applying ecological criteria to marine reser ve design: a case study from the Califor nia
Channel Islands. Ecological Applications 13 (Supplement): S215-S228.
Balmford A, Gravestock P, Hockley N, C. McClean and C. Roberts. 2004. The Worldwide
costs of marine protected areas. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 101: 9694-9697.
Beebe, W. (1926) The Arctur us Adventure. The Knickerbocker Press, New York.
Baum, J.K. and R.A. Myers (2004). Shifting baselines and the decline of pelagic sharks in
the Gulf of Mexico. Ecology Letters 7:135-145.
BirdLife International (2004) Tracking ocean wanderers. The global distribution of 
albatrosses and petrels. BirdLife International, Cambridge, UK.
Devine, J.A., K.D. Baker , and R.L. Haedrich (2006) Deep-sea fishes qualif y as 
endangered. Nature 439: 29.
Gage, J. D. and P.A. Tyler. (1991). Deep-sea Biology . A Natural Histor y of Organisms at
the Deep-sea Floor . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Gell F.R. and C.M. Roberts (2003). Benefits beyond boundaries: the fisher y effects of
marine reser ves. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 18: 448-455
Gjerde, K.M., ed. (2003). Ten-year strategy to promote the development of a global 
representative system of high seas marine protected area networks, as agreed by Marine
Theme Participants at the 5th World Parks Congress Gover nance Session Protecting
Marine Biodiversity beyond National Jurisdiction,” Durban, South Africa (8-17
September 2003). IUCN, WCP A WWF . Available at
www.iucn.org/themes/marine/pdf/10ystrat.pdf
Grey, Z. (1919). Tales of Fishes. Grosset & Dunlap, New York.
MCBI (2004). Scientists’ Statement on Protecting the World’s Deep-Sea Coral and
Sponge Ecosystems. http://www .mcbi.org/DSC_statement/sign.htm Marine Conser vation
Biology Institute, Redmond, Washington (USA)
Merrett, N.R. and R.L. Haedrich (1997). Deep-sea Demersal Fish and Fisheries. Chapman
& Hall, London (UK)
MPA News (2005) Global targets for MPA designations will not be met; experts respond.
MPA News 7(5): 1-2.
Myers, R.A. and B.Worm (2003). Rapid worldwide depletion of predator y fish 
communities. Nature 423: 280-283
Norse, E.A., L.B. Crowder , K. Gjerde, D. Hyrenbach, C.M. Roberts, C. Safina and M.E.
Soule. (2005) Place-based ecosystem management in the open ocean. Pages 302-327 in
E. Norse & L. Crowder , eds. Marine Conser vation Biology: The Science of Maintaining
the Sea’s Biodiversity . Island Press, Washington DC, USA.
Pauly, D., V. Christensen, R. Froese, A. Longhurst, T. Platt, S. Sathyendranath, K.
Sherman and R. Watson. 2000. Mapping fisheries onto marine ecosystems: a proposal for
a consensus approach for regional, oceanic and global integration. Pp 13-22. In: Pauly, D.
and T.J. Pitcher (eds). Methods for Evaluating the Impacts of North Atlantic Ecosystems.
Fisheries Centre Research Reports 8(2).
41

Richer de Forges, B., J.A. Koslow and G.C.B. Poore (2000). Diversity and endemism of
the benthic seamount fauna in the southwest Pacific. Nature 405: 944-947
Roberts, C.M. (2002). Deep impact: the rising toll of fishing in the deep sea. Trends in
Ecology and Evolution 17: 242-245
Roberts, C.M. and J.P. Hawkins. (2000) Fully Protected Marine Reserves: A Guide.
Endangered Seas Campaign, WWF -US, Washington DC, and University of York, UK.
131pp. Translated into Spanish and French. All language versions are available to 
download from: http://assets.panda.org/downloads/marinereser vescolor .pdf.
Roberts, C. M., S. Andelman, G. Branch, R. Bustamante, J.C. Castilla, J. Dugan, B.
Halper n, K. Lafferty , H. Leslie, J. Lubchenco, D. McArdle, H. Possingham, M.
Ruckelshaus, and R. Warner. (2003a) Ecological criteria for evaluating candidate sites for
marine reser ves. Ecological Applications 13 (Supplement): S199-S214.
Roberts, C.M., G. Branch, R. Bustamante, J.C. Castilla, J.  Dugan, B.  Halper n, K.
Lafferty , H. Leslie, J.  Lubchenco, D. McArdle, M. Ruckelshaus, and R.  Warner. (2003b)
Application of ecological criteria in selecting marine reser ves and developing reser ve 
networks.  Ecological Applications 13 (Supplement): S215-S228.
Roberts, C.M., J.D. Reynolds, I.M. Côté, J.P. Hawkins. (2006). Redesigning coral reef
conser vation. In: I.M. Cote and J.D. Reynolds (ed). Coral Reef Conservation. Pages 
515-537. Cambridge University Press.
World Parks Congress Recommendation 22. (2003). Building a global system of marine
and coastal protected area networks. http://www .iucn.org/themes/wcpa/wpc2003/pdfs/
outputs/recommendations/approved/english/html/r22.htm
World Parks Congress Recommendation 23. (2003). Protecting marine biodiversity and
ecosystem processes through marine protected areas beyond national jurisdiction.
http://www .iucn.org/themes/wcpa/wpc2003/pdfs/outputs/recommendations/approved/
english/html/r23.htm
Worm, B., Lotze, H.K., Myers, R.A., Sandow , M. and Oschlies, A. (2005). Global patter ns
of predator diversity in the open oceans. 309: 1365-1369.
42© Greenpeace/Newman

14.Ackno wledgements
This report could not have been produced without the generous support of many people.
Foremost among them, we thank Boris Worm for sharing his excellent tuna and billfish
data and several important oceanographic data layers with us. Kristina Gjerde was
extremely helpful in supplying key documents to us before they became generally 
available. Elliott Norse has provided endless inspiration for the task of high seas 
conser vation. We are also grateful to the many people who replied to our questionnaire at
short notice, suggesting places that deser ve to be protected on the high seas. We owe them
a large debt of gratitude. Their names are listed in Appendix 2.
Appendix 1:Data layers used
Bathymetr y
Global sea depths were obtained from the GEBCO One Minute Grid (The GEBCO Digital
Atlas published by the British Oceanographic Data Centre on behalf of Intergover nmental
Oceanographic Commission and International Hydrographic Organization, 2003), which
provide the data on a one-minute interval global grid. For use with Marxan the depth 
values were reclassified into five categories: 
0-200m Epipelagic
201-1000m Mesopelagic
1001-4000m Bathypelagic
4001-6000m Abyssopelagic
6001m+ Hadalpelagic
Bottom comple xity
High species diversity is often associated with high habitat complexity . More complex
habitats provide greater refugia, which can support a greater variety of life stages and
also interrupt predator -prey relationships, so allowing more species to co-exist. All of the
above can lead to greater ecosystem resilience.  To identif y features associated with 
varying and complex habitats such as sills, ledges and rocky reefs, Ardron (2002) 
developed a method of calculating bottom complexity . The measure gauges how convoluted
the seabed is from how often the slope of the sea bottom changes in a given area (Ardron
2002). It is estimated by exaggerating the depth scale and calculating the density of
changes in the ‘slope of the slope’ of the (exaggerated) depth. We followed this method,
but due to the large grid size used and the global coverage (which meant a broad range of
values) it was not necessar y to exaggerate the depth in order to cause a greater spread of
values. We then classified the results into four equal categories of high to low bottom
complexity . Global sea depths were obtained from the GEBCO One Minute Grid (GEBCO
2003), which provide bathymetric data on a one-minute interval global grid.  
Figure 3: Map of seabed bottom complexity .
43


Ardron, J.A., 2002. A Recipe for Deter mining Benthic Complexity: An Indicator of
Species Richness. Chapter 23, Marine Geography: GIS for the Oceans and Seas. Edited by
Joe Breman, ESRI Press, Redlands, CA, USA. Pp 169-175
Seamounts
A global point database of more than 14,000 seamount locations was obtained from The
Sea Around Us Project (www .seaaroundus.org). The seamounts were identified from depth
differences on a digital elevation map (Kitchingman and Lai 2004). The locations were
mapped, overlaid with a five-degree grid, and the number of seamounts per grid cell 
calculated. 
Figure 4: Density of seamounts (number per grid cell).
Kitchingman, A., and Lai, S., (2004) Inferences on potential seamount locations from
mid-resolution bathymetric data. Pp 7-12 In: Pauly, D., and Morato, T. (eds). Seamounts:
Biodiversity and Fisheries, 2004 Fisheries Centre Research Reports 12(5).
Upwellings and Downwellings
We created a data layer showing ocean areas where deep and bottom waters form and
sink, zones where intermediate waters form and sink, and major upwelling zones. We 
created a GIS polygon layer of these zones that could be used within Marxan as features
for selection.  
Source: Segar , D. A., 1998.  Introduction to Ocean Science. Wadsworth Publishing Co.,
Belmont, CA.
Sea surface temperature gradient
The steepness of the gradient in sea surface temperature from one place to another 
provides an indication of places where warm and cold water meet, including upwellings
and convergence zones between warm and cold currents. These data are markers of high
productivity and the presence of higher concentrations of marine life (Worm et al. 2005).
Sea surface temperature (SST) gradient data were kindly provided by Boris Worm (Worm
et. al. 2005).  Five-day maps of sea surface temperature at a resolution of 0.5owere 
provided by the NOAA/NASA Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer , Oceans
Pathfinder Project from 1998-2002.  The maximum slope of each data point (at original
resolution of 0.5o) to its eight surrounding points was calculated and then averaged across
5ox 5ogrid cells, to give an estimate of the spatial gradients in SST (oC.km-1).
44


45 © Greenpeace/Behring©Greenpeace
©NOAA

Figure 5: Map showing the intensity of the sea surface temperature gradient
Worm, B., Sandow , M., Oschlies, A., Lotze, H.K. and Myers, R.A., 2005. Global Patterns
of Predator Diversity in the Opens Oceans. Science 309: 1365-1369.
Tuna and Billfish data
Tuna and billfish diversity data were kindly provided by Boris Worm (Worm et. al.2005).
Global 5ox 5ogridded Japanese longlining data from 1990-99 were used to estimate two
measures of species diversity in each grid cell: species richness (the number of species per
50 individuals caught) and species density (the number of species caught per 1000 hooks). 
Figure 6: Map showing the species richness of tunas and billfish (number of species per
fifty fish caught).
Worm, B., Sandow , M., Oschlies, A., Lotze, H.K. and Myers, R.A., 2005. Global Patterns
of Predator Diversity in the Opens Oceans. Science 309: 1365-1369.
46


Bottom sediments
The distribution of sea-floor sediments was taken from
http://soconnell.web.wesleyan.edu/courses/ees106/lecture_notes/lecture14_106ocean_cir2/s
ld034.htm.  The original source of the image is: Segar , D. A., 1998.  Introduction to
Ocean Science.  Wadsworth Publishing Co., Belmont, CA. The image was then digitised to
create a GIS polygon layer.
Cetaceans
Maps of the geographic distribution of 73 cetacean species were obtained from
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cetaceans. They represent the majority of the world’s
cetaceans, but we excluded river dolphins.  Maps were digitised into polygon coverages
which were compiled into distribution maps of three groups: baleen whales (Mysticetes),
toothed whales (Odontocetes) excluding dolphins (Delphinidae), which are the largest 
family within the Odontocetes and were mapped separately .  A 5ox 5ogrid was then 
overlaid and the number of species present per grid cell calculated for each group and 
collectively .
47


Figure 7: Species diversity of cetaceans.
Biogeographic zones
A map of the world oceans biogeochemical provinces (Pauly et al. 2000, downloaded from
http://seaaroundus.org/report/method/pauly02.pdf) was used to create a GIS layer of the
world’s 12 ocean biomes that are to be used as a selection feature representing 
biogeographic zones in Marxan .
Figure 8: Biogeographic zones of the global oceans.
Pauly, D., V. Christensen, R. Froese, A. Longhurst, T. Platt, S. Sathyendranath, K.
Sherman and R. Watson. 2000. Mapping fisheries onto marine ecosystems: a proposal for
a consensus approach for regional, oceanic and global integration. Pp 13-22. In: Pauly, D.
and T.J. Pitcher (eds). Methods for Evaluating the Impacts of North Atlantic Ecosystems.
Fisheries Centre Research Reports 8(2).
48


Longlin e and purse-seining catches
Fishing operations represent a threat to biodiversity of both target and non-target species
on the high seas. Average recent yearly catches of tuna and billfish (tonnes) were obtained
on a 5ox 5ogrid basis.  We used data averaged from 2000 to 2003 inclusive, separated
by gear type, i.e. longlining and purse-seining. 
Figure 9:  Distribution of longline and purse-seine catches.
Reference
Fisheries Global Infor mation System (FIGIS).  Atlas of Tuna and Billfish Catches.
http://www .fao.org/figis/ser vlet/static?dom=root&xml=index.xml.
Distribution of aquatic megafaun a
An extensive data search on the abundance, at-sea distribution and foraging ranges of
penguins, turtles, pinnipeds and albatross was carried out.  The data were digitised into
separate GIS layers for each species. To identif y areas on the high seas that were  
important to marine megafauna, we divided the high seas into five-degree grid-cells. Cells
that fell entirely within the exclusive economic zones were excluded, however cells around
small islands such as the sub-Antarctic islands were included on the basis of being so
remote they were essentially high seas in all but name.
Cells were scored from 0-3 on a species-by-species basis, depending on the use:
Score Definition
0 No individuals present
1 Little use
2 Intermediate use
3 High use and/or a breeding colony present
These scores were then summed across the species within the taxonomic groups to produce
a composite score for each grid-cell for each of the four taxa. To ascertain an overall
importance for each taxon, the scores were standardized onto a common scale of zero to
one, to give them equal weighting. The scores were then summed to produce a combined
score for all taxa. The score for each grid-cell was divided by the number of taxa present
so as not to over-represent cells where data were available for multiple taxa.  
We were unable to obtain data on all species or regions because of the incomplete 
49


coverage of scientific research to date. Consequently , where data indicate high importance
of an ocean area to one or more of the taxa, it is taken as a positive indication that 
protection of that area would be worthwhile. However , absence of data from an area is not
used as an indication that the cell does not warrant protection. Its value to aquatic
megafauna is simply indeter minate. Data on albatrosses are the most complete due to the
existence of a detailed review of at-sea movements that includes data for 16 of the 21
existing species (BirdLife International 2004).
Figure 10: Distribution of at-sea movements of air-breathing aquatic megafauna 
(albatrosses, turtles, pinnipeds and penguins).
50
© Greenpeace/Grace

Appendix 2:Respondents to the expert consult ation on high seas 
marine reserv es.
Rob Ahrens, University of British Columbia, Canada;
Jeff Ardron, German Federal Agency for Nature Conser vation;
Peter Batson, Deep Ocean Expeditions;
Giovanni Bearzi, Tethys Research Institute, Italy;
Maria Beger , University of Queensland, Australia;
Doug Biffard, British Columbia Parks, Canada;
Barbara Block, Stanford University , USA; 
P. Dee Boersma, University of Washington, USA;
George Branch, University of Cape Town, South Africa;
Chris Caldow , NOAA , USA
Claudio Campagna, National Research Council of Argentina
Jim Carlton, Williams College, USA;
Nick Conner , Environment Department, New South Wales Gover nment, Australia;
Helen Cross, University of East Anglia, UK; 
Paul Dayton, University of Califor nia, San Diego, USA;
Lyndon Devantier , Australia;
Nick Dulvy , Centre for Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, UK; 
Carlos Eduardo Leite Ferreira, Dept of Oceanography , Arraial do Cabo, RJ, Brazil
Kate Eschelbach, NOAA , USA
Marta Estrada, Departamente de Biología Marina, Institut de Ciències del Mar, Spain;
Sergio Floeter , University of Califor nia, Santa Barbara, USA;
Rod Fujita, Environmental Defense, USA;
Caleb Gardner , University of Tasmania, Australia;
Fiona Gell, Isle of Man Gover nment, UK;
Stuart Green, Reefcheck, Philippines;
Ben Halper n, University of Califor nia, Santa Barbara, USA;
Indu Hewawasam, World Bank, USA;
Cheryl Hislop, University of Tasmania, Australia;
Sascha Hooker , St. Andrews University , UK;
Mike Kaiser , University of Wales at Bangor , UK;
Les Kaufman, Boston University , USA;
Graeme Kelleher , Australia;
Stephen Kellert, Yale University , USA;
Nicola King, University of Aberdeen, UK;
Stuart Kininmouth, Australian Institute of Marine Science;
Heather Leslie, Princeton University , USA;
Helene Marsh, James Cook University , Australia;
Aileen Maypa, Philippines
Laurence McCook, Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority , Australia;
Paul McNab, Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Canada;
Camilo Mora, University of Windsor , Canada;
Ivan Nagelkerken, Radboud University , The Netherlands;
Deon Nel, WWF , South Africa
Giuseppe Notarbartolo di Sciara, Tethys Research Institute, Italy;
John Ogden, Florida Institute of Oceanography , USA;
Bob Paine, University of Washington, USA;
Steve Palumbi, Stanford University , USA;
Dominique Pelletier , IFREMER , France;
Simon Pittman, NOAA , USA
Andrew Price, University of Warwick, UK;
Murray Roberts, Scottish Association for Marine Science, UK;
Rod Salm, The Nature Conser vancy , USA;
Dominique von Schiller , University of East Anglia, UK; 
Stephen Schneider , Stanford University , USA;
51

Charles Sheppard, University of Warwick, UK;
Chris Smyth, Australian Conser vation Foundation;
Jason Spencer -Hall, Plymouth University , UK;
Daniel Suman, Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, USA;
John Terborgh, Duke University , USA;
Virginie Tilot, France;
Carl Walters, University of British Columbia, Canada;
Dianne Williams, University of Western Australia;
David Williamson, James Cook University , Australia;
Alan White, Tetra Tech, Honolulu, USA;
Dirk Zeller , University of British Columbia, Canada;
52© Greenpeace/Grace

53© Greenpeace/Davison©Greenpeace/Visser
©NOAA

Appendix 3:Results of the expert consult ation
Area recommended for protection Justification
Gulf of Maine shelf edge/central Atlantic Convergence zone between warm Gulf Stream and cold Labrador current;
summer feeding site for highly migrator y species, including whales, tuna, 
billfish and leatherback turtles.
Northwest Atlantic - Grand Banks The ‘tail of the bank’ outside Canada’s EEZ. Important nurser y area for 
cod and other shallow water fish; high intensity international fisher y.
Northwest Atlantic - Flemish Cap A shallow water shelf covering a total area of 58,000 km2situated 
(47˚N, 45˚W) outside the Canadian EEZ; supports the most heterogeneous offshore 
Atlantic cod population; foraging ground for north easter n and wester n 
Atlantic bluefin tuna populations; leatherback turtle summer foraging 
area; visited by sperm whale; may be an important wintering area for 
Great Shear waters. The area is intensively trawled.
Easter n Canada - the Gully submarine On the Scotian Shelf off easter n Canada, this large submarine canyon 
canyon (approx 43.5o- 44.5oN, supports an unusually high abundance and diversity of cetacean species.  
58.5o- 59.5oW) This region appears to be particularly important for deep-diving species, 
possibly due to high squid biomass in the area.
Sargasso Sea, Western Central Atlantic Downwelling region in the centre of the North Atlantic Gyre; large 
floating mats of seaweed; critical habitat for juvenile turtles, eels and 
other migrator y species; especially rich for tuna and billfish species; high 
planktonic endemism; important for birds and cetaceans.
3 nominations
Mid-Atlantic ridge between 49oand 53oN This section of the mid-Atlantic ridge contains the Charlie Gibbs Fracture
Zone and is rich in seamounts. High levels of illegal as well as legal deep
sea fishing using trawls and gill nets causing depletion of target species 
and serious habitat damage. The area also holds the sub-polar front 
which is highly productive and supports prolific pelagic life, including 
large bodied species such as whales.
2 nominations
Rockall, Hatton and Porcupine Banks, Support highly diverse deepwater coral reefs and fish fauna; currently 
Northeast Atlantic – subject to intensive trawling pressure; location is ideally suited for 
enforcement.
3 nominations
Mid-Atlantic Ridge Rainbow Hydrother mal Comprises more than 30 groups of active small sulphide chimneys over 
Vent field - located in international waters an area of 15 square kilometres. About 32 different species so far 
at 2270-2320 m depth on the Azorean recorded in the Rainbow area; small spatial extent and site-specific 
segment of the Mid-Atlantic-Ridge – communities make the vent field highly vulnerable to the increasing levels
of scientific and commercial exploitation, including sampling, 
bioprospecting and mining.
2 nominations
Mid-Atlantic Ridge Logatchev Hydrother mal The Logatchev-1 field is characterised by three distinct sites: (i) a large 
Vent Area –Logatchev-1 field is located at sulphide mound with smoking craters; (ii) an active chimney complex 
14°45'N 44°58'W called Irina-2; and (iii) an area with soft sediment and diffuse flow.  
Logatchev-2 is located at 14°43.22'N These areas are further characterised by a diversity of biotopes including 
44°56.27'W thick bacterial mats, diffuse flow areas, and two different types of 
smokers – ‘creeping’ or horizontal smokers, and the more common 
Covers approximately 200,000 m2vertical structures that resemble chimneys.  Logatchev-1 also hosts an 
at a depth of 3050 m. abundance of fauna, including swarms of shrimp at black smokers, clam 
Most isolated in mid-Atlantic. beds in the sediment biotopes, mussels from the genus Bathymodiolus on 
sulphide chimneys and sulphide base areas, as well as sea anemones. 
- there were 2 other more general Logatchev-2  is characterised by six sulphide mounds and extensive 
nominations for hydrother mal vents massive sulphide deposits containing high concentrations of copper , gold, 
zinc, uranite (uranium), and the highest concentration of cobalt of any 
hydrother mal vent field recorded to date. Main current threat is scientific
research; future threats are mining and bioprospecting.
54

Easter n Atlantic - Josephine Bank Current swept seamount, rising from 3200 m depth to within 170 m of t
(36˚45’N, 14˚15’W) he surface. This seamount is situated in international waters between the 
EEZ of continental Portugal and Madeira; and is located on an abyssal 
plain. Supports a diverse assemblage of fish, corals and other 
invertebrates; possible stepping stone in tuna and turtle migrations. 
Seriously threatened by deep water trawling.
Atol das Rocas/F ernando de Noronha Ridge, Submarine mountain ridges extending east-west from the coast of Brazil;
Brazil rich in deep sea endemic species and sensitive to damage from bottom 
trawling.
Vitoria- Trindade Spur, Brazil Very important for deepwater endemic species; strong fishing pressure 
from the Asian fleet (e.g. Korea, Japan). The chain has shallow peaks 
that are currently subjected to trawling and very deep parts as well.
Patagonian Shelf Edge – Convergence zone between the cold Falklands-Malvinas Current and 
warm Brazil Current; exceptionally high pelagic productivity attracts and
supports large concentrations of aquatic megafauna; an internationally 
critical area for endangered whales, seals and sea lions; high intensity 
shallow and deep sea fisheries operate for toothfish and squid.
3 nominations
Vema Sea Mount - 500km off Namibia High diversity , high vulnerability deep seamount; has suffered badly from 
overexploitation of rock lobsters.
Afrikaner II Rise (ca. 46oS, 42oE) in This deep rise straddles the edge of the South African EEZ boundar y, 
the Souther n Ocean. and is the site of a large amount of illegal fishing activity . It is a 
favoured foraging site for many top predators, especially albatrosses, 
breeding both on the Prince Edward Islands and the Crozets.
Mediter ranean: The National Park of the Sparsely populated with limited human impacts; has a rich biodiversity of
North Dodecanese, currently in the process marine and terrestrial ecosystems, supporting numerous protected and 
of being established, is situated in Greece, endangered species: marine mammals and turtles including 
in the southeaster n Aegean, including Mediter ranean monk seals, bottlenose, striped, common and Risso’s 
44 islands and islets (the island groups dolphins and logger head turtles; extensive Posidonia seagrass beds and 
of Agathonisi, Arki and Lipsi, as well diverse littoral ecosystems; the islands support numerous important 
as isolated islets further south) breeding birds and are critical way stations for migrator y species.
Ligurian Sea, Mediter ranean Contains a permanent frontal system that promotes higher productivity; 
important region for marine mammals; currently declared a protected 
area between France and Italy – the Pelagos Sanctuar y – but little real 
protection as yet.
2 nominations
Easter n Mediter ranean – area of cold The area harbours an exceptionally high concentration of cold 
seeps off the Nile Delta. Location of the hydrocarbon seeps between 300 and 800 off the continental slope of 
core area is: 31°30’-31º50’N, North Sinai (Egypt) and the Palestinian Authority Gaza strip; supports 
33°10’-34º00’ E. unique living communities of chemosynthetic organisms such as 
polychaetes and bivalves.
Easter n Mediter ranean - Eratosthenes The flat-topped seamount measures approximately 120 km in diameter at
Seamount is located between the the base, and rises 1500 m above the adjacent bathyal plain, with a 
Levantine Platfor m to the south and the summit 756 m deep. Studies reveal a rich and diverse ecosystem of 
Cyprus margin to the north, ca.100 km corals and other invertebrates. Possibly an isolated refuge for relict 
south of Cyprus (33°-34°N, 32°-33° E) populations of species that have disappeared from the adjacent 
continental slope. No fishing activity is reported in the area; probably the
most pristine environment in the Mediter ranean.
Mascarene Plateau, South West Indian Supports deep and shallow water fauna, including coral reefs; high 
Ocean fishing intensities including trawling.
2 nominations
Saya de Malha Banks (part of the The are contains the largest coral reef and seagrass habitat in the world 
Mascarene Plateau), between in international waters; stepping stone linking connectivity between 
Seychelles, Madagascar , Mauritius whole-ocean shallow water communities and fisheries; crucial to gene 
and Chagos flow and migrator y straddling stocks across the entire Indian Ocean; 
major whale calving grounds.
55

Indian Ocean – Chagos, Lakshadweep, Chagos is almost totally unpolluted and unaffected by direct human 
Maldives - a single but large ribbon impacts except fishing and hence is perhaps one of the world’s few 
protected area encircling the entire area remaining ‘pristine’ environments. The reser ve would surround and 
provide an offshore conser vation buffer for the three island groups, whose
coral reefs in particular are of exceptional biodiversity and international 
significance.
Northwest Pacific/Japan: Oyashio- Area of convergence between the warm Kuroshio Current and the cold 
Kuroshio confluence Oyashio Current; highly productive region rich in fish and aquatic 
megafauna, including whales, dolphins, tuna and albatross; productive 
fishing ground for sardines, squid, bonito, and mackerel.
Southwester n Pacific – box 32oS to This area contains deep-sea mounts and is a known and well-targeted 
24oS and 172oto 180oEast. The area commercial fishing ground for the high seas fishing fleets mainly focusing
is bordered by theEEZs of Norfolk Island, on pelagic species. The area also has significant concentrations of deep 
Fiji, Tonga Australia and New Zealand. sea coral habitats. It is threatened by deep-water bottom trawling, tuna 
fishing and potentially sea bed mining operations.
Norfolk Ridge seamounts, southwest Pacific Highly endemic deep seamount fauna; many relict species; vulnerable to 
deepwater trawling.
Equatorial wester n central Pacific Convergence zone between norther n and souther n equatorial currents; 
convergence zone between 10onorth and high plankton productivity attracts large concentrations of migrator y 
south of equator megafauna.
3 nominations
South China Sea/Spratly Islands Large area of shallow water coral reefs rich in species; probably acts as 
a regional source of replenishment for depleted populations; disputed 
between several countries; proposed as international marine protected 
area.
6 nominations
Lord Howe Rise, between Australia and Highly endemic deep seamount fauna; vulnerable to deepwater trawling.
New Zealand - 
2 nominations
Easter n Pacific - box 10oN-25oN and This large sub-equatorial area lies to the south west of the Hawaii EEZ 
170oW-150oW and has high predator diversities and abundance.
Clarion-Clipperton Fracture Zone, Area with high concentrations of manganese nodules; nodules support 
Easter n central Pacific hard substrate fauna on sediment covered abyssal plain; likely to be 
impacted by future mining operations.
2 nominations
Easter n Pacific off Mexico Two migration corridors for Leatherback turtles between nesting beaches 
and feeding areas in the south easter n Pacific.
2 nominations
Easter n Tropical Pacific (Panama Bight) Under cold and warm current influences; includes highly productive 
bight region – enclosed by Costa Rica, waters where the Humboldt Current flows east from South American 
Panama, Colombia, and Ecuador to the coast; highly productive waters support extraordinar y concentrations of 
east and to the west by Galapagos marine life, including endangered aquatic megafauna such as 
and Cocos Islands. Leatherback Turtles. Intensively fished using longlines and purse-seines.
2 nominations
Easter n Pacific - Explorer seamount Includes several seamounts and ridges straddling Canada's Pacific EEZ 
region to the west of British Columbia and international waters; supports high diversity of deep sea fish and 
invertebrates; threatened by bottom trawling.
Easter n Pacific - box within 5oS-33oS This large sub-equatorial area is adjacent to the EEZs of Chile and Peru 
and 145oW-90oW and the Humboldt current system and has high predator diversities and 
abundance.
South Pacific from 0oto 40oSouth, Critical habitat for a wide variety of whale species; proposed as the 
between 120oEast and 130oW. South Pacific Whale Sanctuar y: http://www .doc.govt.nz/
Whats-New/Issues/Archive/A-South-P acific- Whale-Sanctuar y-(Agenda-
Paper).pdf 
Souther n Ocean Polar Front in South Transition zone between warm and cold water masses. Critical feeding 
Atlantic and Indian Oceans and migration routes for albatrosses and other aquatic megafauna.
56

Balleny Islands, Souther n Ocean; Nesting area for Adelie, Chinstrap and Macaroni penguins; important for
zone of approximately 150 nautical marine megafauna including whales and seals.
miles around the islands.
New Zealand Sub-Antarctic Islands: Collectively the islands, the 800 seamounts and the comparatively 
Campbell and Bounty Plateaus shallow surrounding seas represent a strong physical barrier in 
combined; the Auckland Islands/Motu Maha, oceanographic terms. The marine environment is thus one of a 
Campbell Island/Motu Ihupuku, slow-moving water mass rich in nutrients. Important for New Zealand 
the Antipodes and the Bounty Islands Sea Lions, several species of endemic seabird. The area has a rich but 
poorly described under water biota, including fragile seamount 
communities.
Souther n Ocean to the south of Tasmania The norther n border of the protected area should meet the Australian 
encompassing the Tasman Basin and South EEZ (South of Tasmania), the easter n border should meet the New 
Tasman Rise Zealand EEZ, to the West of the Auckland Islands and Macquarie Ridge.
The area is rich in seamounts with a high diversity of the deep sea fauna 
is well documented.  The area is fished by bottom trawlers from several 
countries including Australia and New Zealand.
Antarctic and Polar Seas Highly productive; habitat for many threatened birds, mammals and 
deep-sea fish. Require large scale protection.
7nominations
Antarctica - Ross Sea continental shelf Distinct from the wider Antarctic marine ecosystem; highly productive 
ecosystem; south of the Antarctic and healthy food web includes such charismatic megafauna as whales, 
Divergence or East Wind Drift. seals and penguins; imminent threat to this last remaining sanctuar y in 
It lies west of 155oW in waters the rapid growth of the extraction of toothfish and minke whales; 
shallower than 3000 m potential threats may arise from bioprospecting, tourism and the 
introduction of invasive marine species from ship hulls.
57© Greenpeace/Novis

58