# Archivo original: safer-chemicals-within-reach.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:52 -03 2025

1SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
SAFER CHEMICALS 
WITHIN REACH
Using the 
Substitution Principle to drive 
Green Chemistry
February 2005

2
 
For more information contact:  
Greenpeace European Unit  
Rue Belliard 199  
B-1040 Brussels  
Belgium  
T: +32 (0)2 274 1900  
F: +32 (0)2 274 1910  
http://eu.greenpeace.org
Safer Chemicals within REACH 
Report prepared for the Greenpeace 
Environmental Trust by Clean Production 
Action with contributions from International Chemical Secretariat 
October 2003
 
Updated February 2005  
ISBN:  1-903907-07-1Photos: 
This page:  © Les Stone/Greenpeace  
Page 2:  © Greenpeace/Robinson  
Page 9:  © Morgan/Greenpeace  
Page 15:  © Basel Action Network   
Page 20:  © Greenpeace/Cobbing
Design: Paul Hamilton @ oneanother  
 
Printed on 100% post-consumer waste 
– environment friendly paperChildren playing in Cancer Alley, 
Louisiana, USA

1SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
1.  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 3
2.  INTRODUCTION 5
2.1   What is the Substitution Principle? 5
2.2   Why not control the risks instead  
of insisting on substitution? 6
2.3  What is a ‘safer alternative’? 7
2.3.1  Substitution can be performed on several levels  7
2.3.2  Assessment of alternatives  8
3. WHY MAKE SUBSTITUTION A LEGAL OBLIGATION?  9
3.1    The Substitution Principle must  
be an obligation for all  9
3.2  Substitution regulation spurs innovation 9
3.3   Legislation is needed to ensure that data  
is available for substitution  10
3.4  Legal precedents for the Substitution Principle 10
3.5   Case Study: Alternatives to  
Dry Cleaning with Perchloroethyelene  11
4. WHAT IF THERE IS NO SUBSTITUTE AVAILABLE? 12
4.1  Mandatory planning for substitution 12
4.2  Economic Instruments 13
4.3  Technical Support to find safer alternatives 13
5. SUBSTITUTION IN PRACTICE  
– THE INDUSTRY EXPERIENCE 14
5.1   Greenpeace efforts to win corporate  
commitments to chemical substitution 14
5.2   Downstream users promote  
mandatory substitution 15
5.3  Recyclers support mandatory substitution 16
5.4  Retailers support mandatory substitution 16
6. CONCLUSIONS 17ANNEX I  
CASE STUDIES OF SUCCESSFUL SUBSTITUTION  19  
 
1.   SUBSTITUTING BROMINATED  
FLAME RETARDANTS (BFRS) 19
1.1  The electronics industry  
 found alternatives to BFRs 19
1.2  Retailers target BFRs for substitution 20
1.3  Leaders in the building trade  
 are  phasing out BFRs 20
2.   ASSESSING NON BFR CHEMICAL  
ALTERNATIVES – ARE THEY SAFER? 21
2.1   Material and functional  
approaches to substituting BFRs  21
3.   SUBSTITUTING LEAD  
IN ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS 22
4.   RETAILERS ARE SUBSTITUTING  
A RANGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 23
5.  PVC PHASE OUT IS WIDESPREAD 24
6.   CHEMICAL SUPPLIERS ARE  
ADOPTING GREEN CHEMISTRY 24
ANNEX II   
COMMON POSITION OF CBI, CIA  
AND GREENPEACE ON SUBSTITUTION  25
ANNEX III    
SUBSTITUTION IN INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS  26
ENDNOTES 35
TABLES AND FIGURES
Figure 1 :   Proposed decision making process for  
use specific authorisation under REACH  2
Table 1:   Flame retardants investigated  
by Umweltbundesamt    21CONTENTS

2
EU chemicals policy must ensure a high level of 
protection of human health and the environment as 
enshrined in the Treaty both for the present generation 
and future generations while also ensuring the efficient functioning of the internal market and the competitiveness of the chemical industry. Fundamental 
to achieving these objectives is the Precautionary 
Principle. Whenever reliable scientific evidence is available that a substance may have an adverse impact 
on human health and the environment but there is still 
scientific uncertainty about the precise nature or the magnitude of the potential damage, decision-making must be based on precaution in order to prevent 
damage to human health and the environment. Another 
important objective is to encourage the substitution of dangerous by less dangerous substances where suitable 
alternatives are available. It is also essential to ensure 
the efficient functioning of the internal market and the competitiveness of the chemical industry.
 
White Paper. Strategy for a future chemicals policy, 2001
Greenpeace 
laboratory at Exeter 
University, UK

3SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
Synthetic chemicals have become very much part of our 
lives.  They may be seen to serve useful purposes and to 
bring substantial benefits to our lives and our health. At the 
same time, however, many are already known to possess 
dangerous properties while many more have never had 
their safety properly assessed. We should certainly not be 
indiscriminately exposed to chemical pollutants on an ongoing 
basis. Nevertheless, we are. Research into levels of industrial 
chemicals in the human body shows that we are continuously 
exposed to a large number of chemical pollutants.1
The fact that we are all continuously exposed to many different chemicals is because the law allows this to happen. 
European law is currently based on an assumption that there 
are ‘acceptable’ levels of risk, even from the most hazardous 
chemicals, and regulators determine acceptable levels of 
exposure from these risk calculations. 
It is further assumed that the quantity of substances that we are 
exposed to can be controlled through dilution and dispersion of 
chemicals throughout the environment. However, this assumption falls apart for chemicals which do not degrade, or degrade 
only slowly in the environment and which can bioaccumulate. 
Additionally, a surprising number of hazardous chemicals are used 
in consumer products and there is another, implicit, assumption 
that exposure to hazardous chemicals from consumer products 
and other dispersed sources, is negligible. Recent research 
suggests it is not.
2 As a result of these assumptions we are all 
continuously, and quite legally, exposed to multiple and ongoing 
small doses of many different substances.
As long as chemical regulation is based on this risk-based 
philosophy, human and environmental exposure to dangerous 
chemicals – ‘substances of very high concern’ – will continue. 
The ‘disperse and dilute’ model does not work for persistent 
bioaccumulative chemicals because Nature quite simply collects 
and concentrates these materials over time.
What is needed is a shift from ‘permissive’ regulations based 
on attempted control of exposure and risk, to one based on 
prevention. The goal of chemicals policy should be the elimination 
of exposure to intentionally manufactured substances whose 
intrinsic properties give cause for high concern. 
European chemicals regulations are currently being completely 
overhauled and new legislation will be passing through 
Parliament in 2005. But the EU’s proposed new chemical 
policy does not as yet include measures that will move us away 
from a permissive regime. Although the framework (REACH) and mechanism (Authorisation) are there, as it stands, the 
draft legislation continues with ‘adequate control’ as the 
regulatory paradigm. Human exposure to what are considered ‘acceptable levels’ of exposure to chemicals that may cause 
cancer, or genetic damage, endocrine disrupting chemicals and 
substances that build up in our bodies, seems set to continue. 
We know there is a problem,  
what is the solution?
The most important step towards a preventive regime, one that truly has protection of human health and the environment 
at its core, is to give a central place in chemicals legislation to 
the Substitution Principle. This can be defined quite simply as 
‘the substitution of hazardous substances by less hazardous, or 
preferably non-hazardous, alternatives where such alternatives 
are available’. It means that if a product that uses a hazardous 
chemical can be manufactured using a safer alternative, at a 
reasonable cost, the hazardous substance will no longer be 
permitted for that use. Common sense? Yes, but currently things do not work that way, and many hazardous substances are used 
without need, simply because there is no legislative or economic 
reason for substitution to take place systematically. 
Is the Substitution Principle workable?
Some companies are already using substitution as a means of eliminating hazardous chemicals from their businesses. (see Annex 
I) A variety of reasons exist for why some companies are searching 
for safer substitutes and these include regulatory drivers (such as 
the recent Directive on the Restriction of Hazardous Substances), 
increased public awareness, demands from downstream users or 
clients, worker protection,  liability issues, competitive advantage 
and company ethics. However, there are also barriers and the 
development and adoption of safer substitutes is happening only 
slowly, in a piecemeal fashion and in some sectors not at all. 
For this reason, the Substitution Principle cannot be implemented 
to its full and necessary effect simply as a general policy 
statement within the regulatory framework, since this will be an 
insufficient driver for change. Instead it needs a clear mandatory 
imperative to drive it. Within REACH, this means that the 
Substitution Principle needs to be written into the authorisation procedure so that the availability of a safer alternative is sufficient 
grounds for an authorisation to be refused.
A safer alternative is one that does not meet the 
requirements for a substance of very high concern as 
defined in the authorisation procedure of the REACH 1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

4
proposed regulation. Obviously, every effort must be 
made to select the least hazardous alternative within this 
universe of ‘safer’ chemicals.
‘Availability’ means the substitute must be available on the 
market and is defined to include an economic element (i.e. 
at a reasonable cost). It must also be technically effective 
and fit for the use to which the application applies. 
An alternative may be safer in that it does not meet the 
criteria for very high concern, but it may have other 
hazards such as corrosivity or flammability. These hazards 
are easier to control, but if there is a serious health and 
safety issue with a proposed substitute, that alternative 
would not be deemed an available alternative. A proposal 
for a workable authorisation procedure based on the 
Substitution Principle is shown schematically in Figure 1.
When an application for an authorisation is made, 
the applicant should provide details of alternative 
substances, materials, processes or products currently 
in use (substitution plan). A comparative assessment of 
alternatives should be provided in order to justify the need 
seen by the applicant for authorisation to be granted. 
Other parties (e.g. manufacturers of potential substitutes) 
should be invited to respond to this Substitution Assessment.
If the manufacturer, importer or user of a chemical of very 
high concern can demonstrate that no viable alternative 
is available, that there is need for the chemical (with a 
transparent socio/economic assessment) and that all 
steps are taken to minimise exposure, and therefore 
risks, from continued use of the substance, then a time-
limited authorisation may be granted. A time-limited authorisation will both ease costs of a phase out and 
encourage development of alternatives.
The basis of this system is the presumption that a 
chemical of very high concern will be phased out unless 
the applicant can demonstrate that there is no safer 
alternative, there is a compelling reason for production to 
continue and that the risks can be controlled. Only in those 
circumstances would a time-limited authorisation be granted. Otherwise authorisations should be refused.
 Figure 1.  Proposed decision making process  
for use specific authorisation under REACH
Yes
No
No
NoIs the substitute 
free of other 
significant hazards?
No
Authorisation  
refused
   
Restrict use.  
Tighten control  
measures.Chemical of very high  
concern (identified by  
registration process)
Hazard Assessment
Are there registered  
alternatives not classed  
as ‘substances of very  
high concern’ ?
 No
   
Socio-economic  
analysis  Does the  
product serve a useful/  
necessary social function?
 YesRisk Assessment
Do the benefits to
 
society outweigh the  
risks of continued use?
 Yes
Have all the possible meas ures been taken to 
minimise the risk from temporary continued use
?
 Yes
Time limited authorisation  
granted with requirements  
for preparation of  
Substitution  PlanYes

5SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
Europe is at a crucial time in its development of chemical 
policy and the European Commission has proposed what can 
be considered the most comprehensive system of chemicals 
regulation in the world. The intent of REACH (Registration, 
Evaluation and Authorisation of CHemicals)3  is a comprehensive 
overhaul of a chemical system that has failed to protect people and the environment from ongoing exposure to many different 
chemicals with unknown properties. The Commission must 
be congratulated for deciding to end the lack of information 
on chemicals in wide use today and for targeting the most 
hazardous chemicals for stringent measures. However, the 
new legislation will fail to deliver its protection goals for 
human health and the environment if it does not ensure that 
the most hazardous chemicals are systematically phased-out and replaced with safer alternatives. The Commission has 
created a unique opportunity to protect human health and the 
environment, while at the same time stimulating development 
of safer chemicals and increasing innovation within the industry. 
But it is unlikely that any of these goals can be achieved unless 
the mandatory substitution of chemicals of very high concern is 
a central feature of the legislation. 
Under the current proposal, chemicals with the most hazardous 
properties – those that have been named ‘substances of very 
high concern’ – may be authorised for continued use if the 
risk to human health and/or the environment is deemed to be 
‘adequately controlled’. However, this principle of ‘adequate 
control’ is, quite simply, not one that should be applied to 
persistent, bioaccumulative substances. Their intrinsic properties 
mean that exposure is virtually impossible to control. Small releases from production processes, from applications that 
disperse them widely, or from disposal operations lead to 
significant accumulation of the chemicals in the food chain and 
consequently in human beings. Chlorinated paraffins in PVC 
flooring are not adequately controlled for instance. Brominated 
flame retardants in computer circuitry, or nonylphenol in 
children’s pyjamas provide unexplored routes of exposure despite the fact that these substances have been recognised as 
persistent, bioaccumulative toxins for many years and are subject 
to control regimes. These chemicals are consistently found in 
house dust, breast milk, umbilical cord blood and other places that 
demonstrate ongoing human exposure despite pollution permits 
that supposedly control environmental discharges
.  
The availability of alternatives should not merely be seen as 
one consideration in the authorisation process. It should be 
the decisive factor in deciding the future of a substance of 
very high concern. Producers and users of chemicals of very 
high concern should be required to assess alternatives to these chemicals, and where none exist to develop them. This requirement will redirect the focus of chemical producers and 
downstream users towards safer chemicals and processes 
and stimulate the development of Green Chemistry. It will 
be a major driver towards clean production and effectively 
level the playing field for companies who are already using 
safer materials in their products.  Without such a regulatory driver, however, the adoption of safer substances will proceed 
in a piecemeal fashion and entrench other substances in 
extensive risk assessment procedures to justify ongoing use 
of substances of very high concern. On the other hand, a 
requirement to assess substitutes has the potential to change 
the focus from trying to manage and justify intrinsically 
hazardous chemicals to one that advances the use of safer 
processes and products in our society. 
BACKGROUND: TOXIC CONTAMINATION
We are all contaminated by a wide range of chemicals. Each 
generation is progressively exposed to persistent chemicals 
in the womb and intake of persistent organic pollutants by 
nursing infants is high. Effects caused during development 
may cause permanent irreversible damage and some effects 
may not even become apparent until later in life. This is no 
longer acceptable, particularly when safer product design and 
chemical substitution is feasible. 
Chemicals such as brominated flame retardants have become 
widespread contaminants and are now detectable even in 
marine mammals from remote areas as well as more generally 
in human blood and breast milk. Release to the environment 
occurs not only during the manufacture of these chemicals 
but also during the routine use and final disposal of a wide 
range of household and consumer products such as computer 
components, sofas, carpets, toys and textiles. Studies show the flame retardants, PBDEs, to have similar effects to PCBs by 
affecting neurological development in the foetus.
4 Again, the 
youngest in our society are generally the most susceptible to such contamination. 
2.1  What is the Substitution Principle?
The Principle of Substitution states that hazardous chemicals 
should be systematically substituted by less hazardous alternatives 
or preferably alternatives for which no hazards can be identified. 
As a basis for protection of human health and the environment 
from chemicals of concern, the Substitution Principle has several 
advantages:2. INTRODUCTION 

6
• It provides a stimulus and direction for innovation. 
Governments need not prescribe particular alternatives, 
but rather define criteria to guide the identification of 
alternatives. This will end the common practice of 
replacing a hazardous chemical under legislative pressure with a similar hazardous chemical that is less 
in the spotlight.
 
• It implements the Precautionary Principle. Arguments 
against the Precautionary Principle commonly centre 
on what degree of evidence of harm is necessary before 
action is taken to restrict the use of a substance. When 
applying the Substitution Principle, it is not necessary 
to wait for cancers, reproductive disorders or genetic 
defects and elusive evidence of cause and effect. If 
alternatives with less hazardous intrinsic properties are available, use of the hazardous substance is not 
permitted. The potential for harm is then reduced or avoided altogether.
• It will avoid the current ‘paralysis-by-analysis’ syndrome where we have upwards of 30 000 chemicals on 
the market that have not been adequately tested. 
Substitution reduces the need for cumbersome, time-
consuming, subjective and data-poor assessments of 
risk. If an alternative is available which is intrinsically 
less hazardous, intensive assessment of the original hazardous chemical is unnecessary.
• In many cases, hazard based substitution eliminates the need for notoriously difficult exposure 
assessment. Persistence and bioaccumulation potential 
are surrogate measures of both hazard and exposure 
that can be applied quickly to all chemicals
5 In order to 
identify those of greatest concern.
• The Substitution Principle provides the stimulus 
for Clean Production and sustainable product and 
system design. A focus on substitution also opens up 
other possibilities for solving the dilemma of how to 
replace chemicals of very high concern. For example, 
where necessary the substitute may not be another 
chemical, but the redesign of a product. Computer 
companies are adopting metal housings to avoid the 
use of toxic flame retardants in plastic. Fire services 
point to preventative sprinklers, product redesign and alternative materials to achieve fire prevention in 
buildings. The same function is achieved but by using 
safer alternatives.2.2.  Why not control the risks instead  
of insisting on substitution?
“The considerable inherent uncertainty in our understanding of 
the way that chemicals interact with the environment means 
that there will continue to be a risk of serious effects, as a 
result of the use of chemicals products, that we cannot predict 
on the basis of our current or foreseeable understanding of 
these processes. This requires a precautionary approach to 
chemicals management, and this is best implemented through 
substitution …  We recommend that the UK Government adopt 
substitution as a central objective of chemicals policy. ”  
UK Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution, 20036
It is not possible to achieve ‘adequate control’ of the risks of persistent, bioaccumulative chemicals.  The fact that traditional 
risk assessment cannot reasonably be applied to such chemicals, 
and that a revised PBT (persistent, bioaccumulative, toxic) 
assessment is necessary, is explicitly recognised in the EU’s 
Technical Guidance Document for risk assessment. Their 
intrinsic properties mean that there is a high risk of exposure at 
sometime during the life cycle of the chemical or the article that 
contains it. Even small releases, if they are continuous, can result 
in significant exposures. This is why we see significant and, in some cases, escalating levels of brominated flame retardants, 
nonylphenols and other persistent chemicals in breast milk, 
umbilical cord blood and human tissue. 
Substitution, rather than risk management is therefore 
essential. Chemicals identified as of very high concern, e.g. 
carcinogens, reproductive toxins, those that persist and bioaccumulate in the environment and affect the hormone 
system,
7 should be targeted for substitution based on their 
intrinsic hazards. 
“….It has been suggested by producers of brominated flame 
retardants that the health risks related to the extrusion of plastics containing PBB and PBDE could be avoided by 
strengthened worker protection measures in the recycling 
installations. As an example it was recommended that 
workers carry protection masks…. Clearly, the substitution 
of the concerned substances would provide the best 
protection of the concerned workers.
’’ 8  
European Parliament and Council, 2002.
By defining criteria for substances of very high concern, 
REACH has already clarified which properties of substances 
make them a priority for phase-out. Any chemical that, by its 
nature, would require an authorisation to permit continued 

7SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
use should immediately be targeted for substitution. This is 
a natural progression from what some Member States have 
already suggested: 
In August 1999, a government decision in the German 
Bundestag called for a staged but drastic reduction in 
discharges of endocrine disrupters drawing on a similar 
decision by the European Parliament on 26th January 1999.  
The German Environmental Protection Agency (UBA) stated:
“Substances whose endocrine potential has been shown in in 
vivo tests, but where the available data is (as yet) insufficient for legal restriction or prohibition, should be named publicly 
in blacklists, and made subject to a substitution requirement 
under the Hazardous Substances Ordinance. Such a list could 
provide sufficient incentive to substitute, even where there is 
only a suspicion of danger.”
9
The Swedish government has also reiterated the need 
to substitute substances of very high concern.  These 
substances are estimated to be relatively few and would 
not overload the authorisation system.  Sweden states 
that authorisation of such chemicals may be granted only if 
industry can demonstrate that no feasible alternatives are 
available; the socio-economic arguments clearly outweigh 
the potential risks and emissions are foreseen to be negligible 
during manufacture, use and disposal.10 
2.3 What is a ‘safer alternative’?  
The goal of substitution is to progressively move to safer 
materials and system design, so it is important to have a clear 
decision process and set of criteria to define what is ‘safer’. As 
information has increased over the last few decades, there is a 
general tendency to move from halogenated chemicals to non-
halogens specifically because many organohalogens are toxic, 
persistent and bioaccumulate in living systems or give rise to 
by-products with these properties throughout their different 
product life cycles. As more information emerges on endocrine 
disruption and neurotoxicity, suspect chemicals are highlighted. This has resulted in lists of restricted chemicals drawn up by 
both regulatory and industrial bodies. For example, the OSPAR 
list of Chemicals for Priority Action first drawn up in 1998 has 
focused much attention on the search for safer substitutes for 
all uses of these chemicals. 
However REACH moves the list approach forward by 
setting a clear standard across Europe on what must be 
substituted. Any chemical meeting the criteria of ‘very high concern’ because of its inherent hazards should be subject 
to the substitution procedure. Conversely, any chemical not 
intrinsically of ‘very high concern’ is a candidate for a safer 
alternative (though cannot, of course, be automatically 
considered to be non-hazardous).
There will undoubtedly be cases that are not as simple as this. 
For example, an alternative may be safer in that it does not 
meet the criteria for very high concern, but it may have other 
hazards such as
 corrosiveness or flammability. However, 
these hazards are generally easier to control and fall under appropriate health and safety regulations. If there is a serious 
health and safety issue with a proposed substitute, that 
alternative would not be deemed an acceptable alternative.
2.3.1 Substitution can be performed on several levels
Substitution may be performed in a variety of ways 
depending on the application of the hazardous chemical. 
Approaches vary from ‘drop in’ substitution with a less hazardous chemical that exhibits the same technical 
functionality to complete product or process redesign. This 
allows the same desired result to be obtained by different 
methods and encourages innovation at all levels from 
chemical engineering and Green Chemistry to product and 
systems design. Annex I (6) shows how some chemical 
producers have reduced the need for toxic intermediates by employing different synthetic routes. Similarly hazardous 
solvents, in both cleaning and synthesis, may be replaced with 
more benign alternatives. 
The case of toxic phthalates in PVC carpet backings can be used 
to demonstrate the different levels of innovation available in the 
search for a safer product:
• Chemical Substitution Phthalates are used to provide 
flexibility to the polymer backing. The use of alternative 
plasticizers represents the most direct method of 
substitution. In some cases this choice may have little 
impact on production techniques, and so be the most 
economically favourable option in immediate terms.
• Material Substitution Replacement of the entire backing with a different material, e.g. a different plastic 
polymer that does not require phthalate plasticizers 
removes the need for these chemicals. Other 
hazards associated with PVC are also then avoided, 
with potential economic benefits in the medium 
to long-term. An innovative use of this approach is 
demonstrated in Annex I (6). 

8
• Functional/System Substitution Substitution may also 
occur at a higher level. The function of the carpet (in this 
case) is to provide a floor covering. Other alternatives that 
also fulfil this need are e.g. linoleum, sisal flooring. 
2.3.2 Assessment of alternatives
Risk assessment is the conventional tool for decision making 
on the acceptability of chemical use. It is based on predicted 
exposure levels, predicted no-effect levels of individual 
chemicals and politically defined degrees of acceptable risk. Each of these processes involves a series of value 
judgements and estimations. Risk assessment is therefore 
highly subjective. 
On the other hand, the assessment of intrinsic hazard can be a 
much more objective process. Intrinsic properties can generally 
be established and quantified more empirically and provide a better basis for decision-making.
The assessment of substitutes will rely on various factors 
and a number of methodologies have been developed to 
compare the alternatives available. A variety of software 
and tools are available to enable a comprehensive review of 
chemical properties. 
One model, developed for the German Ministry of 
Environment, uses an evaluation matrix based on indicators 
to compare a range of criteria, such as specific chemical 
properties, intrinsic mobility, amount used and indirect 
releases into the environment. Weightings are given for 
each chemical assessed and then results are place on a risk 
index ranging from very high to very low. The evaluation 
matrix then ranks the most preferable. The indicators 
for the evaluation and a software tool for carrying out 
an evaluation can be down loaded from the Internet.
11 
Additionally, the German government has studied in some 
detail the drivers and barriers to sustainable substitution of 
hazardous chemicals.12         
Another model, used in the USA, is the OASYS Pollution Prevention Optional Analysis System, developed by the 
Toxic Use Reduction Institute. Technologies are assessed 
on a variety of hazard criteria, including acute and chronic human toxicity, physical properties, aquatic impacts, persistence/bioaccumulation, atmospheric releases, 
disposal, chemical properties, energy/resource use, 
product hazard and exposure potential. Alternatives are 
rated to display a series of scores and the final weighted 
score displays the best option for the manufacturer.
13  
The Swedish Chemical Inspectorate (KEMI) has used substitution analysis to assess biocides with the goal of 
promoting sustainable agriculture. KEMI uses a seven-step 
process that evaluates not only the intrinsic hazards of a 
chemical but its efficiency, its cost and its intended use. 
Alternatives are monitored and assessed for effectiveness. 
Since the Substitution Principle has been operational, 20% of 
the pesticides on the Swedish market have been substituted with less hazardous products. Users have a reasonable 
time frame to adopt the substitute and this enables smaller 
pesticide formulators and farmers to adapt to the change 
with few complications.  When a safer product is put on 
the market, KEMI allows the existing and more hazardous 
product to be used until its approval expires.
14 
Many progressive companies have used the Substitution 
Principle to move towards the goal of clean production. 
Some downstream users of chemicals claim to only use 
benign chemicals in their processes and products. For 
instance, the McDonough Braungart team of consultants 
has worked with the Design Tex company to produce a 
carpet that is made with non-hazardous chemicals from 
their ‘Positive’ chemical list.15 
In February 2005, M&S launched a new range of household cleaning products called “Naturally Inspired”, from 
which they claim to have removed all synthetic chemical 
ingredients. According to the press release:
 “We’ve taken 
out petro-chemical based cleaning ingredients ….  We’ve 
made sure that every single ingredient we’ve used actually 
adds a benefit and isn’t there for show, and that each 
product performs just as well as conventional cleaners” .16 
Examples of successes in Green Chemistry, as listed in Annex I (6), demonstrate the feasibility of designing 
benign products. 

9SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
Many people would argue that substitution is desirable, but 
without a legal driver it happens only in a piecemeal fashion. 
Without legislation, the objective - to eliminate all but 
absolutely necessary uses of chemicals of very high concern 
- is not achieved.
3.1  The Substitution Principle must be an 
obligation for all  – not only for the most 
progressive companies
Substitution is already a goal for some progressive companies. 
It helps them to reduce systematically their use of hazardous 
chemicals and develop new products. Some companies have 
agreed on substances that need to be avoided. As documented in 
the case studies in Annex I of this report, they are instructing their 
suppliers to phase out a range of carcinogenic, mutagenic and 
reproductive toxins, as well as some persistent, bioaccumulative, 
and endocrine disrupting chemicals. 
However, voluntary substitution will not end general exposure to 
chemicals of very high concern. Several studies have shown that 
voluntary actions in isolation have severe limitations. The OECD 
published a report17 pointing out some of the major problems with 
voluntary as opposed to obligatory schemes. In particular, they 
point out that ‘free riding’ is a significant problem among many 
collective voluntary approaches. This fact was highlighted during 
industry’s lobby for the Directive on the Restriction of Hazardous 
Substances (RoHS) when the industry sector was adamant that 
restrictions must apply equally across Europe.
The OECD further note that the economic efficiency of voluntary 
approaches is generally low because they fail to equalise the costs between all producers and environmental targets are set on 
individual sectors rather than at a national level. 
While the proactive efforts of some of industry demonstrate that 
substitution is indeed feasible, voluntary action will not solve the 
global problem of chemical contamination. Such action needs to be 
universal and across all industry sectors and size of firms. Industry needs clear criteria in which to operate and innovate. In particular, 
small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) need clear criteria to 
chart their way forward in a competitive economy.
A common position statement issued on 25
th October 2004, by 
the Confederation of British Industry (CBI), the UK’s Chemicals 
Industry Association (CIA) and Greenpeace recognises the ability 
of a strong REACH regulation to drive innovation: “ We share 
the view that a requirement within the authorisation procedure to substitute substances of very high concern if an acceptable alternative that does not fall into the very high concern category 
is available has the potential to drive innovation to the benefit of 
business, human health and the environment.
”  
(For full statement see Annex II)
3.2 Substitution regulation spurs innovation
“Just as sustainability presents us with the most troubling and 
complex technical challenges we face, it also highlights the 
most important technological opportunities crying out to be 
cracked by today’s chemists. Finding the solutions will result 
in major economic progress. ”Terry Collins, Director of the 
Institute for Green Oxidation Chemistry, 200318
The role of regulations in promoting innovation has been a matter of discussion for a long time. The Royal Commission on 
Environmental Pollution in the UK appointed the Science and 
Technology Research Unit at the University of Sussex to report on 
the impact of regulations on innovation in the chemical industry. 
The report concluded that the introduction of new regulation 
sometimes causes a temporary decrease in innovation activity, but 
in the long term has no negative influence on innovation. It notes 
that in many countries the most successful firms and industries are 
those that face the highest levels of regulation.
19
The 1982 Swedish ban on the use of cadmium as a pigment, surface treatment and stabiliser, backs up this conclusion. The ban 
was implemented in the face of strong protest from companies 
claiming the costs would be too high. Later, an assessment of the 
effects of the ban was undertaken. It was discovered that the 
ban had caused some short-term financial difficulties for some 
companies, but in the longer term, no effect was seen on the 
companies’ market shares or profits.
20 
In fact, regulatory drivers are often seen as instrumental in spurring innovation. An assessment by a major aerospace 
manufacturer of what drives innovation towards safer 
processes for hazardous waste streams revealed that: ‘The 
regulatory drivers for waste reduction are familiar to most 
by now, and may be summarised into three categories of 
legislation: 1) inventory reporting, 2) emission reporting, and 
3) employee exposure levels. Anticipation of future restrictions 
was a decisive factor in this project.
21 
The mandate within the Directive on the Restriction of 
Hazardous Substances (RoHS) to phase out a range of 
hazardous materials in new electrical and electronic products by 
2006, has been the most significant driver to product redesign 
not just in Europe, but also in other regions. For example, an 3.  WHY MAKE SUBSTITUTION 
A LEGAL OBLIGATION?

10
assessment of the high tech industry in Asia has revealed that 
impending European legislation was the driver for hazardous 
chemical phase-out and adoption of alternative designs and 
chemicals.22 While manufacturers in Europe were opposing the 
impending WEEE and RoHS directives, Japanese companies 
strategically positioned themselves as promoters of greener 
products, and took the lead in finding substitutes for lead solder 
in electronics. As a result, Japan adopted lead-free soldering 
technologies well ahead of the WEEE directive timescale, and 
ahead of European and American counterparts.
Regulatory drivers are needed to stimulate the research and 
market for safer substitutes. If the cost of a safer substitute is too high due to lack of market demand and interest 
among companies within a sector, the innovation will remain 
marginal at best. In particular, it may not spread to the SMEs 
who would face an even more difficult financial challenge 
to adopt the safer substitute. A clear regulatory focus on 
substitution would stimulate the research, development 
and adoption of safer processes and products. For example, it is well documented that impending legislation under the 
Montreal Protocol to ban ozone-depleting CFCs stimulated 
the widespread research and adoption of non ozone 
depleting alternatives.
23
Similarly, the various EU directives that mandate substance 
bans have initiated wide scale research and development of 
alternative materials. Lead is a case in point. Lead has been 
widely used in the electronic industry in solders. Lead-free 
solders have existed for many years but it was the mandate 
in the Restriction of use of certain Hazardous Substances 
Directive (RoHS) to have products free of lead by July 2006 
that spurred industry research, planning and adoption of the 
substitutes.24 Annex I lists examples of Green Chemistry case 
studies where research was stimulated in response to legislation targeting hazardous materials.
3.3  Legislation is needed to ensure  
that data is available for substitution
A common complaint from downstream users of chemicals is 
that data gaps prevent adequate characterisation of the risks 
from chemicals. Increased information under REACH will change this situation as long as data are transparent, readily available and accessible to the public. But collecting information on 
chemicals in the absence of a clear goal to replace chemicals 
of very high concern is likely to lead to the entrenchment of 
hazardous chemical use within a more costly end-of-pipe 
management model. Any system that does not force an 
examination of safer substitutes and make this a priority over the risk management of hazardous substances, will ultimately 
fail to protect people from needless exposure to chronically 
dangerous chemicals.
Researchers  for the German government have documented a 
variety of reasons why substitution fails to be carried out.25 For 
example, they detail how cement manufacturers in Scandinavia solved the problem of skin contact with cement containing 
hexavalent chromium back in the 1980s, but the information was not diffused to other European manufacturers. 
An extensive overview of the incentives and barriers to 
substitution prepared for the European Union concluded that 
well-designed regulatory signals are needed because market 
forces alone often fail to provide a competitive advantage 
for the safer product. This is a particular problem where the 
markets are ‘too far away’ from consumer awareness to be 
influenced by the potential demands of consumers.
26
3.4  Legal precedents for  
the Substitution Principle
The acceptance of the Substitution Principle as a workable legal act was demonstrated in a European Court of Justice 
(ECJ) court case in 2000. Trichloroethylene (TRI), a cancer-
causing chemical, was banned in Sweden and companies 
had to find alternatives. Exemptions were only given when 
a suitable alternative was not available, when use did not 
lead to unacceptable exposure and on the condition that the 
company continued to seek alternatives. For the majority of 
exemptions, the firms had managed to substitute TRI in most 
of their production, but had not found a suitable alternative for a specific use in the production process. One firm 
appealed against the ban, but the European Court of Justice 
ruled against them. The ECJ ruling demonstrates acceptance 
of the Substitution Principle in EU courts.
27

11SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
3.5  Case Study: Alternatives to Dry cleaning with 
Perchloroethyelene
The solvent perchloroethylene (PERC) is used by approximately 
90% of all EU dry cleaners today.28
PERC has serious environmental and health impacts, it is toxic to the liver and the central nervous system, can accumulate in the 
body and is probably carcinogenic to humans.
29 The compound 
induces leukaemia in rats and increases risk for oesophageal cancer, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and cervical cancer. It has 
been shown to cause liver tumours in mice and kidney tumours in 
male rats.
30 PERC is very persistent in ground water and soil, as 
well as toxic to the aquatic environment. Perversely, everything perchloroethylene comes into contact with at the dry cleaners 
must be handled as ‘hazardous waste’ except the dry cleaned 
clothes we wear.  As a result, dry cleaning operations using 
PERC are regulated under the recent EU VOC Directive,
31 which 
requires that VOCs that are carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic to 
reproduction should be replaced as far as possible, by 2007. In 
addition many EU countries have set national regulations.  
Wet cleaning  
In the early 1990s a significant new alternative to dry cleaning with 
PERC was developed. The process, termed ‘wet cleaning’, involves 
gentle washing with water and specialist detergents, followed by 
careful drying and finishing. Electrolux first launched a wet cleaning system ‘Aquaclean’ in 1992,
32 as a complement to dry cleaning. In 
the UK, the ‘Aquatex’ system was developed by the company JLA,33 
and was launched in 1994 as a complete alternative to PERC. 
Wet cleaning is a direct alternative to dry cleaning for 40 – 60% of 
items.34 However, the take-up of wet cleaning has been relatively 
small, despite its advantages over cleaning with PERC, including lower cost of machinery and nicer smelling clothes. In the UK, the 
take up of wet cleaning was not sufficient to sustain investment in 
the drying and finishing technology, and Aquatex is now no longer 
sold in its complete form. Elsewhere in Europe, especially in the 
Nordic countries, the Netherlands and Belgium, wet cleaning has 
had slightly more success, with some shops offering it as a complete 
alternative but PERC still dominates.
35 
Carbon Dioxide (CO2 ) and other alternatives
CO2 technology provides a complete alternative to PERC and 
can process some additional fibres such as leather and fur, which are problematic with perc-cleaning. Capital investment 
is relatively high,
36 but the process is very efficient, with a 
greater throughput than cleaning with PERC, lower costs per 
kg,37 and lower maintenance costs. This means that over the 
course of machine lifetime CO2 is cheaper than PERC. CO2 
cleaning technology has been available commercially since 2003; in the US and Canada there are over 90 installations, 
but in Europe it is still relatively new, with 5 installations in the 
Netherlands and 3 in Sweden.
38 
Other alternatives exist though these are associated with risks such 
as flammability and potential toxicity. Barriers to take-up of alternative cleaning technologies 
It is likely that greater uptake of alternative technologies to 
dry-cleaning with PERC has been hindered by a combination 
of factors including:
Improving efficiency of PERC dry cleaning machinery Equipment manufacturers are able to offer 
advanced machinery complying with the stricter emission 
control standards, to the extent that the consumption 
of PERC has reduced by more than 50% since 1980, and 
in some countries 90%
39 - misguided efforts that could 
have been better directed towards removing this toxic 
substance totally.  
Economies of Scale Due to the lack of ’push or pull’ 
pressures (regulatory or governmental aid) take up has been 
low, this results in no reduction in capital costs that would 
inevitably occur if take up increased.
Resistance to change  There is reluctance to change to an 
unknown technology, has different technological properties 
and depends on skilled operators.  
Lack of a wet cleaning label for garments  To date, 
there has been no care label for wet cleaning. In 2002, the International Committee of Textile Care (CINET) proposed 
such a new label (a bold 
W in a circle), which will be voted 
on in 2005.
The fact that regulations required users of PERC to meet 
emission limits, rather than substitute PERC by investing in 
alternative technology, meant that few dry cleaners were 
bold enough to convert to new methods. A variety of safer 
substitutes have existed for over a decade that the Canadian 
and US governments have independently monitored. Both 
studies confirmed the economic and environmental benefits and technical feasibility of these alternatives. 
A recent EU-funded study examined the operation of two 
full-scale liquid carbon dioxide (LCO
2) pilot units in Denmark 
and the Netherlands, based on 38 different textile materials and nine different garment types. The study identified several 
advantages of LCO
2 textile cleaning compared to perc dry 
cleaning:
• Less dimensional change of sensitive fabrics;
• Less colour loss of the fabrics;
•  Less direct bleeding of colour from one fabric to another;
• Less loss of glitter, glued on a basic fabric;
• Less loss of oily/fatty finishes;
•  Less damage to coatings or laminates that swell with perc;
•  Less loss of textile fibres during the cleaning cycle leading to a longer lifetime of the garments.
40
However, the majority of dry cleaners continue to use perchloroethylene because there is little awareness and no 
legislative imperative to choose safer substitutes.
41 With 
both wet cleaning and CO2 now available in Europe and 
commercially competitive, there can be no justification for the continued use of PERC to ‘clean’ clothes. 11SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry

12
Substitution is already a goal for some progressive 
companies and case studies have been extensively 
documented. (See Annex I)  Reasons why some companies 
are searching for safer substitutes include: 
• regulatory drivers (such as the European Directives on the Restriction of Hazardous Substances in electronic 
equipment and End-of-Life Vehicles); 
• increased public awareness; 
• demands from downstream users or clients; 
•  worker protection;
• liability issues, and
• competitive advantage and company ethics. 
In addition to legislation mandating substitution, other 
activities and instruments will be required to ensure proper 
implementation of the law. These include: 
• mandatory planning for substitution; 
• technical and financial support to identify  
safer chemicals, and 
• use of taxes
• regulatory drivers such as time-limited 
authorisations, in order to encourage timely action.
4.1 Mandatory planning for substitution 
Any company using a chemical that requires authorisation 
should be required to provide a Substitution Plan, namely an 
assessment of available substitutes. This should include a 
full description of the alternatives available, a comparative 
assessment of their intrinsic hazards and an assessment of 
technical feasibility. This substitution assessment would 
form the basis of a justification of why an intrinsically 
less hazardous alternative cannot be used to replace the 
substance of high concern. The Substitution Assessment 
Plan should be transparent as to the methods and data used in seeking and assessing alternatives and should be open for 
independent scrutiny.  
If the company demonstrates that no suitable alternative 
is available, and can satisfy the other requirements for an 
authorisation to be granted (a social need, a positive cost 
benefit analysis and minimisation of exposure and risks) a Substitution Plan should be required, so that chemical, 
process or function substitution can take place upon expiry 
of the authorisation period. In other words, any authorisation 
granted must be time-limited and conditional on companies 
putting in place an effective Substitution Development Plan.  Costs of alternatives may initially be higher than continued 
use of a chemical of very high concern, but increased demand 
for the alternative will drive costs down, particularly as competition increases among producers to supply the new 
market demand. Chemical producers will in turn find an 
expanded market for Green Chemistry products. 
Making companies prepare plans which focus on safer 
chemical use has proved particularly successful in the USA. 
The benefits of mandatory pollution prevention planning have 
been demonstrated in the state of Massachusetts. Here, over 
550 companies had to assess toxic use reduction options with technical help supplied by university and government experts. 
Toxic use reduction strategies included material substitution 
and product reformulation. Within ten years, industry has 
reduced the use of toxic chemicals by 40%, by-product waste 
by 58% and toxic emissions by 80%. A cost benefit analysis 
reveals that the same companies saved a total of Saved a 
total of USD 14 million (Euro 10.47 million) over this period
 
through the adoption of more efficient and safer processes. The programme is ongoing and has been expanded to 
community outreach and assessment of substitutes for some 
hazardous material flows and products within the state.
42 
4.2 Economic Instruments
To further stimulate the drive to safer substitutes, a fee 
could be levied on users of all authorised chemicals. This fee 
could be used to centralise and disseminate information on 
alternatives, and fund research.  At the same time, any direct 
or indirect subsidies and tax exemptions to the chemical 
industry should be withdrawn.
In some EU countries, green taxes are already being used 
to help achieve environmental goals. In 1996, Denmark 
abolished some of the taxes on personal income, while at the same time introducing new green taxes on environmental 
‘bads’, including pesticides and chlorinated solvents. This 
type of ecological tax reform could be used to tax producers 
of chemicals requiring authorisation, and use the revenues to 
subsidise the development of safer chemicals.
4.3.  Technical Support to  
find safer alternatives
Expertise to help companies already exists in many countries. Companies who are adopting safer alternatives 
often contract outside help. Chemical producers have 
their own in-house research teams. Other institutes work 4.  WHAT IF THERE IS NO  
SUBSTITUTE AVAILABLE?

13SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
with SMEs such as the European Cleaner Production 
networks and some Member States have well-established 
programmes that focus on sustainable product design and 
safer chemical use. 
Some Member States give prominence to substitution in 
government policy. For example, the Danish environmental 
strategy prioritises action on their dangerous substances 
list and encourages manufacturers and importers to find 
substitutes and to develop alternative products. The Danish EPA’s ‘Cleaner Products Support Programme’ 
grants subsidies to a number of projects that promote 
substitution. It supports the development, testing and 
assessment of alternatives to brominated flame retardants, 
as well as the dissemination of knowledge to manufacturers 
about the feasibility of implementing alternatives.
43 Such 
information helps small and medium size enterprises who cannot afford the same level of research into hazards and 
technical feasibility as large corporate users.
44
The Swedish government’s ’Seven Steps to Substitution’ 
are based on comparative assessment and the feasibility 
and availability of substitutes.  The government gives 
help to industry through its PRIO interactive database 
that contains both substances that are regulated and 
those that are not covered by any legislation. PRIO 
provides data on the intrinsic health properties and 
environmental properties of substances.  Through 
an interactive website, it allows companies to assess 
their chemical use, examine the opportunity for risk reduction through substitution and anticipate future 
legislation.
45 A variety of other software tools in other 
countries exist to help industry assess alternatives.46
The UK, Germany, Denmark and Sweden have 
disseminated information on safer substitutes 
for specific industrial sectors as well as guidance 
documents for industry. The UK Government agrees 
with the Royal Commission’s assessment of the 
importance of substitution and has decided that they 
“will take a more strategic approach to discussions with 
industry by examining substances of concern in groups 
of say 10 to 12 per Forum meeting…. An approach 
which will, in turn, help to prepare UK industry for the 
requirements expected of it under REACH .”47
It is essential that ALL authorisations are time-
limited. This is necessary to move towards the goal 
of phasing out all chemicals of very high concern.
Playing Chemical 
Roulette with 
our health and 
environment13

14
Annex I to this report presents a large number of cases in which 
substitution has been carried out successfully, following a 
systematic approach to finding alternatives. The information 
was compiled from desk research and from conversations with 
industry representatives. Other case studies show how leading 
retailers are moving to phase out hazardous materials and how 
some chemical companies are researching and implementing 
Green Chemistry. The information available demonstrates that 
substitution is feasible and is already happening in the more 
progressive sectors of industry. 
For example:Apple does not use brominated flame retardants in the enclosure 
plastics of its products and is actively seeking alternatives to 
brominated flame retardants in circuit boards. 
Some manufacturers use internal metal ‘shields’ to protect 
computer housings from internal sparks and heat, and can 
therefore use non-flame retarded plastics.
Electrolux is the world’s largest producer of powered 
appliances for kitchen, cleaning and outdoors. They have created 
comprehensive Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs) 
for many of their product lines. Information within the product 
profiles details chemicals that have been banned as well as the percentage and types of materials and how they have improved 
material choices. For example, plastic components do not contain 
cadmium, lead, mercury or their compounds or chlorinated or 
brominated flame retardants; metal components are not coated 
with cadmium, chromium, or nickel; and metal paints do not 
contain pigments and additives based on heavy metals. Many 
Electrolux products are also PVC-free.
Until recently, halogen-free products were only available in 
Europe, but Sony has now adopted global design specifications 
to ensure that all their projects meet the same standards. Sony aims to have all product lines free of brominated flame 
retardants by the end of 2005 if substitutes are found to be 
safer. They also aim to phase out all uses of polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC) by 2005 as well as lead solder, and specified heavy 
metals. For example, a Walkman model has PVC-free cables and 
no brominated flame retardants or lead solder in the printed 
circuit board.
5.1  Greenpeace efforts to win corporate 
commitments to chemical substitution
Some of these company decisions to substitute hazardous substances were prompted by Greenpeace letters and meetings with companies. In 2003, Greenpeace started writing to 
companies asking them to commit to implement chemical 
substitution based on the precautionary principle, and as a 
concrete measure to commit to substituting a list of Chemicals 
for Priority Action, first identified by OSPAR in 1998, with some 
additions by Greenpeace.
OSPAR LIST +
OSPAR List of Chemicals for Priority Action (1998)
Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs)
Polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs)
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
Polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)
Pentachlorophenol (PCP)
Short chained chlorinated paraffins (SCCP)
Hexachlorocyclohexane isomers (HCH)
Mercury and organic mercury compounds
CadmiumLead and organic lead compounds
Organic tin compounds
Nonylphenol/ethoxylates (NP/NPEs) and related substances
Musk xylene
Brominated flame retardants
Certain Phthalates – Dibutylphthalate and Diethylhexylphthalate
In addition, Greenpeace includes ALL synthetic musks, 
phthalates and alkylphenols on the banned substances list and 
has added PVC because some of these substances are mainly 
used as additives for PVC or created during its production, and 
because PVC hampers recycling of products.
Companies and their brand name products are ranked red, 
amber and green according to their commitment to substitute 
OSPAR+ chemicals. The rankings are updated on a database, known as the Chemi cal Home at: http://www.greenpeace.org.
uk/Products/Toxics
/
Since the launch of the international database in May 2004, several companies have committed to substituting OSPAR+ 
chemicals and their products have been graded amber. The 
first was Samsung . In June 2004, Samsung committed to 
phasing out the specified chemicals, and is currently working on a phase out programme which sets dates for a ban on PVC, 
organotins and brominated flame retardants. 
Gregor Margetson, Head of European Environmental Affairs 
for Samsung Electronics Europe said: “ Samsung Electronics 5.  SUBSTITUTION IN PRACTICE  
– THE INDUSTRY EXPERIENCE  

15SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
has always taken environmental issues seriously and our 
work with Greenpeace shows we welcome constructive 
input on such subjects. Their initial criticism motivated us 
to re-evaluate our goals and consider what is truly possible. 
We choose to take the difficult option because we have 
ambitions to become a more sustainable company, and we 
realise that this prize comes at a price ”.48
In November 2004, following discussions with Greenpeace, 
brand name products made by Unilever, Nokia, Puma, Adidas, 
and Chicco were graded on the database.49 
Puma , a sport-lifestyle brand, committed to eliminating 
the OSPAR+ chemicals from both its sports shoes and perfumes with immediate effect, across their whole 
product range.  
Dr Reiner Hengstmann, Global Head Environmental & Social 
Affairs at Puma, said: “ The intentional use of hazardous 
chemicals is forbidden and when traces of hazardous 
substances are found in the product (due to contamination), 
Puma looks into the source and eliminates the cause. From 
Puma’s point of view, it is well worth the effort to be proactive 
with our standards whenever the health of our consumers and 
manufacturing partners is at stake .”
Adidas , a sporting goods company, has committed to 
phasing out OSPAR+ substances from its sports shoes, 
so is ranked amber on the database. However, Adidas 
has yet to adopt a phase-out policy for its perfume and 
body care products so the company grading remains red 
(February 2005).
In October 2004, Unilever confirmed that its new personal 
care products, such as the Organics and Timotei shampoo 
lines, and household products in Europe do not contain OSPAR+ chemicals. These include: shampoo, body lotion, 
cleansers, cleaning products and detergents.
 Almost all 
phthalates will be banned from these products, except for 
one phthalate DEP, which will take a bit longer to phase out. 
Unilever has not yet eliminated phthalates and musks in 
their perfumes.
Nokia, the world’s largest manufacturer of mobile phones, 
has committed to phasing out brominated flame retardants 
(BFRs) and PVC plastic. Chicco , a manufacturer of toys 
and baby products, will eliminate the use of PVC within 
three years; small amounts of this plastic are still used in 
components, accessories and packaging. 5.2   Downstream users promote  
mandatory substitution 
Companies with experience in working systematically with 
substitution are in many cases actively promoting the inclusion 
of the principle in legislation. This is, for instance, seen in 
comments from companies to the European Commission during 
the REACH consultation in July 2003. Notably, companies with 
lengthy experience from national requirements embracing the 
substitution principle praise the legislative instrument, and 
promote its use in REACH.
Skanska , one of the world’s largest construction companies 
with 75 000 employees and activities world-wide, are stating 
that operating for many years under substitution regulation 
in Sweden has lead them to “...continuously seek less harmful 
alternatives. This is something that our clients expect from us as a producer of buildings or infrastructure. As we are not 
Toxic recycling 
of printed circuit 
boards in China

16
experts on the components in our products, we have to go back 
to our suppliers with the requests that our clients put on us. As 
manufacturers of building components they will have to go back 
to their suppliers etc. This is the way we want the market to 
work in order to reduce the environmental impact .” 
Skanska are disappointed with the lack of a strong substitution 
rule in REACH: “The present proposal is much more static, 
focusing only on evaluation and registration. Without the strong support from a Substitution Principle it will be difficult for an 
individual company that is a downstream user to be proactive in 
substituting substances.’
’ 50
Tetra Pak , the world’s largest producer of food packaging, 
takes a similar stand:  “These two principles [precaution and 
substitution] are important principles in the Swedish national 
chemical policy and has proven to be a good basis for chemical 
control. Tetra Pak is therefore supportive to building the REACH 
system on these two fundamental principles. Precaution and 
substitution need to be introduced early in the text as guiding 
principles for the whole policy.’ ’ 51
In fact, the collective construction industry in Sweden strongly 
advocates an EU-wide substitution regulation. The Construction 
Federation that represents the interests of the construction 
industry in Sweden, state in their response to the REACH 
consultation that: “ Particularly hazardous substances must be 
blacklisted and, accordingly, banned. Only substances for which there is no safer alternative may be exempted and this only if 
there are strong social or economic reasons for doing so. If an 
exemption is granted, producers/users must take precautions 
in order to minimise the risks….Products containing particularly hazardous substances should not be authorised just because the 
producer/importer can show ‘adequate control’. Substitutions 
should always be considered.’’
The Federation calls for the following text on the Substitution 
Principle to be incorporated in the legal text: “Particularly 
hazardous substances must be blacklisted and banned. 
Exemptions may be granted only when it is clear, after a 
thorough investigation, that there is no safer alternative and if 
the social and economic advantages are greater than the risks 
involved with using the substance.” 
52
5.3   Recyclers support  
mandatory substitution
Industry sectors further down the product chain 
express their concern about a weak or non-existing Substitution Principle in REACH. The Recycling 
Industry Association in Sweden, for instance, 
considers both precaution and substitution practically 
absent in the legislative proposal. They insist that: 
“In order for EU to maintain a high level of chemical 
control, it ought to be explicitly stated in introducing 
articles of the legislative text, that the Precautionary Principle and the Substitution Principle constitute 
the fundamental principles of the entire legislation. 
The principles also ought to be incorporated into the 
Duty of Care chapter, to make clear that all parties 
will follow the principles, and be responsible for having 
sufficient knowledge to uphold the duties set up by 
REACH.
” 53
5.4   Retailers support  
mandatory substitution
H&M , one of Europe’s largest retail chains, is a strong 
proponent of safer substitutes. They state:
“H&M is applying the precautionary principle. In 
practice, this has meant working closely with our 
suppliers to phase out substances and materials that 
are, or could potentially be, harmful to our customers 
or the environment, from our products. In doing so, we 
have constantly, together with our suppliers, searched 
for less harmful solutions. We have encouraged our suppliers to be innovative and when we have found 
a better alternative somewhere among our suppliers 
we have helped to spread that knowledge to other 
suppliers and other markets.
In doing so, we have found that almost anything is 
possible as long as you set clear guidelines on what is not acceptable. We have not had to compromise 
on fashion or quality in a way that has harmed our 
business. Prices may have gone up temporarily but as 
soon as mass production has started, the prices have 
gone back to previous levels.
With the background of this experience, we find it 
important that EU legislation supports the idea of 
substitution when a better alternative is available. Such legislation would support us in our continued 
effort to eliminate hazardous substances from our 
products and to find better solutions that are less 
harmful to the environment.”
  
Ingrid Schullström H&M  

17SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
6. CONCLUSIONS
The proposed REACH legislation attempts to address the 
lack of information on existing chemicals and the need to 
prioritise substances of very high concern for regulation and 
substitution. However, under the current draft, even the most 
hazardous chemicals will be authorised for continued use if a 
manufacturer can demonstrate that the risk to human health 
and/or the environment is ‘adequately controlled’. If adequate 
control cannot be demonstrated, an authorisation may still 
be granted if socio-economic benefits outweigh the risk to 
human health and/or the environment arising from the use of the substance. This decision shall be taken after consideration 
of: (1) the risk posed by the uses of the substance; (2) the 
socio-economics benefits as demonstrated by the applicant or 
other interested parties;
 and (3) any available information on 
alternative substances or technologies.
These loopholes in the REACH proposal will effectively mean 
that even the most hazardous substances could be granted 
authorisations for continued production, even when safer 
alternatives are available. ‘Adequate control’ does not prevent 
releases into the environment and the intrinsic properties of 
chemicals of very high concern mean these releases will lead to 
ongoing exposure and continued build up of these chemicals in the environment and in human beings. 
If REACH allows the continued production of chemicals of very 
high concern under a provision for ‘adequate control’, even when 
intrinsically less hazardous substitutes are available, it will not 
provide the high level of protection for human health and the 
environment required under the EU Treaty. 
The Substitution Principle should be the key principle of the 
authorisation process. Specifically, it must be mandated that the availability of a safer alternative is in itself sufficient 
reason to refuse an authorisation. This is the only way to ensure 
REACH is a driver of safer chemical production and innovation; 
not an entrenchment of hazardous chemical use that permits the 
continued, unnecessary exposure of people to hazardous chemicals for the sake of short term profits.
Some sectors of industry are already developing practical 
programmes on substitution. At the same time, expertise exists 
within the European Union to help small and medium companies 
implement safer products and processes. Some governments, such 
as in Sweden and Denmark, already provide technical and other 
support to companies to help them identify safer substitutes to 
harmful chemicals.
54 
A requirement to provide a Substitution Plan with all applications for an authorisation will prevent unnecessary requests for 
authorisation and focus attention on safer chemicals. If 
substitution is not currently feasible for a particular use, the use 
of an authorised chemical would be allowed under a strict risk 
management regime, providing social need could be demonstrated 
and a positive cost/benefit analysis provided. The authorisation 
would be time-limited to allow the development of safer substitutes, and manufacturers and/or users would be required to 
produce a substitution development plan to enable substitution to 
take place before the authorisation expires. 
Such planning for substances of very high concern would 
vastly improve the information flow and development of safer 
substitutes. It would also move Europe to become a more competitive, innovative and sustainable producer of chemicals, 
goods and services. More importantly, it would begin to reverse the 
body burdens of hazardous chemicals that we all now carry.

18
Baby sucking a non-PVC teething ring

19SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
ANNEX  I:
CASE STUDIES OF  
SUCCESSFUL SUBSTITUTION  
The following case studies focus on chemicals likely to be 
defined as ‘substances of very high concern’ i.e. that would 
require authorisation under the REACH system. 
The information was compiled from paper and on-line 
research and from direct phone conversations and meetings 
with industry representatives. The more comprehensive 
overview of case studies of company substitutions 
for brominated flame retardants demonstrates both 
the complexity and feasibility of implementing safer alternatives. Other case studies show how leading retailers 
are moving to phase-out hazardous materials and how some 
chemical industries are researching and implementing Green 
Chemistry alternatives.
1.  SUBSTITUTING BROMINATED  
FLAME RETARDANTS (BFRs) 
BFRs are used in a wide range of consumer products: 
electronic components, textiles, foam in upholstery, carpets 
and building materials – all uses where the risk of fire 
necessitates caution. The increase in the use of plastics and 
flammable synthetic materials has contributed to the rise in 
the use of flame retardants. 
As evidence grew by the late 1980s of the dangers of 
brominated flame retardants, particularly PBBs and PBDEs, 
Germany, Denmark, the Netherlands and Sweden began restricting and banning their use. In a declaration of intent 
in 1989, the chemicals industry and plastic manufacturers 
in Germany declared that they would neither produce nor 
use PBDEs.
55 
1.1  The electronics industry  
found alternatives to BFRs
The electronics industry moved quickly to find alternatives 
ranging from material substitution (replacement of halogenated 
flame retardants with non-halogens) to function substitution 
(replacement of plastic with metal housings). Much of the 
stimulus for better design and less hazardous materials has 
come from the WEEE and RoHS Directives and their emphasis 
on recycling and chemical bans respectively. 80% of a typical 
product’s environmental impact is determined by its design.56
As concern around bromine compounds grew, industry moved away from those under the greatest legislative 
pressure (PBDEs and PBBs) towards other bromine 
compounds such as TBBP-A and HBCD. Meanwhile, understanding of the toxicity and persistence of TBBP-A and HBCD has increased the pressure to address brominated 
flame retardants as a class and, in parallel, the development 
and supply of non-halogenated chemicals has increased.
Apple does not use brominated flame retardants in the enclosure 
plastics for its products.
57
In response to the German Dioxin Ordinance of 1994, Sony  
Europe started investigating safer substitutes for halogen-
based flame retardants. Sony has developed halogen free circuit 
boards used in European television sets, VCRs and DVD players. 
Printed circuit boards use resin that is an inherently flammable 
material. Sony’s engineers adopted a resin structure containing 
nitrogen to increase heat resistance and modified the content 
and dispensability of the phosphate compounds and fillers. Since 
the circuit boards must be completely halogen free, Sony also 
substituted phthalocyanine green, which contains chlorine, with phthalocyanine blue as the photoresist pigment that covers the 
board’s surface. By substituting all chlorine- and bromine-based 
chemicals with safer alternatives, there is no longer a risk of 
dioxin formation throughout the product’s life cycle. 
In 2001, Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd. developed a ‘Green 
semiconductor’ that uses no halogen compound or toxic 
substances such as lead, chlorine and bromine. The company 
was the first to develop a package and module that contains neither lead nor halogens. The alternative increased quality
, 
and has saved 960 million won (684,000 euros) since its 
inception. Samsung has marketed its efforts in substitution 
to enhance its corporate image as an environmentally 
friendly company that responds rapidly to international 
environmental regulations. However, precise information on 
alternatives is seen as confidential.58
National/Panasonic (Matsushita) joined forces with other 
major manufacturers to develop electric wires and plastics that 
do not contain halogen compounds. In September 1999, they 
began marketing the world’s first wide-screen television free of 
halogen compounds that had been eliminated from low voltage 
internal wires, from the cabinet, from the back cover and from 
a number of printed circuit boards. At present, this technology 
is being successively applied to a wide range of other products, 
such as PCs and monitors. The company does not state on its 
website what alternatives they are using.59
TBBA, a brominated flame retardant, is used in the epoxy resin laminate in printed circuit boards in most manufacturers’ 
products. In 1997, a phosphorus-based alternative to TBBA 
was developed by the German engineering giant, Siemens,
 

20
with support from the German Research and Technology 
Ministry. The laminate is manufactured under licence by 
Siemens-Nixdorf, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Siemens, 
and by the German chemical group Hoechst. Furthermore, 
the production waste, which can amount to 30% of the final product’s weight, can be recovered more easily because of 
the absence of halogens. All of the housings and keyboards 
manufactured by Siemens-Nixdorf are BFR-free.
60
The electronics giant, NEC produces mobile phones, office 
equipment and personal computers. Its environmental policy includes a target to stop using halogenated flame retardants 
by 2011. In 1999, the company went one step further 
and launched a polycarbonate containing a silicone flame 
retardant which it claims to be ‘far superior to conventional 
flame-retarding plastics in environmental safety’. Sold under 
the brand name NuCycle, the new material is used to make 
NEC’s liquid crystal display (LCD) monitors and battery packs 
for portable computers and it can be recycled up to five times for the same purpose.
61
In 2000, NEC developed an epoxy resin with what it 
describes as a fire-retardant structure that avoids the need 
for either TBBA or phosphorus-based flame retardants in 
circuit boards. The new resin contains a metal hydroxide 
retardant. The company claims the new board is ‘almost 
totally free of pollutants’, and is easy to process and thermally 
recycle. By also integrating flame retardant properties within 
the board, use of the metal hydroxide is minimised, while 
offering good electrical properties, higher heat resistance 
and improved processing characteristics.62
1.2  Retailers target BFRs for substitutionIKEA prohibits a range of hazardous materials in their product 
lines, including azo dyes in textiles and a product-wide ban on BFRs and PVC. IKEA chooses textiles and materials that by 
nature are difficult to set on fire and can often completely avoid 
the need for chemical flame protection in their products with 
innovations such as inter-liners made of non-woven inherently 
flame retardant materials. When the company has to meet more 
stringent fire standards for the UK and Californian market, they 
employ chemical substitutes for some product lines. To meet UK fire standards which are the most stringent in Europe, IKEA 
replaced brominated compounds with organic phosphorus and 
nitrogen compounds either applied by impregnation of the 
cover fabric or to a cotton inter-liner. 
Deca-BDE is used widely in polyurethane foam in the United 
States due to the lack of regulatory controls, and limited awareness of the dangers of BFRs within the upholstery industry. IKEA was able to meet the stringent Californian 
standards by switching three years ago to melamine 
combined with chlorinated paraffins. Melamine is not 
a bioaccumulative or persistent material. They are now 
researching alternatives to chlorinated paraffins, including 
the use of novel substances, such as expanded graphite. IKEA 
is conducting this research in isolation in the USA and points out that the cost of new substitution will be high unless other 
upholstery designers and retailers follow suit.
63 
Marks & Spencer continue to develop substitutes for 
deca-BDE in some product lines.
Suppliers to Laura Ashley have confirmed they do not use 
any BFRs in their product lines.H&M (Hennes & Mauritz) uses no flame retardants in 
any product line, using instead natural materials that are inherently flame resistant. In a few cases, the company 
has cancelled clothing line items that proved a potential 
flammable hazard and could not be materially replaced.
64
1.3  Leaders in the building  
trade are phasing out BFRs
Skanska is one of the world’s largest construction 
companies and was ranked by the Financial Times as the 
world’s most respected company in the property and 
construction sector. Skanska Sweden was a leader in 
developing a national, industry-wide chemical database. 
The Skanska database now contains over 5,000 chemical 
products and stipulates if a substance is banned from 
use, should be avoided or represents an environmentally favourable choice.
65 This positive approach, based on the 
substitution principle, prevents the company being stifled 
by the prohibition of a substance, since existing alternatives 
are instantly presented.
Skanska is replacing BFRs through product redesign and 
material substitution. They initiated a project entitled 
‘Brominated Flame Retardants in the Building Industry’ 
to audit the use of BFRs in building materials, analyse 
substitutes, and draw up a plan of action. Their investigation found that fire standards for individual components 
should shift to the installation as a whole and be more 
function-oriented. They identified several examples where 
purchasers selected a flame retarded product marketed as 
‘fire proof’, even where there was no legal obligation to use 
flame retardants.
66

21SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
2.  ASSESSING NON BFR CHEMICAL  
ALTERNATIVES – ARE THEY SAFER?
The Bromine Industry in particular, points out that non-
brominated chemical flame retardants may be very hazardous 
and that the phase-out of BFRs may not be safe. The non-
brominated alternatives listed in the above case studies are likely 
to be safer if they exhibit less persistence and bioaccumulation 
in living systems, but some do possess significant toxicity. In the 
last few years, some agencies have therefore investigated the 
relative merits of alternatives to BFRs. 
The German Environmental Protection Agency (UBA) surveyed 
13 flame retardants for toxicity to humans and the environment 
and their suitability for closed-loop substance management. 
The aim was to assess the feasibility of substitution with less 
hazardous flame retardants. They selected red phosphorus, 
ammonium polyphosphate and aluminium trihydroxide as 
the least environmentally problematic alternatives.67 Red 
phosphorus can technically be used in a variety of polymers to meet even the toughest fire safety standards, although it may 
not work for all applications.
68 
UBA remarked that: “It is encouraging that there is a general 
trend to refrain from the use of halogenated flame retardants 
in products and to replace them with less problematic flame 
retardants or to redesign flame retardant systems, e.g. by 
creating greater distances to potential heat sources. ”
Their findings are summarised in Table 1. 
The Danish Environmental Protection Agency also investigated 
the profiles of 12 non-brominated flame retardants for 
environmental and health effects. From a survey of published 
literature, they found that the amount of data available is 
often very limited, particularly for important criteria such as 
degradation. Furthermore, the screening study showed that the majority of the alternatives also had undesirable environmental 
and health characteristics, but an assessment was needed to 
determine the amount and the manner in which they are released 
before a conclusion could be drawn.
70 
REACH will obviously help fill this much-needed gap in information. 
It can be surmised that the phosphorus alternatives to BFRs listed 
in the case studies above are generally safer because of the non-
organic, less bioaccumulative nature of the compounds. Some 
alternative compounds are in need of more research depending on 
the type of mix used. Specific information on the exact chemical 
composition was generally not available. However, it is vital to 
remember that, within the context of Substitution Assessment Planning, substitution is not envisaged as a simple process. It 
also takes account implicitly of the need to develop effective 
alternatives where they are not already available and to adapt 
rapidly to technical progress. 
2.1  Material and functional  
approaches to substituting BFRs
Using alternative chemicals is only one route to safer 
substitution. Material and functional alternatives also exist 
as well as preventative action to ascertain the real need for 
flame retardants.
An analysis of possible substitution choices for BFRs in the 
computer and auto industry was conducted in Germany and 
subsequent stakeholder sessions were held to further discuss the types and feasibility of alternatives.
71 
Substitution fell into the following basic types:
•  Using non-flammable materials : Merely substituting 
flammable with non-flammable materials, e.g. plastic 
with ceramic circuit boards, can render the use of flame 
retardants unnecessary. 
Summary evaluation of flame retardants
I Phase-out is  • Decabromodiphenyl ether  
recommended  • Tetrabromo bisphenol A, additive
II Reduction is expedient, • Tetrabromo bisphenol A, reactive  
substitution desirable • Tris(chlorpropyl)phosphate 
III Problematic properties;  • Hexabromocyclodo-decane  
reduction expedient • Sodium borate decahydrate 
(Borax)  • Antimony trioxide  
 • Antimony trioxide 
IV No recommendation • Bis(pentabromophenyl)ethane  
possible due to gaps in  • Resorcinol-bis-diphenyl-
phosphate knowledge • Pyrovatex CP new  
 • Melamine cyanurate 
V Use is unproblematic  • Red phosphorus  
• Ammonium polyphosphate  
• Alluminium triydroxideTable 1.  Flame retardants investigated by the 
German Environmental Protection 
Agency, Umweltbundesamt (2001)69

22
•  Preventing fire risk by improving design : Increasing the 
distances between possible flashpoints and flammable 
materials may be sufficient.
•  Substituting hazardous flame retardants with safer ones that have less impact on the environment and 
human health.
Some companies have gone down the non-chemical solution 
route: e.g. IKEA and Sony’s use of non-flammable materials. 
The issue of fire safety regulations is topical. The bromine industry maintains that fire safety is paramount and particularly 
defends the increased use of some of its chemicals in the USA 
by pointing out that less stringent fire standards in Europe are 
associated with more fire deaths.
72 An examination of fire death 
rates for countries in Europe and elsewhere reveals in fact that deaths by fire are no higher in Europe and in fact the USA has 
higher number of fire deaths per 100,000 persons than many 
European countries.
73 Europe, on the whole, uses a fire standard 
based on a smouldering cigarette test, whereas California uses criteria based on direct flame tests. 
The disparity of opinions about European and American 
approaches to fire safety and standards led to the creation of 
Green Flame, a programme of the International Consortium for 
Fire Safety, Health and the Environment. The Swedish Rescue Services Agency, the Swedish National Chemical Inspectorate, 
the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency and the US National Association of State Fire Marshals and corresponding 
US environmental agencies jointly run the system. The goal of 
Green Flame is to promote the design of products and systems 
that are fire resistant but environmentally safe.
74 
The Swedish National Association of State Fire Marshals, 
a member of Green Flame, has been at the forefront of 
advocating more function based alternatives to BFRs.75 
They apply their expertise in fire prevention in buildings to products. They emphasise the role of product design in 
avoiding flammability and advocate that such criteria should 
be part of eco-labels. Prevention is key, and fires need to be 
detected at an early stage. They advocate the use of fault 
detectors to shut off the electrical supply, as well as automatic 
extinguishing systems inside personal computers and 
televisions. In particular, they point out sprinkler systems are 
used for protection inside racing cars so their use in personal cars, buses and trains is also possible and would provide a 
significant increase in fire safety. 
They also outline a selection of materials that can favour fire 
safety in certain applications:• wood (to replace borders and edgings made of polymers)
• Metal
• glass, stone, and ceramics
• plaster (to replace fake stucco details)
• leather, wool, cotton, linen, hemp
• living trees or flowers (to replace synthetic variants)
• stone or glass wool as insulation
• paper (packing materials)
Flammable materials, air and a high temperature are needed to keep a fire burning. The State Fire Marshals advocate:
• lowering the energy that might be produced in the event of electrical failure
• lowering the power requirements for electrical appliances
• preventing heat production from friction in engines or movable parts in fans
• placing electrical heat sources at sufficient distances from flammable materials
• using internal fuses to cope with overloads or short circuits
• maintaining sufficient distances between warm parts and flammable materials
• cooling down parts which generate heat
• using an extinguishing system that reduces the temperature
Supply of air can be stopped by:
• enclosing the heat producing technical components of products in metal
• using materials that creates a layer of tar (or similar) on burning
• designing sandwich constructions with non-inflammable surfaces
• using an extinguishing system that separates the fuel  
from the air
The creation of a two-year research programme into fire 
prevention within the EU will accelerate the move to safer 
substitutes to BFRs in buildings. The project, backed by the 
Commission, began in 2003. The aim is to stage a series of 
workshops at which member states can share expertise and 
experience as a basis for agreeing best practice in fire prevention.76 
3.  SUBSTITUTING LEAD  
IN ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS
The RoHS Directive was a major catalyst for research and adoption 

23SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
of lead-free solutions in electronic equipment. Alternatives to 
lead in soldering range from tin (Sn), silver (Ag) and copper (Cu) 
to bismuth (Bi) and zinc (Zn). These heavy metals do not have the 
same toxicity and bioaccumulation potential of lead (Pb).77
NEC achieved the substitution of lead solders by Sn-Ag-Cu in their pagers by December 1998; by Sn-Zn-Bi in their notebook PCs 
by October 1999; and by Sn-Ag-Cu in their main computers and 
equipment by 2002.
Fujitsu replaced lead solder with Sn-Ag-Cu for their high-end 
servers by October 1999; the use of Sn-Bi-Ag for their main 
board; and all new products to use Sn-Ag-Cu and Sn-Bi-Ag by 
the end of 2002.
Sony replaced lead solders with Sn-Ag-Bi-Cu solders in their 
digital video cameras by March 2000; and all products, electronic 
components and maintenance services to be lead-free by end of 
March 2006.
Panasonic achieved the full adoption of Pb-free solder using Sn-
Cu in 2001.
Philips has developed new lighting for cars – the Philips 
HiPerVision Technology - that provides lighting for the automotive 
industry and uses 99% less lead.
78 
4.  RETAILERS ARE SUBSTITUTING  
A RANGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
• Phthalate esters are used as softeners in flexible PVC 
products, including floors, wallpapers, furnishings, clothing 
and toys, as well as ingredients in cosmetics and perfumes. 
• Organotin compounds are used as stabilisers in plastics, 
especially PVC, and the organotin TBT is used as a treatment 
against mould in some floor coverings.
• Alkylphenols and their derivatives (APEs) are primarily used 
as non-ionic surfactants in industrial detergents, though 
also in textile and leather finishing treatments, water based 
paints and as components of some personal care products.
• Artificial musks are used in fragrances and perfumes, air fresheners and laundry powders.
Marks and Spencer (M&S) has identified 14 groups of 
‘chemicals of concern’, that include phthalates, artificial musks and brominated flame retardants, which the company has 
targeted for removing from its products.
79 So far, M&S has 
eliminated 96% of their use of PVC in packaging.80 PVC has also 
been eliminated from childrenswear, thereby reducing their exposure to damaging phthalates and APEs, though it remains in handbags, belts and shoes.
81 In a clear case of chemical 
substitution, nitro-musks have been substituted by macrocyclic musks. However, very little information is available about 
macrocyclic musks, both on their scale of use and their potential 
hazards to human health or the environment. 
M&S targeted the substitution of alkyl tins in the dyeing and 
finishing of clothing, along with azo dyes and APEs some years 
ago. Their product specialists are working with the Green 
Chemistry department at York University to explore safer alternatives. They have not yet found substitutes for bisphenol 
A in some of their tin can linings. They observed that the 
market needs to move en masse with this issue and that major 
multinationals such as Coca Cola, Heinz and Walmart could demand safer substitutes if they chose to do so. 
Homecare Products got their suppliers to remove a polycyclic 
musk and diethyl phthalates from their products after talking 
to Greenpeace in August 200l. Their suppliers subsequently 
informed them that the two substances added no benefit to the 
cleaning properties of the product. 
As well as achieving a total phase out of PVC, H&M have 
restricted the use of APEs, organotins, azo dyes, bisphenol 
A, BFRs, phthalates and a wide range of heavy metals, as 
well as chlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons. They stipulated a clear set of criteria to all their suppliers, used testing to 
ensure compliance and relied on their suppliers and chemical 
formulators to provide alternatives.
Puma , a sport-lifestyle brand, committed to eliminating the 
OSPAR+ chemicals from both its sports shoes and perfumes 
with immediate effect, across their whole product range. Results of perfume testing commissioned by Greenpeace 
revealed that Puma’s Jamaica Man and Puma Woman had some 
of the lowest levels of nitromusks and polycyclic musks of all of 
the samples analysed.
82
In October 2004, Unilever confirmed that its new personal care 
products, such as the Organics and Timotei shampoo lines, and household products in Europe, will not contain OSPAR+ chemicals, 
including nitro musks, polycyclic musks and all phthalates with the 
exception of DEP. Unilever has not yet eliminated phthalates and 
musks from their perfumes.
Many cosmetics manufacturers have used the lower 
phthalates (diethyl phthalate, dimethyl and dibutyl 
phthalates) for many years as solvents and diluents in 

24
perfumes. On the whole, the cosmetic industry is able 
to innovate quickly because cosmetic products have a 
relatively short life cycle; this provides short to medium-
term opportunities to formulate out the problem ingredients 
in the next version of the product. Raw materials come at 
different costs and to reformulate-out chemicals of concern 
may result in a temporary increase in material cost. However, 
as more companies switch to alternatives, economies of 
scale are realised and the price will fall.83
5. PVC PHASE OUT IS WIDESPREAD  
PVC plastic is the largest end user of phthalates and a significant 
end user for organotins and brominated flame retardants with 
antimony. A phase out of PVC therefore directly reduces use 
of these hazardous constituents. Alternatives to PVC vary and 
must be assessed on their chemical profile. Greenpeace has 
charted the move to PVC alternatives over the last few years 
and has compiled an extensive database of PVC restrictions 
world-wide, which is available on line.84
Nike, Lego, Mattel, and Sony are some of the companies 
that have already phased-out PVC plastic. Ford, Peugeot, 
Daimler Benz, Opel, Volkswagen, BMW, Mercedes Benz, Mitsubishi, Nissan, Toyota are all adopting PVC restrictions. 
These initiatives are driven by the EU Directive on End-of-Life 
Vehicles which requires automakers to meet reuse/recovery 
target of 85% of scrap vehicles by weight by January 2006. 
6.  CHEMICAL SUPPLIERS ARE  
ADOPTING GREEN CHEMISTRY  
The chemical industry is often the strongest link in the supply 
chain since they provide the chemical formulations to their 
buyers and are in control of research into alternatives. The recent 
emergence of Green Chemistry85 and its 12 criteria has spurred 
innovation into safer chemicals. A few examples illustrate the 
progress taking place and suggest a wider potential for innovation 
should more market demand for safer chemicals occur.
Pfizer has implemented a substitution for a range of hazardous 
solvents (methylene chloride, tetrahydrofuran, toluene, and 
hexane) in its formulation of Zoloft – the most prescribed 
agent of its kind to treat depression. The new synthesis 
involves optimising the more benign solvent, ethanol, in its process and has achieved significant hazard waste reductions 
as part of its conversion. PPG Industries has developed a substitute for lead in a coating 
process used widely in the auto industry. The replacement is 
yttrium that, though much less studied than lead, is considered 
orders of magnitude lower in hazard. In addition it was discovered that as yttrium is used in the process it is converted to yttrium 
oxide that is appears to be non-toxic by ingestion, in stark contrast 
to lead. As PPG customers implement yttrium over the next several 
years, it is projected that the use of approximately one million 
pounds (some 454 tonnes) of lead will be avoided. 
The utility of carbon dioxide as a replacement for halogenated 
solvents has long been recognised.  CO
2 is an ideal solvent that is 
non-toxic, non-flammable, safe to work with and reusable. A new 
CO2 surfactant system discovered by a Professor DeSimone at the 
University of North Carolina is likely to expand the use of CO2 as an 
alternative to chlorinated solvents currently used in manufacturing and garment care industries. The use of CO
2 as a blowing agent in 
polystyrene has now been developed by Dow  Chemical Company , 
as a replacement for ozone depleting CFC-12.
Shaw Industries Inc, the world’s largest carpet manufacturer,86 
sought an environmentally friendly backing material for its carpets. 
Historically, carpet tile backings have been manufactured using 
bitumen, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), or polyurethane (PU). These 
have several inherently negative attributes due to their feedstocks 
or their inability to be recycled. PVC has, to-date, held the largest 
market share of carpet tile backing systems. PVC raises health 
and environmental concerns around vinyl chloride monomer, 
chlorine based products, plasticized PVC-containing phthalate 
esters, and toxic by-products of combustion of PVC, such as dioxin and hydrochloric acid. Due to the thermoset cross-linking 
of polyurethanes, they are extremely difficult to recycle and are 
typically down-cycled or landfilled at the end of their useful life. 
Shaw selected a combination of polyolefin resins as the base 
polymer of choice for its substitute,  EcoWorx
™. Due to the low 
toxicity of its feedstocks, superior adhesion properties, dimensional stability, and its ability to be recycled, EcoWorx ™ meets all of the 
design criteria necessary to satisfy the needs of the marketplace from a performance, health, and environmental standpoint. 
Research also indicated that the post-consumer carpet tile had 
a positive economic value at the end of its useful life. The cost of 
collection, transportation, elutriation, and return to manufactu ring 
processes is less than the cost of using virgin raw materials. This is a truly recyclable (or Cradle to Cradle) product and is a good example of how substitution through innovation can make economic as well 
as environmental sense.
87 

25SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
Common position with regard to the authorisation of substances of 
very high concern within REACH
The Confederation of British Industry, the Chemical Industries Association and 
Greenpeace share the common position that substances requiring an authorisation within 
REACH according to Title VII, Article 54 of the Commission’s proposal ( i.e. substances 
of very high concern) should be replaced with less hazardous alternatives wherever and whenever practicable. 
We agree that, for the authorisation procedure to be justified, effective and fair:-
• Substances of very high concern must be identified as such through the application of 
a robust, science-based and transparent process, co-ordinated at a European level and 
subject to European agreement. 
• The authorisation procedure must be flexible enough to provide for authorisations to 
be granted where justified by the absence of available alternatives and by the balance of 
socio-economic benefits over risks to human health and the environment.
• “Availability” of an alternative in this context implies the existence of an alternative - 
capable of providing an acceptable level of performance - acceptable to the regulator, 
user, (and consumer if relevant) at a cost that is not prohibitive and whose supply is 
adequately assured.
• The requirements for resources to be invested in the search for available alternatives should be proportional to the benefits expected from substituting the substance.
• Authorisations granted for uses of substances of very high concern should be time-limited appropriately such that the benefits of emerging alternatives can be realised as 
soon as possible.
We share the view that a requirement within the authorisation procedure to substitute 
substances of very high concern if an acceptable alternative that does not fall into the 
very high concern category is available has the potential to drive innovation to the 
benefit of business, human health and the environment.  However, to be effective, 
substitution will require commitment from the total supply chain, not just from 
producers.
We therefore urge the Minister to press for substitution to be incorporated into REACH 
in such a way that the authorisation procedure is effective, but flexible, in progressively 
phasing-out substances of very high concern.ANNEX II:  
COMMON POSITION OF CBI, CIA AND 
GREENPEACE ON SUBSTITUTION


26
In 1998 at a meeting held in Sintra, OSPAR delegates from each of 
the 15 States of the North East Atlantic Region and the European 
Union agreed to eliminate releases of hazardous substances into 
the marine environment by the year2020.  As a first step towards 
implementing this goal, OSPAR agreed on a ‘List of Chemicals 
for Priority Action’, a list of 15 chemicals that would be dealt 
with by:  The drawing up of programmes and measures by 2003 
for the control of discharges, emissions and losses of substances on [the Priority] list, and their substitution with less hazardous 
or non-hazardous substances where feasible;’
88 The OSPAR 
Commission invited industry to help achieve this objective through 
the incorporation of clean production and clean products and 
the development of less hazardous or preferably non-hazardous 
substances. 
This focus on substitution and the reference to industry 
developments has been mirrored elsewhere. This annex 
provides an overview of existing European Union law, mostly 
directives, which incorporate the principle of substitution. In the text, substitution is generally referred to as replacing a 
substance of concern with a safer alternative. 
All the highlighted directives and the European Court Ruling, as 
well as the two examples of internationally binding agreements 
that mandate substitution, have been analysed closely with 
respect to the scope of each text and the rationale for the requirement of substitution. For this purpose it seemed most 
practical to present the findings in a table format. The following 
directives have been analysed:
• Council Directive  89/391/EEC of 12 June 1989 on the 
introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the 
safety and health of workers at work
• Council Directive  90/394/EEC of 28 June 1990 on the 
protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to carcinogens at work
• Directive 98/8/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 16 February 1998 concerning the placing of biocidal 
products on the market
• Directive 2000/53/EC of the European Parliament and the 
EU Council of 18 September 2000 on end-of-life vehicles
• Directive 2002/95/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 2003 on the restriction of certain 
hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment
• ECJ Ruling of 11 July 2000 in Case C-473/98
In addition, two examples of stringent substitution legislation on the international level, which the EU is, 
party to have been analysed:• Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic 
Pollutants
• OSPAR strategy with regard to hazardous substances (Reference Nr.: 1998-16)
All together these legal texts target the substitution of the 
following toxic substances: 
• Carcinogens such as auramine (manufacture thereof), 
polycyclic hydrocarbons and isopropyl alcohol (90/394/
EEC, Annex 1)
• Biocides (98/8/EC)
• Lead, mercury, cadmium or hexavalent chromium 
(2000/53/EC)
• Lead, mercury, cadmium, hexavalent chromium, polybrominated biphenyls (PBB) and polybrominated 
diphenyl ethers (PBDE) ( 2002/95/EC)
• Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans 
(PCDD/PCDF), hexachlorbenzene (HCB) and 
polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB). All of these are POPs. 
(Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic 
Polluta nts)
• Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs), polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs), polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), 
Pentachlorophenol (PCP), mercury and organic mercury 
compounds, cadmium, lead and organic lead compounds, 
brominated flame retardants. 
In all of the texts below, the respective EU institutions that have initiated mandatory substitution, demonstrate 
a clear understanding of the long-term necessity to apply sustainable measures to control the effects of the 
aforementioned substances on human health and the 
environment. This is furthermore evident when considering 
the objectives laid down in the directives. The overriding 
tenor is the protection of human health (workers health in 
89/391/EEC, 90/394/EEC, 98/8/EC) and the protection 
of the environment through increasing the environmental performance of a particular product (2000/53/EC),
 and 
finally through the prevention of hazardous waste (98/8/
EC, 2002/95/EC & 2002/96/EC). 
As the substitution of dangerous/hazardous substances is 
one of the means to achieve the general goal of protecting 
human health, omitting the principle of substitution from 
the proposed chemicals legislation or the inclusion of a 
weak version of this Principle, will be interpreted as a lack of 
serious commitment by the Commission to this goal.ANNEX III:  
SUBSTITUTION IN  
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS

27SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
Directive Exact Wording Scope & Context
 
Council 
Directive  
89/391/EEC
of 12 June 
1989 on the 
introduction 
of measures to encourage 
improvements 
in the safety and health of 
workers at work
Section II, 
Article 6 
paragraph 2(f) contains the 
substitution 
provision Article 6
2(f) ‘ The employer shall implement 
the measures referred to in the first 
subparagraph of paragraph one on the 
basis of the following general principles of prevention: replacing dangerous by the non 
dangerous or the less dangerous ’.
(Note: the above referred first 
subparagraph to paragraph 1 of the 
Directive reads just like the Directive itself: ‘ The object of this Directive is 
to introduce measure to encourage 
improvements in the safety and health of 
workers at work ‘) Scope
Directive 89/391/EEC takes a general approach towards 
introducing safety and health standards for workers in various 
fields, including chemical industry.
(Article 1.2 ‘ To that end it contains general principles 
concerning the prevention of occupational risks, the protection of 
safety and health, the elimination of risk and accident factors …’). 
Article 16.3 of the Directive rules that this directive also 
applies, if the individual directives which are established in the 
context of this particular one, contain more stringent and more specific provisions. The commission thereby provides further opportunities for the development of more binding legislation.
ContextThe substitution clause appears in Section II of the Directive 
under ‘ Employer’s obligations ’ and under the Article 6 heading 
‘General obligations on employers ’
Further reference in text
Article 6(c) also speaks of ‘ combating the risk at source ’ EU LEGISLATION

28
Directive Exact Wording Scope & Context
 
Council 
Directive  
90/394/EEC of 
28 June 1990 on 
the protection of workers from 
the risks related 
to exposure to carcinogens at 
work
Section II, 
Article 4, 
paragraph 1
 
contains the 
substitution 
provision Article 4 (1)
1. ‘The employer shall reduce the use 
of a carcinogen at the place of work, 
in particular by replacing it , in so far as 
is technically possible, by a substance, 
preparation or process which, under its 
conditions of use, is not dangerous or is less 
dangerous to worker’s health or safety, as the case may be. Scope
This directive is an individual directive as required by 89/391/
EEC, Article 16(1) targeting, amongst others, the protection 
of workers from carcinogens in the workplace in order 
‘to 
guarantee the health and safety of workers ’.
The directive also contains reference to the precautionary 
principle, arguing that  ‘although current scientific knowledge 
is not such that a level can be established below which risks to 
health cease to exits, a reduction in exposure to carcinogens 
will nonetheless reduce those risks. ’
Context
The substitution regulation appears in Section II of the 
Directive which is called ‘ Employers Obligations ’ which 
encloses the respective Article 4 with the sub-heading 
‘Reduction and Replacement ’.
Further reference in text
Article 5(d) (‘ Prevention and Reduction of Exposure ’):
[…] evacuation of carcinogens at source  Directive Exact Wording Scope & Context

29SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
Directive Exact Wording Scope & Context
Directive 
98/8/EC of 
the European 
Parliament and Council
 of 16 
February 1998 
concerning 
the placing of biocidal 
products on the 
market
Article 10, 
paragraph 5
, 
subparagraph 
(i) refers to 
substitution 
Article 10 (5)(i)
‘An entry of an active substance in Annex 
1 and, where relevant, I A or I B may be 
refused or removed (…) if there is another 
substance on Annex I for the same product type which, in the light of scientific or tech
-
nical knowledge, presents significantly less 
risk to health or to the environment ’  
Scope
This directive is concerned with the authorisation and the 
placing on the market of biocidal products. It attempts to 
establish a list of active substances89 that may be used in 
biocidal products within the EC. In order to assess which 
substances should be included in the list, a system of 
registration, authorisation and periodic evaluation is legislated with this Directive. Once approved, active substances will 
be incorporated into Annex I of the directive. The system 
of registration is created for active substances, which pose a low risk for humans, animals and the environment and will be incorporated in Annex IA. In Annex I B so called basic 
substances such as are listed. For products of higher concern, 
usually not an active substance, an authorisation system is established, that includes the formulation of dossiers on 
these products which need to be submitted to the respective 
national authority. 
 
Annex I B
Context
Substitution in 98/8/EC is maintained indirectly though 
the application of comparative risk assessment, which is mandated in Article 10 of the directive. In order to include active substances in Annex I, IA or IB, several requirements 
have to be fulfilled. For example, active substances cannot be 
incorporated in the list if they are carcinogenic, mutagenic, toxic for reproduction, sensitising or bioaccumulative.
In addition, the replacement of an active substance can only 
occur within the same product type (as classified by the directive in Annex V). Twenty-three product types are listed in 
Annex V. These are divided into four main groups: 
•    Disinfectants and general biocidal products (i.e. human 
hygiene products, drinking water disinfectants) 
•   Preservatives (i.e. in-can preservatives, wood preservatives)
•   Pest control (i.e. insecticides, rodenticides used to control 
mice & rats)
•  Other biocidal products (i.e. antifouling products)
Authorisations that have been given have to be mutually 
recognised by all EU Member States.Directive Exact Wording Scope & Context

30
Directive Exact Wording Scope & Context
Directive 
2000/53/EC of 
the European 
Parliament and the EU Council of 18 September 
2000 on end-
of-life vehiclesArticle 4. 
2(b)(iii)Article 4(2)(a)
‘Member States shall ensure that materials 
and components of vehicles put on the market after 1 July 2003 do not contain
 
lead, mercury, cadmium or  hexavalent 
chromium other than in cases listed in 
Annex II under the conditions specified 
therein’ .
Article 4(2)(b)(iii)
‘delete materials and components of 
vehicles from Annex II if the use of these 
substances is avoidable ’ Scope
2000/53/EEC aims to prevent waste from vehicles through 
prioritising reuse, recycling and other forms of recovery of 
vehicles, end-of-life vehicles and their components and materials. This should lead to a general reduction of waste, 
and in the long-term, the gradual phase-out of hazardous 
substances that can be avoided/substituted. In addition, the directive is meant to improve ‘ the environmental performance 
of the economic operators involved in the life cycle of vehicles
’, 
and especially the performance of those operators, which 
are directly concerned, with the treatment of end-of-life 
vehicles (Art.1, Objective). The directive, moreover, means to stimulate renewed product design of vehicles taking into 
account the new demands posed by the reuse and recycling 
provisions in this legislation. Furthermore, reference is made to an environmental impact assessment of PVC, which is conducted by the Commission. The outcome of such an evaluation will be 
included in new Commission proposals regarding the use of PVC 
in vehicles.
Context
:
Although the application of the Substitution Principle is not 
specifically ruled in this directive, substitution follows from the 
principle of avoidance as required through paragraph 4(2) (a) and paragraph 4.2(b) (iii). In all cars produced and placed on the 
market by 1 July 2003, lead, mercury, cadmium or hexavalent 
chromium must be replaced by other substances, with the exemption of those substances listed in Annex II
Annex II lists all those materials and components that are exempt 
from 4(2) (a). For example: lead as an element (i.e. steel up to 0.35% lead by weight, aluminium, copper), lead compounds 
in components (i.e. batteries, petrol tank coatings, vibration 
dampers, stabilisers in protective paint), hexavalent chromium (used as coating on various key vehicle components) and 
mercury (as can be found in bulbs and instrument panel displays).
As ruled in 4(2) (b), the Commission shall regularly amend Annex II, i.e. review all substances that are currently exempt from 4(2) (a). If the use of any of the materials or compounds listed in 
Annex II can be avoided, those substances will be deleted from 
this Annex.The Commission amended Annex II on 27 June 2002 and the 
decisions of the amendment are in force since 1 January 2003. 
The amendment clarifies the need of such an Annex, which in some respect reverses the ‘good’ provisions of Article 4 (2) (a). 
According to the Commission certain materials and compounds 
continue being exempt from phase-out because they are still unavoidable. The body has, however, decided to delete lead that 
is used for coating inside petrol tanks from this Annex, since the 
use of this element is already avoidable.One thing that has been added to the amendment is clea r expiry 
dates for the exemption of about half of those materials and 
components listed in Annex II. A lot of those expiration DA dates 
apply to the exempt status for lead compounds in vehicles.Directive Exact Wording Scope & Context

31SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
Directive Exact Wording Scope & Context
ECJ Ruling of 
11 July 2000 
in Case C-
473/98
Paragraph 47  
of the Ruling 
contains the 
reference to the Substitution 
Principle.Paragraph 47
‘Those requirements90 are compatible with 
the ‘Substitution Principle ’ which emerges 
inter alia, from Council Directive 89/391/
EEC (12 June 1989) on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in 
the safety and health of workers at work 
[…] and Council Directive 90/394/EEC 
(28 June 1990) on the protection of workers from risks related to exposure 
to carcinogens at work 
[…] and which 
consists in the elimination or reduction of 
risks by means of replacing  one dangerous 
substance with another, less dangerous substance .’
Final ruling in C-473/98:
 
‘National legislation which lay down 
a general prohibition on the use of Trichloroethylene for industrial purposes 
and establishes a system of individual exemptions, granted subject to conditions, 
is justified under Article 36 of the EC Treaty 
(now, after amendment, Article 30 EC, on the grounds of protection of health of humans ’.Context
ECJ court case C-473/98 rules in favour of the Swedish Chemicals 
Inspectorate (Kemikalieinspektionen) (and thus Swedish chemical products legislation) over Toolex Alpha AB a Swedish company, which uses Trichloroethylene in industrial processes (the production of machine parts). This highly toxic substance is used to remove grease residues forged during the manufacturing of these machine parts. The Swedish Chemicals Inspectorate had initially rejected the 1997 application of Toolex to continue using this substance.
91 This decision 
was, however, overruled by the County Administrative Court in Stockholm. It argued that Swedish legislation with regard to this matter was inconsistent with EC law and Article 36 in particular. In return the Chemicals Inspectorate appealed the decision before the Swedish Administrative Court of Appeal in Stockholm, who referred the question of the interpretation of EC treaty Article 36 (and article 30) of the EC treaty to the ECJ.
92 The ECJ’s final ruling is that there is no inconsistency 
between Swedish national legislation, which prohibits the use of Trichloroethylene for industrial purposes, and the provisions of Article 36 (now after amendment Article 30) ‘ on the grounds of the protection 
of health of humans ’.
Paragraph 47 of the ruling discusses the exemption of the import of chemical products such as Trichloroethylene. According to Swedish law, such an exemption is only granted if ‘ no safer replacement of the 
product available’
 under the condition that the applicant (i.e. a company) 
continues to search for safer alternatives that are not harmful to the environment and public health. In support of Swedish legislation, the court refers at this point to the Substitution Principle as established in Council Directives 89/391/EEC and 90/394/EEC (both have been discussed above), which ask for the substitution of hazardous substances for general prevention purposes (89/391/EEC), and to guarantee the health and safety of workers in the workplace (90/394/EEC).
With this decision, the ECJ establishes the Substitution Principle as a 
principle of EU law. Clearly, the court’s decision is of high significance with regard to the strengthening of environmental legislation within the EU. The court, however, also advances a less recognised, yet strategic, environmental argument for incorporating the Substitution Principle in the existing EU Directives; namely the protection of human health. The objective of protecting human health, as the court confirms through its ruling, can only be achieved when protecting the environment is given priority
.Directive Exact Wording Scope & Context

32
Directive 
2002/95/EC 
of the European 
Parliament and of the Council 
of 27 January 
2003 on the restriction of certain 
hazardous 
substances in electrical 
and electronic 
equipment
Preamble 
6 contains 
reference to the 
Substitution 
PrinciplePreamble 6‘T aking into account technical and economic 
feasibility, the most effective way of 
ensuring the significant reduction of risks to health and the environment relating to 
those substances in electrical and electronic 
equipment by safe or safer material
s.’
Article 4‘Member states shall ensure that, from 1 July 2006, new electrical and electronic 
equipment put on the market does not 
contain lead, mercury, cadmium, hexavalent chromium, polybrominated byphenyls (PBB) or polybrominated dyphenyl ethers 
(PBDE).’Scope
This directive accompanies directive 2002/96/EC, also known 
as WEEE, which addresses the handling93 of wastes from 
electrical and electronic wastes. These wastes cover a wide 
range of electrical and electronic products from household 
appliances such as refrigerators, freezers and microwaves to personal computers, cell phones to electrical toys, medical 
devices and electrical tools.
94 As specified in Article 4 (1) of 
directive 2002/95/EC the following substances which are 
contained in all of the defined product groups have to be 
substituted from 1July 2006 on: • Lead
• Mercury
• Cadmium• Hexavalent chromium• Polybrominated biphenyls (PBB) or 
• Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDE). 
This list of substances has to be reviewed and extended by the parliament and the council as soon as further scientific 
evidence on other hazardous substances is available which 
recommends their substitution with safer alternatives. Materials or components of electrical and electronic substances can only 
be exempt from the substitution provision if their replacement 
is not scientifically or technically practicable or if there are no safer alternatives. Annex 1 of the directive specifies in detail which applications of lead, mercury, cadmium and hexavalent 
chromium fall under the above-mentioned exemption. However, 
these exemptions also need to be reviewed every four years (Preamble 11 and Article 5 (b) and (c))
Context
Through the mentioning in the preamble, the Parliament and 
the Council establish substitution as a guiding principle for the 
directive. Given that the substances that are covered by this directive are well researched and evaluated (Preamble 7), both 
entities aim at protecting human and animal health as well as 
the environmentally sound recovery and disposal of electrical and electronic waste with the application of the Substitution Principle (Article 1).Directive Exact Wording Scope & Context
Directive Exact Wording Scope & Context

33SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
INTERNATIONAL LAW (related)
As the EU has signed the texts below, it has thereby committed itself to the principles established in those 
conventions (such as the Substitution Principle) and their implementation in an EU context as well.
Convention Exact Wording Scope & Context
Stockholm 
Convention 
on Persistent 
Organic Pollutants
Adopted at the 
Conference of the Plenipoten-
tiaries, 22-23 
May 2001
Article 5(c) contains the 
substitution 
provision
 Article 5(c)
‘Promote the development and, where it deems appropriate, require the use of 
substitute or modified materials, products and processes to prevent the formation and release of the chemicals listed in 
Annex C, taking into consideration the 
general guidance on prevention and release reduction measures in Annex C and guidelines to be adopted by decision of the 
Conference of the Parties
’.Scop e:
This convention aims to eliminate and phase out of the 12 most hazardous POPs (amongst which the below mentioned Annex 
C chemicals) with the goal of protecting human health and the environment from the impacts of POPs
Cont ext
:
Article 5  (Measures to reduce or eliminate releases from 
unintentional production ’) of the convention generally aims 
at regulating the reduction of total releases derived from 
anthropogenic sources (combustion/burning of organic material and chlorine at the same time) of the so called 
Annex C chemicals, which are HCBs, PCBs and PCDD/PCDF 
as well as their continuous minimisation and (where feasible) ultimate elimination.
The Substitution Principle is closely tied to the general goal 
of elimination, which is manifested in Article 5. A direct consequence of the employment of the Substitution Principle 
is the application of best Available Technologies (BAT) and Best 
Environmental Practice (BEP) when dealing with unintentional sources as classified in Annex C. 
BAT as such also requires ‘ the use of less hazardous substances ’. 
Annex C, part V, A (b) again refers to the Substitution Principle 
demanding in para (d) the ‘ replacement of feed materials which 
are POPs or where there is a direct link between the materials 
and releases of POPs from the source ’ and consequently health 
effects and harm for humans and the environment.

34
OSPAR, 
Strategy 
with regard 
to Hazardous Substances 
(Reference Nr.: 
1998-16)Paragraph 2, Guiding 
Principles
Para graph 5.5 
Implementation 
Measures 
Paragraph 2, Guiding Principles
‘ In addition the principle of substitutio n, i.e. 
the substitution of hazardous substances 
by less hazardous substances or preferably 
non-hazardous substances where such alternatives are available, i s a means to 
reach this objectiv
e’
Paragraph 5.5, Implementation
‘Measures should be selected taking into 
account: b) the guiding principles […]. 
If in this process hazardous substances 
are to be substituted by other available 
substances, it has to be assured that less 
hazardous, or preferably non-hazardous, 
substances are to be selected’ . 
Scope:
This is an Implementation Strategy towards reaching the target 
of cessation of discharges, emissions and losses of hazardous substances by 2020. 
Context:
The OSPAR Contracting Parties have in the Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North–East 
Atlantic agreed to take all necessary steps to eliminate and 
prevent pollution AND to take the necessary measures to protect the maritime environment against the effects of human 
activities and to safeguard human health
The ambition of the OSPAR Commission, moreover, as 
manifested in the Objective of the Strategy aims at ‘continuously 
reducing discharges, emissions and losses of hazardous 
substances (as defined in Annex 1) with the ultimate aim of achieving concentrations in the marine environment near 
background values for naturally occurring substances and close 
to zero for man-made synthetic substances’
.
The Substitution Principle is one of the guiding principles of the OSPAR Strategy. In this function, the Substitution Principle continues to play an important role with regard to 
the implementation of the Strategy (Paragraph 5.5) where 
the application of the principle as a means of implementation requires the substitution of hazardous substances. Preferably non-hazardous substances should be selected over less-
hazardous when replacing a substance.Directive Exact Wording Scope & Context

35SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
ENDNOTES
1 Greenpeace 2003 ‘Chemical 
Contamination of the Child’
2 Greenpeace 2003 ‘Consuming 
Chemicals: Hazardous Chemicals in house 
dust as an indicator of chemical exposure 
in the home’
3 See http://europa.eu.int/comm/
enterprise/reach/
4 Allsopp, M., Santillo, D., Johnston, 
P. & Stringer, R. (1999) The Tip of 
the Iceberg?: State of Knowledge on 
Persistent Organic Pollutants in Europe and the Arctic. Publ. Greenpeace 
International, August 1999, ISBN: 90-
73361-53-2: 76 pp. 
5 Royal Commission on Environmental 
Pollution (2003): Chemicals in Products. 
Safeguarding the environment and human 
health. p165 
6 Royal Commission on Environmental 
Pollution (2003): Chemicals in Products. 
Safeguarding the environment and human 
health
7 REACH proposed legislation 
(COM/2003/644 final). Title VII, 
Article 54 a-f. Criteria for chemicals 
to be added to Annex XIII and thus require authorisation: category 1 or 2 
carcinogens, category 1 or 2 mutagens, 
category 1 or 2 reproductive toxins, substances which are persistent, 
bioaccumulative and toxic, very persistent 
and very bioaccumulative, endocrine disrupting or of equal concern. 
8 European Parliament and Council in 
their Proposal for a Directive on Waste 
Electrical and Electronic Equipment 
(COM/2000/0347 final), See http://
europa.eu.int/smartapi/cgi/sga_doc?sma
rtapi!celexplus!prod!CELEXnumdoc&lg=
en&numdoc=52000PC0347(0 1)
9 UBA (2001). Chemicals in the 
Environment which Interfere with the
Endocrine Systems of Humans and 
Wildlife– Pollution, Effects, Control Strategies 
10  Swedish Government (2002).  Swedish 
views on the Authorisation System 
and comments on Accelerated Risk Management.  November 2002
11 Ökopol and Fraunhofer Institut 
Systemtechnik und Innovationsforschung (2003)
12 Subchem (2004) at:
http://www.oekopol.de/en/Archiv/betrieblicher%20u%20komunaler%20US/
subchem/subchem%20PublicPaper%20eng.pdf
 
13 TURI (2003). P2 OASYS Analysis 
System at:http://www.turi.org/content/
content/view/full/1130/
14 KEMI (1994).  Swedish Experiences 
regarding the Principle of Substitution. 1994 08-31, M94/3135/6
15 MBDC (originally McDonough 
Braungart Design Chemistry) See: www.mbdc.com
16 Marks and Spencer press release 
“Marks & Spencer removes synthetic cleaning ingredients”, 16 February 2005
17 OECD (2003). Voluntary Approaches 
for Environmental Policy. Effectiveness, Efficiency and Usage in Policy Mixes.
18 Collins, T (2003). The importance 
of sustainability, ethics, toxicity and ecotoxicity in chemical education and 
research. Green Chemistry. August 2003.
19 SPRU (2002). A review of the impact 
of regulation on the chemical industry. A 
final report to the Royal Commission on 
Environmental Pollution. University of Sussex, Science and Technology Policy 
Unit. 
20 KEMI (2000). Non-toxic Environment. 
See: www.kemi.se
21 Aerojet Propulsion Division (1991) 
speaking at a conference on Alternatives to Incinerable Waste Streams, California
22 Richards, B (2002). Lead-free 
Soldering. National Physical Labs. See: www.npl.co.uk/npl/ei/news/epparticle.
htm
l 
23 GCCD (1998). Global Climate Change 
Digest. Volume 1, Number 1.  See http://
www.globalchange.org/gccd/gcc-
digest/1988/d88jul3.htm
24 SEEBA (2003). Producing Lead-Free 
Products Workshop. SEEBA/Centre for 
Sustainable Design, UK
25 Subchem (2004) at:
http://www.oekopol.de/en/Archiv/betrieblicher%20u%20komunaler%20US/
subchem/subchem%20PublicPaper%20eng.pdf
 
26 Lohse, J., et al.  Never Change a Running Process?  Substitution of Hazardous 
Chemicals in Products and Processes:  
Definition, Key Drivers and Barriers.  Greener Management International.  Issue 41, 2003
27 KemI (2000). Non-toxic Environment. 
See:www.kemi.se
28 Lohse, Joachim et.al.  Substitution 
of Hazardous Chemicals in Products 
and Processes, Report compiled for 
the Directorate General Environment, Nuclear Safety and Civil Protection 
of the Commission of the European 
Communities, Contract No. B3-4305/2000/293861/MAR/E1, 
Hamburg, March 2003, Okopol
29 IARC (1995) Tetrachloroethylene 
(Group 2A) IARC Summaries and evaluations  VOL: 63 (p.159) 
30 ATSDR (2000) Toxicological profile 
for trichloroethylene on CD-ROM.  Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease 
Registry. U.S. Public Health Service
31 Directive 1999/13/E C
32 Almstr öm, Sten H åkan, Electrolux, 
Telephone conversation with Madeleine 
Cobbing, on behalf of Greenpeace 
International, 11/2/05.
33 Brook, Malcolm, JLA, Telephone 
conversation with Madeleine Cobbing , 
on behalf of Greenpeace International, 
10/2/05
34 Almström, Sten Håkan, op.cit
35 Almstr öm, Sten H åkan, Electrolux, - 
wet cleaners may be unable to deal with a 
small percentage of the usual drycleaning 
load (@5%).
36 Almstr öm, Sten H åkan, Electrolux, 
Telephone conversation with Madeleine 
Cobbing, on behalf of Greenpeace 
International, 11/2/05.
37 den Otter, Walther, Institute of Textile 
Research, NL, Telephone conversation 
11/2/05.
38 Hangers Cleaning ™ Hanger Europe, 
www.hangerseurope.com
39 Lohse, Joachim et.al. op.cit.
40 Detective Layman’s Report: LCO2 
cleaning, DEmonstration Textile CO2 
Treatment Introduction Validation Effort 
– Detective , EU Life Project No: LIFE00 
ENV/NL/000797, 17 Feb 2005
41 De Rosa, D. (2001) Out of Fashion. 
Moving beyond toxic cleaners in the Fabric Care Industry. Greenpeace USA. See: 
http://www.greenpeaceusa.org/toxics/

36
42 TURI (2003). S ee: www.turi.or g. The 
Toxic Use Reduction Institute website 
lists the legislation, outline of the plan 
procedure and results of the ten year programme.   
43 Danish Environmental Protection 
Agency (2003). Cleaner products 
support programme. See: www.mst.dk/
homepage/
44 Danish Environmental Protection 
Agency (2000) Alternatives to 
brominated flame retardants. Available 
at: http://www.mst.dk/udgiv/Publications/2000/87-7944-218-8/
pdf/87-7944-219-6.pdf
45 The steps presented are based on 
the document ’sju steg till substitution’ (‘seven steps to substitution’) and 
the method presented in the Prevent document Kemiska h
älsorisker 
(Chemical health risks) See more details 
at http://prio.kemi.se/templates/
PRIOEngframes970.asp x
46 Lohse, J., et al.  Never Change a Running 
Process?  Substitution of Hazardous Chemicals in Products and Processes:  
Definition, Key Drivers and Barriers.  Greener Management International.  Issue 
41, 2003.
47 DEFRA.  Government Response to 
the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution Report on Chemicals in 
Products.  August 2004
48 For details of Samsung’s environment al 
commitments and chemical control 
programme, see: www.samsung-europe.
com/environment/redirectuk.ht m
Quote taken from Greenpeace press release: Samsung commits to phase out 
hazardous chemicals, 10 June 2004, Brussels
49 Greenpeace press release: Global 
brands commit to phase out hazardous 
chemicals in their products, 23 November 
2004, Brussels
50 SKANSKA, Sweden. Comments on the 
proposal for a new chemical policy in the 
European Union – REACH, 9 July 2003
51 Tetra Pak, Sweden. Comments on the 
proposal for a new chemical policy in the European Union – REACH, 9 July 2003
52 Construction Federation, Sweden. 
Position paper on REACH, 8 July 2003
53 Swedish Recycling Industries 
Association. Response to the European Commission’s consultation on a new EU chemical policy (REACH), 1 July 2003
54 See the PRIO tool provided by KEMI 
at: http://www.kemi.se/templates/PRIOEngframes____970.aspx
55 SEEBA workshop on Supply Chain 
Management & Meeting Electronics’ Customer Environental Requirements, 
30
th April 2003, Centre for Sustainable 
Design, Farnham, UK
56 Envirowise (2001) ENDS Report 
321, Envirowise revamp brings advice 
on cleaner product design, October 
2001. Envirowise is funded by the UK Department of Trade and Industry. See: 
www.envirowise.org
57 Apple (2005) Apple states its 
environmental policy with respect to materials at: http://www.apple.com/
environment/design/materials/selection.html
58 Kim J. Chief Researcher, Samsung 
Global Environment Research Center. 
Paper presented at European Roundtable 
on Cleaner Production, Cork, Ireland, 2002
59 Matsushita website (2003). Exa mples 
of products which do not contain 
halogens. See http://www.matsushita.
co.jp/environment/2000e/gproducts/
index3_1.htm l See also their lead-free 
information available at: http://www.
semicon.panasonic.co.jp/lead-free/e-
index.html
60 ENDS Report 270, July 1997. Chemical 
firms move to block shift to bromine-free 
PCs
61 ENDS Report 308, September 2000. 
NEC unveils circuit boards free of halogen or phosphorus compounds 
62 ENDS Report 308, September 2000. 
NEC unveils circuit boards free of halogen or phosphorus compounds
63 Personal communication with 
Magnus Bjork, IKEA, at Brominated Flame Retardants and Foam Furniture 
Conference and Roundtable: EPA 9. San Francisco, April 2003
64 Personal communication with HP, H&M, 
Boots and Sainsbury, May-June 2003
65 Skanska (2004) Press release from 
Johan Gerkle v , Environmental Manager, 
Skanska Sweden, Decem ber 16th 2004
66 Skans ka (2002). Brandforsk project 
706-021. See: www.skanska.s e
67 UBA (2003). Precautionary Risk 
Assessment and Risk Management of Chemicals. Part 1: New Strategies for the Ecological Risk Assessment and Risk Management of Substances.  See: http://www.umweltbundesamt.de/index-e.htm
68 Danish Environmental Protection 
Agency, Brominated Flame Retardants: 
Substance Flow Analysis and Assessment 
of Alternatives. Environmental Project # 494,1999
69  UBA (2001). Substituting 
Environmentally Relevant Flame 
Retardants: Assessment Fundamentals. 
ISSN 0722-186X, March 2001.  Cited in: Growing Threats: Toxic Flame Retardants 
& Children’s Health. Environment 
California Research and Policy Center, 2003. See UBA’s press release at: http://
www.umweltbundesamt.de/uba-info-
presse-e/presse-informationen-e/p5601-e.htm
The full report can be ordered 
on the Internet at http://www.umweltbundesamt.de, ‘Issues’ heading.
70 Danish Environmental Protection 
Agency (1999) Working Report No. 
17 Alternatives to brominated flame 
retardants
71 UBA (1996). Stofffl üsse ausgew ählter 
umweltrelevanter chemischer Stoffe: 
Produktlinien-Controlling’, UBA-Texte 
80/96
72 Discussion with representatives of 
Great Lakes Chemical at EPA 9 conference 
on Brominated Flame Retardants, San 
Francisco, April 2003
73 World Fire Statistics No 18, October 
2002. The Geneva Association
74 Swedish National Testing and Research 
Institute (SNTRI, 2002) See: http://www.
sp.se/fire/Eng/Research/Green_flame.
htm 
75 Swedish Rescue Services Agency. 
Alternative ways to Achieve Fire 
Safety. August 2002. See: www.srv.
se/funktioner/frameset/default.asp?om_id=73
76 European Fire Safety: Fire safety 
addressed by European Commission. Fire 
Magazine, January 2003. S ee: www.fire-
magazine.co m
77 Lymberidi, E. (2001). Towards Waste-
Free Electrical and Electronic Equipment. The examples are cited from: Tadatomo 
Suga, University of Tokyo, ‘Good practice on the substitution of heavy metals’ in 
the Workshop on Best Practices in the 

37SAFER CHEMICALS WITHIN REACH
Using the Substitution Principle to drive Green Chemistry
context of the WEEE Directive
78 Philips website. Chemicals list for 
products and processes. See: www.
semiconductors.philips.com/profile/env/
information/substances/index.html#subs.  See also www.philips.com/Assets/
Downloadablefile/sustainability-2153.pdf
79 The 14 groups of ˜chemicals of concern” 
are: Alkyltins, APEOs, Artificial Musks, Azo-dyes, Biocides, Bisphenol-A, Flame 
retardants, Heavy metals, Parabens, PCP, Pesticides, Phthalates, PVC and Solvents.
80 Marks and Spencer website. Position 
as of April 2004 http://www2.
marksandspencer.com/thecompany/ourcommitmenttosociety/environment/performance/index.shtm
l
81 Personal communication with M&S, 9 
February 2005  
82 Greenpeace (2005), ‘An investigation 
of chemicals in perfumes’, 10 February 
2005
83 Personal communication with Paul 
Wilkes, Head of Regulatory Affairs, The Body Shop International, May 2003
84 Greenpeace (2003). ‘PVC-Free 
Future: A Review of Restrictions and PVC free Policies Worldwide’. See: www.
greenpeace.org/international_en/multimedia/download/1/289615/0/
pvcfre0603.pdf
85 Presidential Green Chemistry 
Challenge. Award Recipients. US EPA 744-K-02-002. June 2002. See: www.epa.
gov/greenchemistry/past.html#2003
86  Shaw corporate web site: http://
www.shawfloors.com/aboutShaw/
Introductions.asp
87 EcoworxTM won Shaw the Presidential 
Green Chemi stry Challenge 2003 Designing Safer Chemicals Award see: 
http://www.epa.gov/greenchemistry/dsca03.html 
88 OSPAR, (1998). Hazardous chemicals 
which have been prioritised for urgent 
action to address discharges, emissions 
and losses by 2003.The OSPAR list of Substances for Priority 
Action
 
Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs)  
Polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs)  
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)  
Polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)  
Pentachlorophenol  
Short chain chlorinated paraffins  
Hexachlorocyclohexane isomers  
Mercury and organic mercury compounds  
Cadmium  
Lead and organic lead compounds  
Organic tin compounds  
Nonylphenol ethoxylates and related substances
 
Musk xylene  
Brominated flame retardants  
Certain phthalates – dibutylphthalate and diethylhexylphthalate
89 Active substance is defined in the 
directive as ‘substance or micro-organism, including a virus or a fungus 
having general or specific action on or against harmful organisms’ 
90 This refers to the requirements of 
Swedish legislation on the import of 
chemical products.
91 The application was rejected 
because Swedish legislation on chemical products enables Swedish 
authorities such as the Chemicals Inspectorate to prohibit the import 
and the export of chemical products that pose a threat to health and the 
environment. There are, however, 
individual exemptions allowed within 
this legislation, i.e. if there is no safer alternative available
92 Article 36 is now Article 30 in the 
Treaty establishing the European 
Community as amended by the Treaty 
of Amsterdam. This article allows for a prohibitions and restrictions of imports 
and exports within EC members 
amongst others on the grounds of protecting human health. (The above cited article 30, now 28, prohibits the 
restrictions of imports between EC 
member states)
93 The handling of wastes in this 
case refers to the prevention, reuse, 
recycling, recovery, disposal and the 
treatment of electrical and electronic wastes.
94 In total there are 10 product 
categories of electrical and electronic 
equipment identified (Annex 1A):
1. Large household appliances  
2. Small household appliances  
3. IT and telecommunications 
equipment  
4. Consumer equipment  
5. Lightening equipment  
6. Electrical and electronic tools (with the exception of large-scale stationary 
industrial tools
 
7. Toys, leisure and sports equipment  
8. Medical devices (with the exception 
of all implanted and infected products)  
9. Monitoring and control instruments  
10. Automatic dispensers

38
Greenpeace European Unit  
Rue Belliard 199  
B-1040 Brussels  
Belgium  
T: +32 (0)2 274 1900  
F: +32 (0)2 274 1910  
http://eu.greenpeace.org