# Archivo original: sonic-impact-a-precautionary.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:30 -03 2025

SONIC IMPACT:
 A Precautionary Assessment of Noise
Pollution from Ocean Seismic Surveys
June 2004
Jim Cummings Natalie Brandon
Acoustic Ecology Institute Greenpeace USA



iAbstract
Ocean noise pollution has become an increasingly controversial and studied
topic in recent years.  Attention to research and development of Naval low
frequency sonar weaponry and the ever increasing scale of marine seismic
surveys for oil exploration have raised significant concerns and scientificquestions about the impact on ocean creatures and ecosystems, particularlymarine mammals.  Seismic surveys used in oil exploration and geological studies
utilize airguns to produce explosive impulses of sound directed toward the
ocean bottom. Echoes produced by these impulses are recorded and analyzed toprovide information on sub-surface geological features for academics and the oil
and gas industry. Both ocean researchers and the public have become concerned
about ways that sounds created by the airguns may impact ocean creatures.
While it is generally assumed by industry that the risk of physiological damage
is low, there are many uncertainties in our understanding of both sound
transmission and the biological effects of sound "pollution" in the ocean. Inaddition, the complexities of acoustics science and inconsistencies within theresearch community in terms of measuring systems, has made it difficult for lay
people concerned about seismic surveying to assess existing research and data.
Here we provide a primer for the non-scientist on current knowledge about
airguns, their impacts and acoustic sensitivity of ocean-dwelling creatures. This
report concludes that given the glaring holes in our knowledge of this subject,
there is a need to take a precautionary approach to regulation of anthropogenicsound in the seas and that a series of suggested mitigation methods and research
programs be undertaken in consort with future seismic surveys.
Foreword
The outer continental shelves of every continent could not be farther from public
consciousness in most cases and the oil and gas industry would just as well keepit that way. The coastal oceans are a broad frontier for development of new oil
and gas reserves. Seismic surveys are a major tool used by industry to map
potential oil reserves in these areas. Seismic surveys utilize airguns, or rather aircannons, to produce explosive impulses of sound directed toward the oceanbottom producing echoes that are recorded and used to assess the sub-surface
geology.
These tests are massive, covering vast areas of ocean with thousands of blasts
going off every few seconds in some cases over the course of days, weeks or
months. The noise pollution from these tests can currently be heard literallyacross oceans.

iiResearchers and the public have become concerned that sound created by the
airguns may adversely effect ocean creatures. While it has been assumed that therisk of physiological damage is low, there are many uncertainties in ourunderstanding of both sound transmission and its biological effects. The marine
mammals and other potential victims of seismic tests are invisible unless they
wash up on shore. Death is not the only damage endpoint as animals may sufferloss of hearing, bodily harm as well as disruption of feeding, mating andmigration.
Greenpeace, the concerned public and the research community will not stand by
as these endangered creatures are harmed or displaced by seismic testing orother noise pollution in the oceans. As a first step to bring public awareness to
this issue, we determined it critically important to collect and review the limited
amount of existing scientific research about noise in the oceans and its impact onmarine mammals. In addition, the research had to be presented in a way that
non-scientists would be able to access it, evaluate it and when possible,
communicate their concerns in an informed way.
This report provides a primer for the non-scientist on current knowledge about
seismic airguns, their impacts, and acoustic sensitivity of ocean dwelling
creatures. The report discusses the need for a precautionary approach toregulation of human-made sound in the seas: and presents suggested mitigationmeasures and research to be undertaken to avoid damage from future seismic
surveys. Greenpeace's report, Sonic Impact, references past sonar-related
stranding incidents and points to the possible long-term effects on the health ofmarine mammal populations.
This debate is far from over. Currently, the U.S. government is skirting its
responsibility under the Endangered Species Act to protect a recently discoveredresident population of sperm whales in the Gulf of Mexico, right in the middle of
rapidly expanding oil and gas development. Will we wait until the whales wash
up on our beaches or will we forge a new US and indeed global energy policythat prioritizes clean renewable energy sources over oil and gas exploration - onethat safeguards our beaches and coasts from oil drilling hazards, helps solve
global warming and safeguards safe, clean drinking water and clean air?
Around the world, the oil industry is striking out onto the Continental Shelf in
search of new oil reserves to tap to quench our endless thirst for oil.  Oil
exploration off the coast of West Africa, Eastern Russia and in the Arctic
continues daily with little or no safeguards for the ecosystems and creatures ofthose regions.  This global problem deserves global attention and indeed global
regulation and oversight.

Table of Contents
Abstract i
Foreword i
1.0 Introduction 1
2.0 Seismic Primer 5
2.1 Functionality 5
2.1.1 How they work  52.1.2 Where they are used 7
2.1.3 Frequency spectrum as related to ocean creatures 8
2.1.4 Short and long duration sound/ rise times 9
2.2 Measurement Issues 9
2.2.1 Decibels in air and water 9
2.2.2 Inconsistent measurement systems used by researchers 112.2.3 Consideration of various exposure regimes in testing 13
        2.3 Overview of source levels and received levels at various ranges 13
2.3.1 Variability in transmission loss and received levels 14
2.3.1.1 Quieter near surface 142.3.1.2 Shallower water propagation is worse 14
2.3.1.3 Hard bottom/soft bottom radically different 15
2.3.2 Examples of measured propagation at various ranges 152.3.3 McCauley exposure modeling over time 16
        2.4 Other sources of noise in the oceans 16
2.4.1 Natural sources of high-intensity sound 162.4.2 Overall ambient noise in the sea, including human noise 17
2.5 Is it valid to compare the intensity of sounds in water and air? 18
3.0 Effects on marine life 20
3.1 Physiological Effects 20
3.1.1 Pathological direct damage 223.1.2 Temporary threshold shift 23
3.1.3 Increased stress 23
3.2 Behavioral 24

3.2.1. Avoidance/stand-off/swimming behavior changes 25
3.2.2 Acoustic masking 27
3.2.3 Masking of perception: ambient noise imaging 293.2.4 Disruption of rest 29
3.3 Food chain impacts 30
4.0 Discussion 30
4.1 Concrete effects 30
4.2 Ethical considerations 31
4.3 Precautionary principle 31
5.0 Calls for action 29
5.1 Case by case analysis and modeling 32
5.2 Require “best practices” mitigation measures 33
5.3 Establish more coordinated oversight of seismic surveys and
of noise in the ocean in general 345.3.1 Formation of a commission charged with developing coherent
                     operational and mitigation policies regarding seismic surveys 34
5.3.2 Follow through on calls for better coordination of research into         ocean noise impacts in general 34
5.4 Research in need of industry and government support 35
5.5 Uniform application of regulatory procedures (Gulf/Beaufort) 36
5.6 Moratorium on new surveys 39
5.7 Reinstate and reaffirm stronger protections during reauthorization
 of the  MMPA in the next congressional session. 39
5.8 Support clean energy alternatives to fossil fuels and strengthened
      conservation efforts 40
6.0  Conclusion 40
Acknowledgements 41

11.0 Introduction
Over the past several years, the specter of whales washing ashore1 and fleeing in
panic2 after exposure to Navy mid-frequency active sonar systems has focused
new scrutiny on the impacts of human-made sound on ocean creatures.  WhileNavy sonars are designed to be heard over vast distances, they are typically
operated for relatively short periods at a time.  By contrast, industrial oil and gas
exploration ships have been deploying seismic survey airguns that are similar inintensity, often for weeks or months at a time, with relatively little publicconcern.  Partly in response to the concern raised by the high-powered sonar
systems, since the fall of 2002 both governments and the courts have begun to
more closely question seismic survey projects.  It seems that a new standard isemerging, whereby both courts and permitting agencies are leaning toward the
“precautionary principle,” leading to decisions that tend toward caution and
protection when conclusive proof of safety is absent.
This is a radical shift from past standards, which held that clear proof of harm
was needed to halt new human activities.  In October 2002, a Federal Court
stopped a geologic research project in the Sea of Cortez when two beaked whaleswere found dead, despite a lack of undeniable evidence that the seismic activitywas responsible
3.  The scientific community was somewhat shocked that the
court would act on such circumstantial evidence, while environmental advocates
cheered the court’s willingness to not wait for more definitive proof, which(given that minimal biological assessment takes place during geology projects)would likely be in the form of more dead whales.  During 2003, the Canadian
government slowed a proposed geological research project off their west coast
4,
and is giving a similarly close look to an oil and gas survey off Cape Bretonplanned for the winter of 2003-4
5.  The Australian government refused to issue
permits for a survey near a marine park, citing precautionary dictates.6 And in
late November, the Bermudan government refused to issue a permit for seismicgeologic surveys off its coast, citing concerns for impacts on marine mammals.
7
Some observers have complained that the public, press, and even courts aremisinterpreting the Marine Mammal Protection Act and National MarineFisheries Service regulations governing “small takes” by incorrectly assertingthat “take” means to “kill” marine mammals, while in fact “takes” include any
sort incidental exposure of animals to human activity that may cause behavioral
changes, including simply creating sounds that they may hear (such exposure istermed “level 2 harassment” under the statutes). The fact is that the public, press,and courts are beginning to realize that “harassment” in the form of exposure to
excessive sound is something worth being concerned about, and are calling on
regulators to address such “harassment” as defined.  This reflects a desire on
the part of many citizens (as well as a growing number of researchers) that our
regulations should not simply protect sea creatures from physical harm, but
should reflect a consideration and respect for their right to hunt, rest, and
travel through the oceans without being subjected to excessive human noise .

2Simply put, our desire to search for oil should not trump ocean creatures’ ability
to survive and thrive.
In the U.S., driven by an energy policy that centers on developing new sources of
fossil fuels, there is a push for more exploration in the few territorial waters thatare not subject to offshore drilling bans.  The Gulf of Mexico and the BeaufortSea, on Alaska’s North Slope, are the two primary offshore development areas
where new seismic surveys are likely to take place (though Canadian exploration
certainly can impact American waters and wildlife).  It is not at all clear thatAmerican regulatory agencies are prepared to join in the present global movetoward a more precautionary approach to permitting.  Indeed, current
application of regulatory standards seems inconsistent, with activities in the Gulf
of Mexico receiving a lower level of oversight than the policies established in theBeaufort Sea (see Section 5.4 below).  In addition, recent changes in the language
of the Marine Mammal Protection Act (included as a part of the 2004 Defense
Authorization Bill) have established permitting standards for the military andresearchers that are less precautionary than existing rules.
The impacts of seismic survey airguns have been quite thoroughly studied by
both government and industry.  The reports that result from these studies arefairly consistent, and tend to show that whales, dolphins, fish, sea turtles, andsquid are all clearly impacted by seismic activity
8.  The danger of gross
physiological damage is relatively low, apparently an issue only at very close
range (and possibly in unusual topographic situations).  There are clearavoidance responses in all species at ranges of one to several kilometers; it islikely that the sounds are audible and may mask important communication or
perceptual cues at much greater ranges.  The general response to these results
has been to allow seismic surveys fairly free reign; airguns are shut down onlywhen cetaceans are seen at very close range (100m to 1km, depending on the size
of the air gun array and species of concern in the area); localized disturbance of
fish or whale movements is considered to be of negligible effect (the assumptionis that the creatures will simply move far enough away to not be harmed).  Thegenerally accepted exposure level for sea creatures is 180dB re 1
µPa2, which
compares fairly well (if a bit loosely) to accepted terrestrial limits for impulse
noise9 and observed behavioral responses of marine mammals and other ocean
species10.  Distances under 1km are, conveniently enough, within the range that
allows ship-board observers to spot whales (at least whales at the surface).  This
rough correlation, however, should not blind us to the many indications that the
180dB threshold, reflecting an area 1-2km around the survey ship, may be set abit too high.
Indeed, current standards for acceptable exposure are based largely around a
dramatically elevated threshold: the effects of human sounds on marinecreatures are considered acceptable unless they cause dramatic physiological
damage or are likely to diminish a species’ long-term survival or reproduction
rates.  Imagine if the noise standards in our cities and workplaces allowed any

3sounds that did not threaten the survival of our species!  Our human-exposure
standards are based on avoiding long-term hearing damage. While it is verydifficult, if not impossible, to determine thresholds of sound exposure that cause
hearing damage in animals, surely there is room for developing standards that
are more sensitive to other species’ needs than those currently in place.
Although this report will provide a summary of the current state of our
knowledge, it is important to realize that all the research that has been done to
date still offers only an extremely limited picture of the extent and impact ofhuman noise in the oceans, and of the functioning of ocean creatures’ acousticperceptual systems.  Research scientists certainly do their best with what they
have to work with, but there is a widely recognized lack of solid data in nearly
all aspects of ocean acoustics
11. Potter/Delory (1998) raise this point clearly:
“Marine mammals are perhaps the hardest mammalian group to
study. Virtually all relevant aspects of their biology (including
sensory capabilities, undisturbed behaviour and its adaptivesignificance, distribution and abundance) are only poorly
understood . Conducting marine mammal research at sea is always
difficult and costly. . . Given such a background of ignorance, it is
extremely difficult to even establish a meaningful framework for
estimating the impact of noise on these animals.”
For this reason, it’s crucial to remember that the observations and studies that
have taken place provide just some starting points for understanding, and thatthere is much more to be learned about the acoustic experience of oceancreatures.  Just as it is imprudent to make sweeping conclusions based on current
knowledge, likewise it is important not to lose sight of the idea that human
activities in the ocean are likely having effects that are not yet recognized.  Sincemany marine species are experiencing severe population declines (e.g., most fishspecies), or are in the tenuous process of recovery (e.g., many cetacean species), it
is essential to act with caution, knowing that any errors we make now in
assessing the ecological impacts of our actions could easily lead to biologicallycritical population stresses, including limited genetic diversity or extinction.
What are the uncertainties that we should bear in mind as we survey current
research?  There is much local variability in how far sound travels in the ocean,and a dramatic lack of knowledge about the biological effects of sound on wild
creatures.
Acoustic propagation (the physics describing the way sound travels through the
water) is relatively well understood yet highly variable, with water depth,
seafloor composition, temperature, and salinity all playing roles.  Most studies of
how sound introduced into the sea by seismic surveys will decrease overdistance are based on mathematical models; while often being goodapproximations, these predictions have too rarely been followed up with direct

4measurements (funding for such field studies is difficult to come by).
Propagation in deep-water areas, where much of the new exploration is takingplace, is relatively well understood: powerful sounds can travel extremely long
distances while remaining significantly louder than the ambient background
noise of the sea.
Meanwhile, very little is known about the physiological or behavioral responses
of cetaceans, fish, and other sea life to sound.  We have no direct knowledge even
of the hearing range of large marine mammals, and there is ample reason tosuspect that our land-based conception of “hearing” (centered on the ears and onperception of discrete frequencies of sound) offers only a very partial picture of
the acoustic perception of water-based creatures.  It seems possible that many or
most sea creatures perceive sonic vibrations throughout their bodies, and arecapable of sensing minute changes in acoustical energy, beyond our perceptual
imagination or scientific measurements.
In surveying the existing research on seismic surveys, it’s easy to get lost in a sea
of numbers, charts, and conclusions.  The abstractions generated by models of
acoustic propagation, threshold sound levels, and predicted consequences can
lead to both a false sense of security (it’s not killing the whales) and false sense ofuncertainty (there’s no way to know what the animals are experiencing).Strangely, both responses lead to similar action, or more commonly, inaction.
As an antidote to the torpor that can be imposed by the deluge of data, it is
especially revealing to step back and listen to what researchers say about theirown experiences in the field.  These “anecdotal” reports from people who have
grounding in the objective data may be especially eye- (and ear-) opening:
The authors have been in the North and Norwegian Seas on many
acoustic experiments, and listening to the raw output from hydrophones
deployed from the research vessel, the entire soundscape is oftendominated by the repetitive 'boom...boom...' of distant geophysical
surveying.  This incessant cacophony, an acoustic equivalent to the fabled
‘Chinese water torture’ deeply disturbs some individuals who are exposedto the sound over long periods. Perhaps it does the same to whales. . .
Recently, attempts were made to monitor baleen whales off the West
Coast of the British Isles using a SOS US array of (deep-water)hydrophones. Levels of background noise were so high in the summer
months due to oil-related seismic surveying that monitoring had to be
abandoned for long periods . . .  One can only assume that baleen
whales' ability to monitor (their) acoustic environment might be
similarly compromised by such noises.
-Potter, Delory (1998)
12
The increased concern about seismic testing is taking place in a context of
realizing that all forms of ocean noise need closer scrutiny13.  High intensity

5sonar, seismic airguns, and explosions related to industrial or military activities
are simply the loudest forms of human noise, and therefore ones of specialconcern.  Chronic exposure to high levels of shipping noise and construction
activity are also part of the picture.  Darlene Ketten, perhaps the world’s
foremost authority on cetacean hearing systems, stated at a marine mammalhealth conference that “a surprisingly large number of stranded animals, nearly
50 percent, show evidence of some form of auditory compromise or pathology
that correlates with low to profound hearing loss in other species.” (Ketten,
2002)  While bearing in mind that human noise is far from the only possiblesource of such physiological damage (parasites, infections, and trauma from
natural sources or other animals could all be factors), this is surely cause for
pause.
The issue of human noise in the ocean raises a complex debate with a mix of
ethical questions and compassionate concerns.  For this reason, closer attentionshould be given to the confusions caused by both the variety of measurementsystems used by researchers, and the tendency of laymen to not take into account
the ways that sound is measured and experienced differently in the denser
medium of water, compared to our familiar experiences in air.  As laymen are
asked to meet the science community on common ground, at the same time itis also valid and important to encourage researchers, regulators, and the courtsto acknowledge the scope of uncertainties in our knowledge, and to act in
ways that take into account the profound risks of causing irreparable harm to
sensitive natural systems and populations whose future survival is tenuous.
Again, it is especially useful to listen to scientists who are beginning to voice
concerns about the implications they see underlying the dry data of their finalreports.  In the words of Hal Whitehead, a marine mammal expert at Dalhousie
University in Halifax, commenting on the Cape Breton seismic survey plans, "My
message is that we know very little and the risks are very great. We shouldproceed very cautiously."
14
2.0 Seismic primer
2.1 Functionality
2.1.1  How they work
Seismic airguns generate sound impulses by expelling bubbles of air; single
airguns (often used in basic geological surveys, especially ones that are simply
mapping sea floor profiles) expel from 30 to 800 cubic inches of air per shot.(From this range of size, you may be able to imagine that while some guns aresmall enough to be held in your hands, others could more accurately be
considered air cannons.)  For oil and gas exploration, air gun arrays are used.
Arrays consist of 12-48 individual airguns synchronized to create a simultaneouspulse of sound, outputting a total of 3000-8000 cubic inches of air per shot.During seismic surveys, shots are typically fired every ten to sixty seconds;

6surveys can last from a few days to several months.  The sounds are so powerful
because the survey is attempting to generate echoes from each of several geologicboundary layers below the bottom of the ocean; results can show geologically
significant information as deep as 40km down
15.
Until 1993, most surveys were 2D; this means they used one array of airguns (or,
in the earlier days, dynamite tossed overboard at regular intervals) to generate
the sound pulse, and a single “streamer” of hydrophones to receive the echoes.
More modern 3D surveys use multiple arrays, and multiple hydrophonestreamers (stretching several kilometers behind the ship and over 1km wide), tocreate much more detailed maps of subsurface geology.
Airgun array on board the Polarstern, a research vessel doing geological surveys in the Weddell
Sea, of Antarctica
http://www.awi-bremerhaven.de/GPH/www_weddell_tectonics.html

7
An airgun array being fired during a marine geophysics research project off the coast of
Nicaragua
http://es.ucsc.edu/~silver/MarineGeophysics.html
2.1.2  Where they are used
Seismic surveys are carried out primarily by the oil and gas industry, and
secondarily by research geologists studying topics ranging from plate tectonicsand climate change to gas hydrates and ancient meteor impacts. Continentalshelves are by far the most common areas for surveys; among the zones that
have been subject to ongoing interest are the North Sea, the Gulf of Mexico, and
areas around Alaska, Australia, Venezuela, the Canadian Maritimes, and Brazil.Most of the United States coastline and “outer continental shelf” is currently off-limits to oil and gas drilling, and thus (apart from Alaska and the Gulf of Mexico)
US waters are not subject to many surveys; a proposal to mandate a survey of US
coastal waters was floated during the 2003 Congressional session, but did notprevail.
Most surveys are conducted before development leases are bid on, in order to
identify likely oil and gas reservoirs.  After issuance of a lease, the lessee willgenerally do both low-power, high-resolution surveys to determine best
placement of oil rigs and pipelines, as well as deep-penetrating 3D seismic
surveys, aimed at discovering previously unnoticed reservoirs in the lease area.During the 40-year life of the lease, repeated surveys are done to track fluid flowswithin the reservoirs (these repeated 3D surveys are referred to as 4D data).
Areas not surveyed since the development of 3D technology in the early 1990s,

8are often re-surveyed to take advantage of the increased resolution now
obtainable.16
2.1.3 Frequency spectrum as related to ocean creatures
It is important to consider not only the intensity of sound being output by
airguns, but also the frequency band(s) within which the sound is loudest.  Each
ocean species vocalizes, and presumably preferentially perceives sound, in aparticular range of frequencies; these ranges differ greatly between species.Larger whales are likely the most susceptible to direct impact by the relatively
low frequency output of airguns, since they make the most use of low frequency
bands themselves.
Calls or perception of surrounding environment can be obscured by “acoustic
masking” from sounds in similar frequency ranges.  The most dramatic maskingis caused by sounds within .1 to .2 octaves of the sound of interest (be it a call orthe sound of prey or predators).  However, some masking can take place in
frequencies further from the source of the interference, with increasing
interference as the intensity of the interfering sound increases (Potter, 1998).
Baleen whales (humpback, blue, fin, grey) are too large to have been studied incaptivity, so vocalization patterns must be examined to determine a sense of theirrange of hearing; it appears that frequencies from 20-500Hz are especially
important, with some components of their calls occurring up to 8kHz (8000Hz).
Toothed whales (dolphin, orca, beaked, sperm) are focused on higher frequencysounds, from 100Hz to a bit over 100kHz, with a special concentration ofsensitivity in the 10-70kHz bands.  Seals respond to sounds ranging from
roughly 300Hz-80kHz (Richardson, et al, 1995).
Seismic air gun arrays output a
rather broadband low-frequency
sound (i.e., not a single “tone” or
“chord”, but rather a noisecomposed of an undifferentiatedrange of tones).  Peak output is
generally in the range of 50Hz,
with a secondary peak appearingin the 150-200Hz range, and
continuing decreasing peaks up to
almost 1kHz
17.  There is often a
“ghost notch”, or reduction ofoutput intensity in the 100-125Hz
range, due to “destructive
interference” from soundreflecting off the surface.  Theprimary frequency range used toNote on Hz:
The frequency of sound waves is
measured in the number of pulses or
cycles per second, or hertz (Hz).  Low
frequency sounds range from just a
few cycles per second, up through
tens and hundreds of cycles per
second.  A level of 1,000 Hz or 1
kilohertz (1kHz), is often considered a
threshold into mid-frequency sound.
Humans can hear sounds ranging
from 20 Hz to 20,0000 (20kHz).
Most airgun noise occurs in the range
below 1kHz.

9analyze the sub-surface geology is 3-100Hz; this is the most dominant and usable
frequency band that bounces back up toward the surface18.
There is considerable transmission of sound in somewhat higher frequencies, as
well.  McCauley (2000) made direct measurements of a commercial airgunarray’s sound output that shows clearly audible sound in frequencies ranging upto 1000Hz (1kHz), and Goold (1998) mentions airgun effects up to 8kHz.  The
end result of all this is that, given the relatively extreme source levels of airgun
sound, even creatures whose hearing is not centered on the lower frequenciescan hear and are affected by the sound of seismic surveys.
2.1.4  Short and long duration sound/rise times
In general, most creatures respond more dramatically to sustained sounds than
to transient ones.  This is partly because our perceptual systems take some timeto process and react to sound.  Studies with marine mammals tend to bear thisout; whales may (depending on habituation) show avoidance to sustained
sounds at around 120 dB re 1
µPa, while avoidance to short-durations sounds
(like airguns) begins at 140-150dB re 1 µPa19.
However, this tendency is perhaps somewhat countered by the relatively
“unnatural” waveforms of some human-generated sounds.  Impulse noises, such
as caused by explosions and airguns, have faster rise-times than most naturalsounds, far faster than vocalizations, and somewhat faster than even seaquakes.This faster rise time can trigger a reaction that would more likely be expected to a
louder noise
20; this may account for initial startle or early avoidance maneuvers
at sound levels as low as 125 dB re 1 µPa21.
2.2  Measurement issues
There are several measurement issues that have caused much confusion in
debates and research about ocean noise.  Some of these—such as the differences
between sound in air and water—have compromised laymen’s ability tointelligently communicate their concerns to scientists and regulators (likewise,this confusion can at times cause undue concern in the lay population).  Others—
such as the plethora of measurement systems used in research studies—have
made it difficult to analyze, interpret, and compare results from different studies.
2.2.1 Decibels in air and water
First off, a primer on the decibel system: decibels (dB) do not measure an
absolute amount of sound, but rather represent a proportional increase above an
arbitrary reference level of sound intensity.  Each increase of 10dB represents a10-fold increase in the sound’s intensity; thus 140dB is ten times more intensethan 130db, and 150db is one hundred times more intense.  However, 140dB it is
not ten times louder than 130dB; our perception of relative loudness decreases as

10sound intensity levels go up.  To some degree, this matches the logarithmic scale
of decibel measurement, so that a sound of 150dB will tend to sound about halfagain as loud as a sound of 100db.  However, there is much individual
subjectivity in perceived loudness, as well as no real knowledge of how other
species perceive loudness.  Also, when considering a sound’s impact on sensitiveacoustic perceptual systems (i.e., ears or other organs and systems), the relativeintensity is perhaps more important than the perceived loudness.
Comparing dB measurements in air and water involves two different
measurement corrections.  One of them is purely a numerical shift, while theother is more complicated, involving both mathematical and physical
differences.  The result of both corrections can at times make estimating the
impact of sound in the water a difficult task.  Adding to the situation is the factthat our tools perceive specific physical qualities of sound waves, and our
measuring systems then abstract this information into quantifiable values, while
the experience of sound (by either humans or other animals) is far more complex,involving physical responses that are more diverse, subtle, and integrated thanthose captured by our sound-measuring tools, as well as subjective responses to
sounds that are both individual and unquantifiable.  Despite these uncertainties,
there are some straightforward and important corrections that scientists use inorder to make the measurement of sound in water more closely align with thephysical experience of the listener.
The first adjustment is a simple 26dB difference, related to the arbitrary reference
level from which the sound intensity is measured.  The air reference level is “dBre 20
µPa” ( µPa is a unit of measuring sound pressure, the micro-Pascal), which is
the limit of human audibility (that is, humans can only hear sounds that have a
pressure of at least 20 µPa).  In water, where the human hearing system is
inefficient (because our eardrum does not respond well to the added pressure), it
doesn’t make sense to count dB in relation to human audibility threshold, so it is
instead measured from an arbitrary level of 1 µPa.  Since micro-Pascals and dB are
related logarithmically, this means that a sound of a given intensity will bemeasured as being 26dB higher in water than in air.  So (considering only this
first correction factor), a sound measured at 126dB in water will only be as loud
as a sound that measures 100dB in air.  The two sounds are experiencedidentically.
The second adjustment is a bit less cut and dried.  Because water is much more
dense than air, water has higher impedance, so sounds of equal measuredpressure will (because of the physics and math of impedance), be measured at36dB higher in water.  However, this time, the difference is not purely
mathematical, as in the reference pressure correction.  To some degree, the sound
as experienced in water will feel louder—if you were in a bathtub listening tosound at 90dB, and then moved the speaker underwater, it would be measured
as 126dB; unlike the previous correction, though, the sound would indeed feel
stronger when experienced underwater, as well as being measured louder.  Since

11this is a subjective experience, it is very difficult to quantify to what degree the
36dB measurement difference is actually experienced physically as an increase insound intensity.
Since subjectivity is such a slippery slope, and researchers are by nature
comfortable with the abstractions of measurements and mathematics, it isgenerally accepted in ocean acoustics that sounds of equal pressure (in the
respective reference units) can be considered 62dB higher in water than in air
(26dB plus 36dB).  This means that when a sound is reported as 206dB in water, itwill correspond to a sound measuring 140dB in air.  When trying to imagine theimpacts of sounds reported in ocean acoustics studies, it is crucial to keep this
correction in mind (while also remembering that the subjective experience of the
sound may be a bit louder than the correction implies).
2.2.2 Inconsistent measurement systems used by researchers
More surprising than the forgoing discussion of dB differences is the fact that
there is no generally accepted measurement system for use in studies of
underwater sound.  Several systems are in use, each with its own advantages andrelevance to the impacts of sound on animals; again, similar sounds result insignificantly variable dB measurements, depending on which measuring system
was used.  Strangely, many literature surveys complain that all too often, studies
do not sufficiently clarify which system is being used, making comparisonsbetween studies difficult; in recent years, this difficulty has been more widelyrecognized, so that while there is still no agreed upon standard approach, at least
researchers communicate more clearly which one they are using.
22
The three most common systems of measurement are:
• Peak levels / peak-to-peak, mean peak, or zero-to-peak (measured in
units of dB re 1 µPa2; though often by convention the 2 is omitted).  This
considers the change in amplitude (pressure) of a sound wave from thelowest to highest point on its waveform.  It is relatively easy to measure,and may be especially relevant to concerns about direct physical damage
to tissues, since it is the best reflection of the physical displacement likely
to occur in tissue with the passing of a sound wave. In addition, peakmeasurements are less time-dependant than the following methods,which is appropriate for short-duration sounds such as airguns. However,
especially as sound is measured at more distance from the source,
reflection of the sound waves off the sea’s bottom and surface, along withdifferences in the speed at which sounds travel through different layers of
the sea, create a situation where the received sounds are arriving along
countless different pathways, making their waves interfere with eachother.  This interference can decrease or increase the intensity of the wavesarriving at the receiver; accurately predicting the actual peak values is
virtually impossible in many cases.

12• Root-mean-squared or mean-squared-pressure levels (units of dB re 1 µPa).
This measures the total sound intensity, then divides it by the length of
the signal.  It is also useful biologically, because our perception of asound’s intensity takes place over time, not instantaneously.  Acousticpower, intensity, and energy are proportional to the mean squared
pressure. However, measurements based on this system are difficult, since
it is not always easy to precisely identify when a sound starts and stops,especially at some distance from the source, where individual soundimpulses are blurred and often can be confused with existing background
sounds (at the lowest frequencies, “headwaves” traveling faster along the
bottom of the ocean, also complicate the timing).  This problem can tendto cause researchers to over-estimate the length of the sound, therebyunder-measuring the RMS value.
• Measurements of the signal’s energy (units of dB re 1
µPa2. s) .   L i k e  R M S
values, energy measurements do not depend so directly on the specificwaveform of the received sound.  After extensive comparisons of the
many approaches to measurement and prediction, McCauley (2000) builton earlier work by Malme et al (1996) to develop a formula that has
proven effective in measuring the energy of a signal; simply stated, it
involves a correction of mean squared calculations to account for thedifficulty in determining signal duration.  He found that, compared to theabove systems, measurements of what he termed “Equivalent Energy”
provided the most reliable indication of a signal’s intensity in a wide
variety of situations (water depth, distance downrange, etc.).
While McCauley’s Equivalent Energy approach proved to be effective at
accurately measuring sound in a variety of situations, in order to provide more
useful comparison to other systems, and to better estimate the effects that arebest measured by the other systems, a conversion factor was obtained, based on
direct measurements in the field.  For an airgun array in the open ocean, RMS
values averaged about 13dB higher than Equivalent Energy values, while
peak-to-peak values averaged 28dB higher.  Bear this in mind as the propagation
of airgun sounds is described in Section 2.3 below.
Note: Each of the above systems presents measurements based on a signal’s total broadband
energy (generally using the 1/3 octave band standard to create the subsets which are summed oraveraged); most commonly, these energy levels are plotted against distance, to show how the
received level falls as it travels.  At times, they are stated with reference to the range of
frequencies being measured (generally the range within which the sound had significant energy).
It is also common to present sound data as “sound pressure density spectra” levels. In this
approach, the sound pressure or intensity is broken down and plotted separately in smaller
frequency band chunks; the resulting graphs show the sound level (in units of dB re 1 µPa2 /Hz)
plotted across the frequency spectrum, from 1Hz to a relevant number of kHz.  This approach isuseful to analyze the tones at which a broadband sound is most powerful; it can also highlight
the general bands within which animal sounds or anthropogenic sounds carry the most energy.
As related to seismic airgun signals, sound pressure density spectra levels tend to highlight the
ways that airgun sounds are especially intense in frequencies below 100Hz, while carrying
continued but declining energy up to 1kHz.  McCauley (2000) and others often present density

13spectra data as well as broadband energy data, either by plotting the sound level at a given
distance against the frequency spectrum, or by adding a color scheme that allows presentation of
three variables: frequency spectrum, dB levels, and distance.
2.2.3 Consideration of various exposure regimes in testing
Studies of the impacts of seismic airguns have similarly used a variety of
experimental models, or “exposure regimes,” each of which offer advantages anddisadvantages; it is often difficult or even impossible to extrapolate effects fromone approach to another.
The three prime exposure regimes that have been used to date are:
• Caged trials: Here animals are put in cages in the sea, and the seismic
source is moved in relation to the cage.  Offers careful control of exposure
levels and relatively easy observation of reactions; responses are likely
somewhat altered by the caged environment.  Very useful for determining
precise levels of sound that cause physical damage.
• Controlled approaches in the field:  Using a single gun or small array,
researchers move toward or past wild pods or schools, and watch for
responses.  Offers relatively good control over sound levels being tested,
and more realistic simulation of the passing of a commercial survey ship.
Observation of responses can be difficult.  No measure of exposure history(i.e. habituation to noise) of specific animals.
• Monitoring of responses to commercial operations: Boat, plane, or shore-
based observations of the reactions of wild creatures to an operating
seismic survey.  Gives best look at response and recovery times from
actual surveys.  Can be used to verify either exposure models or response
predictions generated by other exposure regimes.  No control exposurelevels; very difficult to observe reactions, especially at long distances fromsurvey ship.
While there is no definitive “preferred” technique, it is important to consider
which regime was used as we compare results.  Many studies involve no (or few)direct sound measurements.  A surprising amount of research is based solely on
mathematical and physical modeling, making predictions of sound propagation
on which deployment and mitigation procedures are then founded.  TheMcCauley (2000) study is one of the few to have made comprehensive direct
sound measurements in the field during a commercial seismic survey
23.
2.3 Overview of source levels and received levels at various ranges
Source levels of airguns and arrays are generally reported at 1m from the array.
In general, commercial airgun arrays output sound in the range of 218-228dB(equivalent energy; increase by 13dB for RMS, 28db for peak to peak).  These

14figures from McCauley (2000) compare fairly well with measurements reported
by Caldwell (2000) of 240-246dB (peak to peak).
The sound emerging from the airgun is directed downward; sound levels
measured to the side (which is the sound that is of most interest, as this is whattravels through the water to affect animals at distance) is lower by a factor of 12-20db, at least nearby the vessel
24.  Also, depending on the type of airgun array,
horizontal sound levels are loudest either fore-and-aft (2D array) or abeam (3D
array) of the ship; this variation is in the range of 2-8dB (McCauley, 2000, p51).
2.3.1  Variability in transmission loss and received levels
Sound is absorbed, scattered, and spread as it moves outward from its source.
Researchers look at all of these as factors in “transmission loss,” or the reduction
in the sound level as it travels.  The received level at any given distance is thesource level, less transmission loss.
In the simplest models, assuming cylindrical or spherical spreading, the received
level decreases simply by virtue of the sound energy being spread over a largerand larger surface area the farther from the source it is.  In both spreadingmodels, there is a relatively rapid decrease in the received dB level at close range,
followed by a leveling off of the dB value out to many tens or hundreds of
kilometers.  High frequency sounds quickly fall victim to transmission loss(especially absorption and scattering), while low frequencies can travel vastdistances at still-audible levels (see Section 2.3.2 below); in the ideal situation, the
transmission loss of a 100Hz sound will nearly level off at about 100dB, so that
an airgun noise (over 200dB at the source) will remain over 100dB a thousandkilometers or more away
25.
There are a number of factors that influence how loud a sound will be as distance
increases.
2.3.1.1  Quieter near surface
Observations of the responses of many marine creatures near seismic surveys or
noise sources indicate that they often take advantage of a “sound shadow” that
exists near the surface of the sea.  As sound waves bounce off the surface of thewater from below, they interfere with themselves “destructively,” meaning that
the high point of the direct wave combines with the low point of a reflected wave
to cancel each other out (similar to the way noise-cancellation headphones work).In this case, the cancellation is far from perfect, so there is no “zone of silence,”but received levels can be significantly lower near the surface, offering refuge to
animals escaping dangerous or annoying sound levels below.
2.3.1.2  Shallower water propagation is worse

15In deep waters, sound waves can travel relatively undisturbed, so that
transmission loss is mainly a factor of distance (and to some degree, time:gradients of temperature and salinity can influence the speed of the sound waves
and thus affect the waveform patterns that are received).  In shallow waters,
however, the distance between the water’s surface and the sea floor is too smallfor the sound waves, and they begin to break up and become scattered, greatlyreducing their received levels if the bathymetry (seafloor topography) is rugged
or varied, but allowing for excellent propagation if the seafloor is flat, as a wave
guide is created.
2.3.1.3  Hard bottom/soft bottom radically different
The composition of the seabed plays a significant—and hard to predict—role in
horizontal sound propagation.  Hard surfaces reflect most of the sound energy,
while soft surfaces absorb/scatter the sound.  So, transmission loss is greater inareas with soft surfaces.  Unfortunately, the sea bed often contains patches ofboth hard and soft areas, making it very difficult to model likely transmission
loss, and thus received levels.  To take this one step further, models from any one
area are likely to be of limited value in another place.
2.3.2  Examples of measured propagation at various ranges
McCauley (2000) made direct measurements of the received levels around an
active seismic survey vessel, at distances of 1km to 50km.  At each distance, there
tended to be about a 10dB variation in received level, likely the result of localizedtransmission loss differences.  The two instances of greatest divergence from theoverall transmission loss trends were both identified as being related to specific
factors (a received level higher than predicted being related to being abeam the
ship, where the source level was higher, and a received level lower thanpredicted being related to an upslope propagation path that increasedtransmission loss).
Distance Mean received level (dB re 1 
µPa2.s, equivalent energy)
(increase by 13dB for RMS, 28dB for peak to peak)
1km 160dB
2km 1503km 145
4km 140
5km 13710km 12520km 116
30km 110
40km 10650km 103

16Current regulatory consensus is that received levels of over 180dB (peak to peak)
are likely to cause significant impacts on sea creatures; this compares to 152dB inequivalent energy.  According to these measurements, then, the zone of
significant impact will be out to almost 2 km from the ship.  Behavioral, and
likely perceptual, impacts are likely at far greater distances (see Section 3.2below)
2.3.3  McCauley exposure modeling over time
While most studies have focused on the effects of exposure to a given level of
transient sound, McCauley (2000) took the analysis a step further, creating a mapshowing the cumulative exposure likely over the course of a full seismic survey,
whatever its duration (generally a few days to a few weeks, occasionally a few
months).  This is most relevant to resident species, which may be exposed to thefull survey; migratory species would pass through in a relatively short time.
The exposure model looks at how many individual air gun shots would be
received at a level of 155dB re 1
µPa2.s (equivalent energy) or higher over the
course of a four-month survey.  The results are sobering: an area roughly 60kmby 90km in size would be subject to
40,000 shots at this biologically
significant level (over 300 per day onaverage).  An area of about 150km by
120km would experience 20,000 shots,
and an area of 240km by 200km wouldhear 1000 shots in the course of thesurvey.
While this is an unusually long and wide-ranging survey, leading to exceedingly
high numbers of shots over the threshold, McCauley’s exposure modelingapproach would provide similarly useful insight for smaller surveys measured
on the scale of shots over 155dB re 1
µPa2.s per day, or per hour, in the area being
surveyed.  It is likely that this sort of detailed analysis of cumulative impactscould be used to adjust survey boundaries in ways that would protect residentspecies from highly disruptive repeated exposure.
It should be noted that industry sources offer substantially lower estimates of the
cumulative impacts.  Caldwell (2002) focuses on the maximum exposure of any
one animal to high levels of sound, assuming that it will tend to move away
rather than linger in the vicinity of the seismic vessel; his figures suggest ananimal may hear 40 shots above 180 dB re 1
µPa over the course of 6.5 minutes
“once a day or so for a few days.”26
2.4 Other sources of noise in the oceans
2.4.1  Natural sources of high-intensity soundAn area roughly 60km by 90km
in size would be subject to
40,000 shots at this biologically
significant level (over 300 per
day on average).

17Many observers have noted that the sea is full of loud sounds, both ongoing and
episodic.27  Among the most dramatic sources of natural ambient noise are wave
action, sea-quakes (earthquakes in the sea floor), and whale vocalizations.  The
evolutionary adaptations that allow ocean creatures to withstand these sounds isconsidered an indication of their ability to cope with similarly loud humannoises.  In fact, most natural sources are quite a bit lower than the source levels of
seismic arrays: high seas measure a peak of 140dB re 1
µPa2 at low frequencies
under 10Hz, dropping to 90db at 100Hz, and continuing down from there.Seaquakes have been measured at 130dB re 1
µPa2 at around 10Hz, and less
elsewhere in the frequency band; other measurements of seaquakes range much
higher, with estimated source levels28 of up to 240 re 1 µPa2, and received levels of
up to 204dB29.  Heavy rain can create a higher frequency (over 1kHz) noise of
80dB re 1 µPa2.  While these levels can surely influence the background ambient
noise significantly, and so reduce the distance at which seismic noise is audible
and disruptive, localized disturbance from repeated airgun shots is clearly farlouder in most cases (and far more persistent in the case of seaquakes).
Whale songs and calls are often quite loud.  Many species have been measured in
the range of 130-228dB re 1
µPa (not clear if peak or RMS).  The loudest sources
are high-frequency echolocation clicks of toothed whales, which attenuate ratherquickly.  Low frequency baleen whale calls are often 170-180dB re 1
µPa.
Individual whales have been observed within 100m of companions singing at
peak intensities.
By comparison, the two loudest sources of sound in the sea are explosions and
seismic survey airguns, both with source levels of up to 240dB re 1 µPa, with low
frequency active sonar just behind at 235dB (NRC 2003).
Whatever the levels of sound produced by whales, we must again refrain from
making the leap to thinking that we can thus know how they respond to loudsounds:
Arguments that marine mammals, simply by nature of their size and
tissue densities, can tolerate higher intensities are not persuasive. First,mammal ears are protected from self-generated sounds not only byintervening tissues (head shadow and impedance mismatches) but also
by active mechanisms (eardrum and ossicular tensors). These
mechanisms do not necessarily provide equal protection fromexternally generated sounds largely because the impact is not
anticipated as it is in self-generated sounds.
-Ketten (2001), testimony to U.S. House Resources Committee.
2.4.2  Overall ambient noise in the sea, including human noise

18There are good indications30 that the overall background ambience of the seas
has increased 10-20dB over the past hundred years, mostly due to long-rangetransmission of shipping noises (though possibly also sea state noises caused by
wind and waves has increased some as well, due to climate change or natural
cyclical factors).  In some areas, such as the west coast of the US, the increase hasbeen measured at 10dB since the 1960s (Andrew, 2002).
There have been many theoretical studies of how far a sound would be audible
above the background ambient noise “floor.”
31 Ambient noise in the sea includes
wave and wind noise, snapping shrimp, shipping, and animal sounds.  Outsidethe surf zone along shorelines, ambient noise is often as low as 35-70dB re 1 
µPa2;
during times of high wind and storms, wave noise alone can increase to over
80db. Dense animal or shipping noise can peak as high as 140 dB re 1 µPa2 at low
very frequencies (below 10Hz), 100 dB re 1 µPa2 at frequencies up to 1kHz, and 60
dB re 1 µPa2 at frequencies over 1kHz.  Other more recent studies32 have shown
individual supertankers being as loud as 189dB re 1 µPa2/Hz at low frequencies,
with most large ships having individual source levels between 160 and 180db re1
µPa2/Hz.
It is important to bear in mind that airguns are not the sole sources of sounds
loud enough to propagate audibly over tens or hundreds of kilometers.  By farthe most dominant source of marine noise is shipping.  Some observers consider
the added sounds introduced by any intense human source other than shipping
to have negligible added effect, mainly because there are far fewer sources ofairguns than there are ships.
33  Once again, we are faced with the question of
whether airguns should bear added scrutiny simply because they are among the
very loudest specific sources of sound.  It can be argued that an airgun at 50km34
is no louder than a supertanker at 15km; beyond these distances, their effects are
similar.  It remains, though, that airguns with source levels well over 200 dB re
1µPa2 will have substantially more local impact than other, even modestly less
intense sound sources, while joining other extreme sound sources (ships, whales,etc.) as part of the audible noise at greater distances.
2.5  Is it valid to compare the intensity of sounds in water and air?
While, as discussed above, it is difficult to compare the experience of sound in
the water with the experience of sound in the air, it can still be somewhat helpful
to offer a few points of reference to bear in mind as we traverse the gauntlet ofdecibels over the next several pages
35.  The following chart can give a rough
sense of how common human sounds in air may sound to humans  underwater:

19Sound source dBA36 re 20 µPa at 1m in air dB re 1 µPa2.s in water37   dB re 1 µPa in water38
Conversation 60dB 109dB 122dB
Leaf Blower 90dB 139dB 132dB
(90dBA: OSHA permissible exposure limit; prolonged exposure causes permanent hearing
loss; hearing protection required; NIOSH requires hearing protection at 85dbA; SEE
FOOTNOTE ON dBA ABOVE)
Chain Saw 100dB 149dB 162dB
(100dBA: short exposure can cause permanent hearing loss)
Indoor crowd noise 110dB 159dB 172dB
OSHA ceiling 115dB 165dB 177dB
(115dBA: no employees may be exposed without hearing protection)
Jet takeoff 130dB 179dB 192dBPain threshold 140dB 189dB 202dB
(140dBA: OSHA ceiling for impulse noises and NIOSH ceiling for all noise, with or without
protection  SEE FOOTNOTE ON dBA ABOVE)
For many reasons, comparisons such as this are only really valid when
comparing how the same species, in this case, humans, would perceive a sound.
Every species (and, to a lesser degree, every individual) has its own “frequency
response curve”; that is, we each hear certain frequencies much more easily thanothers.  Humans, for example, do not hear low frequencies very well; a 63Hzsound measured at 100dB sound will sound to us as though it is only 74dB, while
a 2kHz, 100dB sound will indeed sound like 100dB.  Every species has its own
range of hearing where sounds are perceived optimally, and likewise rangeswhere sounds are not perceived as well.  Of course, when dealing with
exceptionally high intensity sounds, physiological damage (and perhaps
behavioral responses such as avoidance) may be caused even when we are nothearing the given frequency very well.
Please do bear in mind that given all the translations involved (from these
individual species differences, to the many measuring scales and conversionsmentioned above), it is difficult to make any definitive claims about how sea
creatures may respond to any given dB level.  At best, an underwater dB rating
is a decent estimate of the sound’s physical power, and a somewhat useful
benchmark by which to make informed guesses about its possible effects.
This is why scientists tend to rely on behavioral responses and observed
physiological damage caused by ocean-based sound, and to avoid making direct
comparisons with human hearing, and especially human safety thresholds, in the
air.
That being said, it is especially important to base our decisions about
operational safety, mitigation, and regulation on careful observation of the
actual responses of many species at a range of distances from seismic survey
vessels, rather than to over-rely on ideas about the danger of specific dB levels
or on models of how we think that the dB level will change as the sound
moves out into the ocean environment.  As we will see, researchers do use dB
measurements as a tool in determining thresholds of effects; when measured in

20the field, this can provide a more concrete handle on the animals’ reasons for
responding the way they do, despite the cross-species uncertainties in how agiven dB level is perceived.  We will also see that many studies are based on
observed responses at various distances, without regard to received dB levels (at
times, such observations are paired with models of likely sound propagation,and more rarely, with measured sound readings); such studies offer less concretedata and more uncertainties as to the reasons for the observed responses.  Both
approaches offer valuable information; the most useful insight with which to
inform our decisions about operational standards is likely to follow from ajudicious use of all data, within a context of appreciating the limits of eachapproach.
3.0  Effects on marine life
A wide variety of studies have shown that cetaceans, fish, squid, and turtles
respond to seismic airgun sounds.  Not surprisingly, louder sounds lead toincreased response: low levels of exposure generally elicit modest changes in
swimming behavior, while increasing sound levels lead to avoidance and/or
startle responses.  More surprising is that significant behavioral responses
happen for all these creatures at 143-152dB re 1 
µµµµPa2.s (equivalent energy; 172-
180db peak to peak). McCauley observes that “the hearing systems of baleenwhales, sea turtles, fishes and squid are fundamentally different, yet the
received air-gun level range over which responses seem to become significant
is within 10 dB for these diverse groups  (McCauley, 2000, p188).”  At this point,
the reasons for this convergence can only be speculative; they may involve
unknown evolutionary pressures, or a limitation in hair-cell mechanics in a widerange of ear systems (tiny hairs in ears are responsible for primary perception ofsound).
Avoidance and startle responses to air gun sounds seem to begin in the range
of 2-15 km, depending on the species and the situation.   Current standard
operating procedures which call for shut down of airguns when whales ordolphins are within 100m to 1km of the ship are designed primarily to avoidcausing physiological damage at close range; this criteria, while usefully
concrete, is also somewhat arbitrary.  There is mounting evidence of consistent
and meaningful avoidance on the part of many species at much greater distances,which deserves closer consideration in setting operational standards.  Apparentcontradictions are also observed where dolphins choose to swim with airgun
arrays for extended periods of time
39, and humpback whales approach survey
vessels, apparently curious about the sounds40.  These observations do not
necessarily imply that the exposure is not harmful, or discount the importance ofthe overall tendency to avoid such sounds.
3.1  Physiological Effects

21Many observers are especially concerned about the possibility that human
sounds may cause direct physiological damage to the tissues of ocean creatures.While this is of course does happen at times (see sections below), and is the
worst-case scenario, we should be cautious about putting too much emphasis on
this specific and grossly obvious effect of sound.
Physiological damage is exceedingly difficult to observe and study; generally,
only dead specimens would yield this information.  Partial impairment of
physiological systems will be especially hard to discover, either because theindividual remains in the wild, albeit in a compromised condition, or because thedamage is not readily obvious upon discovery of a body.
Beyond this, though, is the fact that many physiological effects may not involve
tissue damage, but rather the ways that intense sound impairs or interferes with
the proper functioning of a creature’s acoustic perceptual system.  Virtually all
studies of the physical effects of sound focus on the hearing systems of fish andsmaller cetaceans; this is a sensible starting place, since we have a pretty goodunderstanding of these systems in humans and other land animals.  However, it
is likely that water creatures’ relationships with sound involve far more than
their ears.  The implications of this open a far wider doorway for study andunderstanding of the effects of anthropogenic sound in the oceans.
41
The bodies of ocean creatures have acoustic impedance very close to water(while of course our watery bodies are very different than the air that surroundsus).  This leads to the suggestion that sounds can easily enter their bodies and beperceived in ways we may not initially imagine; we could say that their sense of
touch becomes an auditory sense.  Indeed, fishes respond to pressure gradients
with both their “lateral lines” (running down their sides, and containing hairsand cellular structures similar to those found in the ears of terrestrial animals)
and swim bladders (which are sometimes used for sound production, and in
some species are connected by a set of bones to the fish’s inner ear).  Our sound-measuring tools all measure pressure gradients, as does the fishes’ lateral line.But fish also have particle motion sensors, and they respond to subtle phase
differences using both systems (and so join instantly in schooling movements or
respond to the disturbance on the surface caused by food source such as an insector piece of plant or animal tissue).
Whales and dolphins, like fish, do not have outer ears (they would cause
turbulence) or eardrums (which would not withstand the extreme pressurechanges underwater).  It seems that toothed whales perceive sound largelythough coupling of the lipids in the jaw to the inner ear, with some recent
indications that bone conduction also plays a role.  The melons of toothed whales
(also filled with lipids) surely play a central role in sound production, andpossibly some perceptual role as well.  Since many toothed whales are small
enough to study in captivity, we have quite a body of knowledge about the
structures and frequency sensitivity of their auditory systems, though our

22understanding of how they work and respond to the acoustic world of the ocean
is still speculative.  By contrast, our understanding of the hearing systems ofbaleen whales, which are centered on perception of low frequencies, is almost
purely speculative, based on observing their behavior from a distance and trying
to comprehend strange organs that bear little resemblance to those we knowfrom land creatures more interested in middle and higher frequency sounds.
The properties of water create sensual realms outside of our perceptual
grasp. Water is not as homogeneous as air; it has density and pressuregradients that vary widely with turbidity and turbulence, salinity andtemperature. You might imagine an underwater environment as a rich
mélange of blending densities, all telling of the motions of eddies and
tides, turbulence, and the trails of micro-currents left by themovements of sea animals within it. These swirling nuances of density
affect the transmission of acoustical energy in water, allowing animals
a sense of current, thermal and chemical characteristics withperceptions tuned into these conditions.(Stocker, 2004)
It is probably obvious from this discussion that our consideration of the
physiological impacts of anthropogenic sounds must include more thandiscussion of gross tissue damage.  To
appreciate the ways that powerful human
sounds (which saturate large areas of theocean with powerful acoustical energy)may affect the finely-tuned and integrated
acoustic and tactile senses of water
creatures will require us to step outside theframeworks of our own perceptual
systems.  It is natural that our scientific
inquiries are based in what we know, yet itis important to remember that tounderstand other creatures with very
different perceptual skills, we will need to
expand the horizons of our inquiry.
3.1.1  Pathological direct damage
There is very little evidence of direct tissue damage caused by seismic surveys.
This can be partly attributed to the standard procedure of gradually ramping up
the sound, and the constantly moving vessel, both of which tend to make the
appearance of airgun noise be gradual enough to allow animals to avoid intenseexposure.  It is also clear that we have virtually no direct observations about the
short or long-term physiological effects on wild creatures, since they cannot be
examined.  Evidence from beached whales and dolphins does tend to show someTo appreciate the ways that
powerful human sounds
(which saturate large areas of
the ocean with powerful
acoustical energy) may affect
the finely-tuned and
integrated acoustic and tactile
senses of water creatures will
require us to step outside the
frameworks of our own
perceptual systems.

23long-term hearing loss, with up to half showing some physiological
compromise42, though the sources of this damage are not easily discernable.
However, in the past year, some troubling results have begun to appear.
Cetaceans exposed to high-level mid-frequency sonar have been found (afterbeaching and dying) to have a bewildering array of tissue damage.  Someindividuals have hemorrhaging in the ears, others have lesions caused by bubble
formation and/or bubble expansion in other tissues, including liver, lungs, and
blood
43.  The mechanisms for these forms of tissue damage are not yet fully
understood, and most of the victims have been beaked whales, with a fewdolphins affected as well.  While there is no evidence that seismic airguns can
cause similar damage, these early indications of unexpected physical trauma
caused by high-intensity sound bear close scrutiny.
44
The only controlled study to date that shows clear tissue damage from exposureto airguns involves pink snapper (McCauley, Fewtrell, Popper, 2002).  In thiscaged exposure study, a single airgun was moved toward and away from thefishes several times over the course of a two and a half hour trial, exposing them
to sound in the range of 145-180 dB re 1
µPa (mean squared pressure).  The fish
experienced severe damage to the sound-sensitive hair cells in their ears, and incontrast to earlier studies, there was little or no regeneration of these cells overtime.  The main caveat to this study is the obvious one: had the fish not been
caged, they likely would have swum away.  Nevertheless, it raises for the first
time a clear mechanism by which exposure to elevated sound levels can causepermanent damage to fish ears.
3.1.2  Temporary Threshold Shift
It has long been observed in people and terrestrial animals that exposure to loud
sound for extended periods can cause our hearing sensitivity to decrease. That is,the threshold for hearing goes up, so that we no longer hear sounds that wenormally can faintly notice.  This is known as a Temporary Threshold Shift.  It
can cause significant impacts in the ability to hear distant or faint acoustic signals
of importance.
Relatively little study has taken place with ocean creatures
45, but some studies
seem to indicate that there is evidence of some TTS with fish, though the amount
of temporary hearing loss is far less dramatic than that seen in birds ormammals.
46
3.1.3  Increased stress
While there have been several studies that have shown increases in stress, as
measured by a variety of physiological indicators, in terrestrial animals, verylittle has been done with ocean creatures in this regard.  The one study in theliterature involves captive beluga whales, and showed no stress response to

24recorded offshore oil rig sounds at received levels of up to 153 dB re 1 µPa,
though the researchers cautioned against extrapolation to wild belugas, whichwould likely be exposed to such sounds for longer periods. (Richardson, 1995)  It
is possible that recent advancements in temporary tagging could be used to
explore this question.
3.2  Behavioral
As noted above, behavioral changes are clearly seen in many species
encountering seismic survey sounds.  At the same time, there appears to be little
evidence of dramatic changes in behavior or migration patterns in areas subject
to survey activities.  The general assumption has been that any behavioralchanges are short-term and have negligible impact on species survival.
Summaries of behavioral change will be presented below; however, it is again
useful to keep some perspective on the degree of confidence we may rightlyassume about such studies
47:
There have been no direct studies to investigate whether or not
repeated man-made noise pollution in an area can lead to long termdisturbance and exclusion from habitat. However, some authors havedrawn attention to examples where repeated loud noise events do not
appear to have caused animals to desert areas of preferred habitat.
We should be reticent in taking much comfort from these
observations however.  Firstly, such observations tend to be qualitative
rather than quantitative; they are rarely backed up by surveys oranalysis to show what the population levels might have been in the
absence of airgun noise. Secondly, the option of moving to different
habitats or changing migration routes may be a far more drastic
undertaking than many imagine.  There may be strong reasons why
an alternative route or habitat cannot be found. . . It may also be the
case that animals are not able to appreciate the potentially damagingconsequences of exposure to noise. There are innumerable examples
of humans willingly exposing themselves to damaging levels of
noise, workers using power tools and teenagers in dance clubs to
mention two. The damaging effect of transients can be particularly
difficult to assess.  Because the auditory system integrates sound over
about 0.5 seconds, transients that are much shorter than this (such as
a pulse from an airgun) may not "sound" particularly loud.  For a
number of reasons, marine mammals may be unable to take what
might seem to a human observer to be the obvious course of action toalleviate the effects of a localized noise such as an airgun array or largeapproaching vessel. This could be due to an inability to correctly
appreciate the situation on the part of the marine mammals, or a
failure on our part to understand the biology of the animal concerned.-Potter/Delory, 1998

25Behavioral perturbations are not assessed here but a concern is noted
that they are an equal or potentially more serious element of acousticimpacts. While auditory trauma, particularly from short or single
exposures may impair an individual, that is unlikely to impact most
populations. Long-term constant noise that disrupts a habitat or keybehavior is more likely to involve population level effects. In thatsense, the question of individual hearing loss or animal loss from a
single intense exposure is far less relevant to conservation than a
more subtle, literally quieter but pervasive source that induces broad
species loss or behavioral disruption.
-
Darlene Ketten, testimony before House Resources Committee, 2001.
3.2.1. Avoidance/stand-off/swimming behavior changes
The most commonly observed behavioral changes are avoidance (changing
course to avoid close travel past a sound source; this can include moving away,or continuing to come closer at an oblique angle), stand-off (coming no closer to asound source), and change of swimming patterns (speeding up, startle responses,
increased disorderly swimming).
Bowhead whales, residents of Arctic waters, appear to be among the most
sensitive to airgun sounds
48.  Initial behavioral changes were seen up to 8km
away, at received levels of 142-157 dB re 1 µPa, and bowheads started moving
actively away from the survey vessels at ranges from 3-7.2km.  Rapid swimmingaway began at 152-178 dB re 1
µPa, with activity clearly disrupted for 1-4 hours
afterwards.  Some subtle effects, such as changes in surfacing and blowing rates,
were apparent up to 54-73km from an active airgun array, where received levelswere as low as 125 dB re 1
µPa.
Grey whales have shown pronounced avoidance responses at 2.5km (received
level 170dB re 1 µPa)49, with less consistent or dramatic responses suspected at
received levels of 140-160dB re 1 µPa.  Some subtle behavioral changes in
surfacing patterns seemed to persist for more than an hour after seismic shooting
ceased.
Note that in each of these species, clear behavioral responses are common at
levels far below the current 180dB re 1 µPa threshold, and often far beyond the
1km radius considered the industry standard “exclusion zone”.
Migrating humpbacks encountering
an active seismic survey50 showed
avoidance at 4-5 km (received level140dB re 1
µPa2.s / 168dB re 1 µPa2
peak-to-peak).  The stand-off range
appeared to be about 3km (received
level 144-151dB re 1 µPa2.s).In each of these species, clear
behavioral responses are common
at levels far below the current
180dB re 1 µPa threshold, and often
far beyond the 1km radius
considered the industry standard
“exclusion zone.”

26Controlled exposure trials with a group of resting cow and calf humpbacks
showed much lower tolerance for airgun sounds: avoidance was seen at receivedlevels of 97-132dB re 1
µPa2.s and stand-off at levels of 116-134dB re 11 µPa2.s.
This would translate to avoidance of an airgun array at 7-12km.  It is clear that in
most circumstances, whales would prefer to remain at distances that aresignificantly farther than current mitigation measures are designed to
accommodate.
Responses of sperm whales, a species of special concern in the Gulf of Mexico,
are less clear. Until recently, research has been focused on gathering basicpopulation distribution data; observations of responses to airgun sounds have
been more opportunistic, and less methodical, than those cited above
51. Federal
regulators noted in 2002 that “the effects of noise (on sperm whales) are virtuallyundocumented and, unlike a potential event such as an oil spill, represent theresults of normal industry activities.
52” Though sperm whales vocalize at higher
frequencies than baleen whales or the bulk of airgun noise, seismic survey
sounds do at times cause some responses. Sperm whales have been observed inthe Gulf of Mexico apparently moving away, to as far as 50km, when surveysbegan
53, though this has been contradicted by other studies; likewise, some (but
not all) sperm whales in the Indian Ocean ceased calling in the face of seismic
pulses that were 10-15dB above the background ambient noise, produced by asurvey over 300km away
54.  Most research in the Gulf of Mexico, though, has
shown surprisingly little dramatic response in the face of thousands of miles of
seismic surveys being shot over the past three decades.  It is unclear whether thisis a consequence of low sensitivity or habituation to seismic sound, or reflects ahigh motivation to remain in the area. During the MMS-sponsored GulfCet II
study on marine mammals, the cetacean sighting rate did not change
significantly when seismic exploration signals were audible. Likewise, passiveacoustic surveys to monitor sperm whale vocal behavior and distribution inrelation to seismic surveys in the northeast Atlantic revealed few, if any, effects
of airgun noise
55. A multi-year study of sperm whale responses to sound is
underway in the Gulf of Mexico at this time; preliminary results will be releasedover the coming year
56.  However, the cumulative impact of seismic surveys
conducted in recent decades will be nearly impossible to assess.
Other families of sea creatures
McCauley (2000) studied responses of several non-whale species exposed tosounds from a single airgun in caged trials.  Sea turtles showed increasedswimming activity at 155dB re 1
µPa2.s (168dB re 1 µPa2 mean squared pressure),
and erratic swimming patterns at levels above 164dB re 1 µPa2.s.
Squid showed increasing startle responses (jetting away from the sound) at levels
above 145-150dB re 1 µPa2.s, and a tendency to slow their swimming at levels
over 155dB re 1 µPa2.s.  They also showed a tendency to move to the top of the
water, where the received levels were lower.

27Caged fish trials showed classic “c-turn” startle responses and a tendency to
gather together in tight groups at the bottom center of the cage at levels above145-150dB re 1
µPa2.s.
Again, thresholds for responses indicate that current mitigation standards,
based solely on avoiding physiological harm, may need to be reconsidered.
Engås et al (1996) stands as the most definitive study to document what has long
been observed by fishermen: when seismic surveys are taking place, the fish
leave. Engås noted reductions in catch rates of cod and haddock up to 18
nautical miles from the survey area  (which was 3 x 10 nautical miles in size);
acoustic mapping of the survey area showed a 45 percent reduction in fish
numbers during the shooting, with
numbers continuing to drop aftershooting finished, to a total decline of 64percent.  Catch rates within the survey
area fell 68 percent; in surrounding areas,
catch rates fell 45-50 percent.  Virtually allthe larger cod (over 60cm) left theshooting area; among haddock, there was still some evidence of larger fish still
being caught, though at a reduced proportion relative to before the survey.
Catch rates at greater distances from the survey showed increasing proportionsof larger fish.  The study followed fish numbers via both catches and acoustic
mapping for five days after the survey; while there was some return of fish (and
proportionately more larger fish) during this time, stock numbers were still wellbelow the starting point after five days of quiet.
3.2.2  Acoustic Masking
Masking of communication or of important auditory cues about predators or
prey will generally only happen when the airgun sounds are louder than the
background ambient noise levels.  At greater distance, the airgun sounds are nottotally gone; they simply melt into the (now slightly increased) backgroundambient noise.
Masking is most dramatic on sounds very close in frequency; when the
frequency of, say, a vocalization, is far from the frequency of a noise source, then
the vocalization will remain clear even when the noise is somewhat louder.
While airguns discharge predominantly low-frequency sound, it is stillconsidered a broad-band source, in that it does contain elements in a wide rangeof frequencies.  It is also loud enough to remain distinctly audible, even at
distances of tens to hundreds of kilometers.
Obviously, airgun sounds that start at over 200 dB re 1
µPa2 at the source are far
above the ambient background (see Section 2.4.2 above).  Even as transmission
loss reduces the received levels rapidly over the first few kilometers, they remainEngås et al (1996) stands as the
most definitive study to document
what has long been observed by
fishermen: when seismic surveys
are taking place, the  fish leave.

28clearly audible, often dominant in the soundscape.  Even 100dB transmission
loss, as can be expected in low frequencies (below 1kHz) over about 100km indeep water, and over 10-100km in shallower water,
57 can often leave airguns
clearly louder than the background ambient noise.  It is both theoretically likely
and often observed that seismic sounds are prominent in the soundscape atranges of tens to hundreds of kilometers, far beyond the range at which they maycause physiological damage or obvious behavioral changes.  We can only guess
at what effects this may have on the communication and acoustic perception of
ocean creatures.
Given the lack of clear data on how the long-range audibility of airguns may
mask biologically important communication or perception, some excerpts from
research reports that address this issue will perhaps give the best sense of what itgoing on below the surface.
There will be many situations when there is significant biological
advantage for an animal to be able to detect very faint sounds .
Indeed this is believed to have been the evolutionary pressure for the
creation of sensitive hearing, so there is the potential for harmful
masking to occur at very great ranges.Potter/Delory (1998)
Even at 8 km range seismic power was still clearly in excess of the high
background noise levels (featuring mainly the noises of the surveyship) up to 8 kHz.Goold (1998)
Toothed whales hearing is relatively poor in low frequencies, but there
is sufficient energy in the output of airgun arrays at frequencies of 200-
500Hz to make them audible at distances of 10-100km
Harwood, Wilson (2001)
The PMEL autonomous hydrophone array deployed in the central
Atlantic Ocean recorded at least three different airgun sources from
around the Atlantic Basin, sometimes simultaneously. The most
frequent origin locations were near Nova Scotia, Canada, NortheastBrazil, and Northwest Africa. Airgun signals dominate approximately
75% of the annual data recordings.
PMEL/NOAA website, airgun page

29
This map shows the placement of the hydrophone array that has been dominated by airgun
signals from Brazil, Novia Scotia, and Africa.
Map from Smith (1999)
http://humm.whoi.edu/projects/cruisereport1999.pdf
3.2.3  Masking of perception: ambient noise imaging
A new field of study that has emerged in the past five years or so is pointing
toward a heretofore unimagined use of sound in the underwater environment.  It
appears that the ambient noise of the sea may “illuminate” the underwater
environment much as light illuminates terrestrial landscapes.  Researchers havedeveloped systems that can begin to “see” objects in the underwater landscapeby complex processing of the jumble of sound waves that make up the ambient
background noise. Using the early processing systems developed so far, it seems
that ambient noise imaging is most useful in relatively close ranges (less than500m), and that high-frequency sounds provide the best resolution.  Suspicion isincreasing (though so far unfounded by any direct evidence) that many ocean
creatures may use similarly subtle processing systems to decode changes in
ambient noise patterns in order to identify individual fish or schools of prey, orto navigate through underwater topography.  These sorts of very subtle acoustic
sensitivities could be disturbed by loud transient sounds, which may be likened
to a bright spotlight sweeping across our face as we try to see our surroundings.(Caveat: while this is a very intriguing line of research, and may develop into anew and powerful form of passive monitoring, imagining such abilities in sea
creatures is by far the most speculative and unsubstantiated moment you’ll
encounter in this report.)
3.2.4  Disruption of rest
Perhaps one of the most overlooked aspects of anthropogenic noise impacts is
the disruption of rest periods important to migrating, or even generally moving,
ocean creatures.  By easily falling back on the idea that creatures can simply

30swim away from the bothersome noise, we may neglect to appreciate that
“swimming away” takes valuable energy and attention.
McCauley (2000) clearly noted that humpback whales at rest were far more easily
disturbed by airgun noise, than whales that were intently migrating; restingwhales showed avoidance behavior at greater distances and lower receivedlevels of sound
58.  (See section 3.2.1 above)
3.3  Food chain impacts
There is little direct knowledge of the impacts of sound on creatures lower on the
food chain, such as krill or plankton.  It is known that some crustaceans haverudimentary auditory structures, and it is quite likely that most or all ocean
beings make use of tactile/auditory perceptions in some way.  Robert McCauley,
who has studied the sound impacts of seismic sources on larger creatures, andhas acknowledged the lack of data on of the use of sound by prey such as krill,was aghast at plans to allow a survey in an important blue whale feeding area:
“It beggars belief that we can allow this to happen when we don't know the
impact,” McCauley was quoted in the local press, “Krill also have sophisticatedsensory systems. The noise effects on blue whales and krill and their interactions,have not been investigated.”
59
4.0 Discussion
4.1  Concrete effects
We must always stay aware of the fact that extreme human sounds have effects
on ocean creatures on a continuum of scales.  Gross physiological damage is themost dramatic, but it may be a tragic mistake to stake our ocean’s future on
implementation rules that are built primarily on avoiding such damage.  The
current standard of simply assuring that marine mammals are far enough awayto avoid sounds of over 180dB deserves closer scrutiny.
Likewise, we must be cautious about assuming that driving fish, cetaceans, or
any other creature away with our sound is always a “negligible” impact.  Thereis ample evidence that a wide variety of ocean creatures choose, when possible,
to avoid sounds much less intense than 180db re 1 
µPa2.  The fact that
occasionally an individual may remain, or approach, closer should not blind usto the evidence of those that retreat.
And finally, it is crucial to remember that the acoustic sensibilities of ocean
creatures are incomprehensibly more sensitive than we can imagine based uponour own experience.  It is nearly certain that repetitive human sounds which arevastly louder than the ambient background at their source, and that remain
audible at great distances, are having effects that we cannot understand.

314.2  Ethical considerations
While of course we cannot refrain from all activity in the ocean because of our
lack of understanding of how it may affect bodies and senses that are verydifferent than ours, we can and should bear in mind our degree of certainty oruncertainty about the effects of our actions.
We humans like to set ourselves apart from the rest of nature.  Yet our special
qualities are not just our power of reason and inquiry, but also our ethicalsensibilities.  To enter the sea as truly human, we must combine our efforts
toward practical and concrete measurement of highly disruptive effects with a
curiosity, respect, and consideration for the beings that live there.  Obviously,seismic surveys are but one of many factors in the human sound presence in the
ocean realm; while it may seem unfair to single airguns out for closer scrutiny, it
is also natural that such extreme examples of human activity will be the first tostir the deeper questions that must be faced.
Is death of whales the threshold that triggers us to stop?  Is the disruption of a
school of fish’s feeding activity enough to give us pause?  Is it acceptable to causeannoyance, irritation, or confusion in wild species across tens, hundreds, orthousands of square kilometers of the sea? By what virtue do we claim the right
to so dominate the soundscape?
Such questions may not have concrete or easy answers.  Yet it is time that we
begin to ask them, and in so doing, to challenge ourselves in new and important
ways.  The understandings that may come from such inquiries promise us the
opportunity to continue to thrive in this place, in relationship with a diverse andhealthy natural world.  Indeed, such questions represent a natural maturation of
the self-awareness about the unintended effects of our actions that gave rise to
the first environmental regulations. While our regulations can serve to slowunthinking or even intentional destruction, consideration of ethical questionssuch as these lead us toward a strong, long-term relationship with the rest of our
planetary companions.
4.3  Precautionary principle
The recurring theme of choosing our actions with mindfulness of the
uncertainties of our understanding leads to the application of the Precautionary
Principle.  Rather than charging ahead with new actions, accepting limits only
when presented with incontrovertible proof of harm being caused, thePrecautionary Principle holds that we should proceed with caution, and set ourstandards such that we can be assured of doing no harm to other creatures or
living systems.  Or more simply put, that we err on the side of caution in the
absence of a full understanding of the impacts of our actions.

32There is ample historical evidence that our rush to progress tends to carry with it
unintended and unforeseen consequences.  Especially in situations where the
survival of species hangs by relatively tenuous threads, the precautionary
principle makes ecological and biological sense.   The depleted state of global
fisheries, the ongoing recovery of cetacean species from the brink of extinction,and growing concerns about the health of the ocean ecosystem as a whole, all
point toward a need to take each action with mindfulness of a picture very much
bigger than an individual survey area and more long term than most currentknowledge allows.
Thompson, et al (2000) have shown that the precautionary principle can mean
the difference between survival and extinction for populations on the edge.  It islikely to take 10 to 30 years to notice small but significant 1-5% annual declines in
population.  The chances of survival once the decline is noticed drop rapidly as it
takes longer for us to notice problems.  A precautionary management criteria cangreatly increase the opportunities for species survival, by minimizing negativeimpacts during the decades it may take to know how the population is doing.
This is especially important, given our current systemic questions about the
ocean’s vitality and the low rate of population recharge in larger species.
Potter (1998) notes that “Sperm whales, for example, are thought to have afecundity rate only four percent above natural attrition. If this is the case, even amarginal decrease in fitness for life of this species could result in total extinction
in the future.”
Regarding the effects of seismic surveys and industrial development in the Gulf
of Mexico, the National Marine Fisheries Service Biological opinion (NOAA,
2002) stressed the fragility of the stock of sperm whales in the Gulf: “NOAA
Fisheries believes sperm whales may be vulnerable to adverse effects of acoustic
harassment from seismic activities, construction and operation noise, or pollutionresulting from activities associated with the proposed action (p28). . . . Eventhough sperm whales are abundant on a world-wide scale (Reeves and
Whitehead 1997), because their potential rate of reproduction is so low and
because those found in the Gulf of Mexico are believed to be a small (Nmin=411)resident stock, even small negative impacts of noise resulting from activitiesassociated with the proposed action could cause population declines (p37).”
Given such profound concerns, proceeding in a precautionary manner would be
the prudent choice.
5.0 Calls for action
5.1  Case by case analysis and modeling
Because of the great variability in transmission loss across different sorts of ocean
floor profiles, and the small but significant variation in the output levels of
individual air gun arrays
60, we follow McCauley (2000) in calling for case-by-case
modeling of likely propagation patterns: “at present, predicting the horizontal

33sound propagation from any specified air-gun array source needs to be done
on a case by case basis . . . Accurately predicting levels at specified ranges and
water depths requires modeling of the source and local environment.”
We also encourage the use of cumulative effects modeling such as developed by
McCauley (2000) and described above, to better adapt each survey’s operations
to fit local biological and geophysical conditions.  Such case-by-case procedures
may help to ameliorate the effects of current uncertainties, which can lead toseemingly excessive regulatory hurdles for very small single-gun site surveys.
61
5.2  Require “best practices” mitigation measures
Many innovative approaches to mitigation and monitoring are emerging from
researchers and regulatory agencies worldwide62.  A “best practices” approach to
mitigation would include:
• Use of the lowest possible power array to meet local conditions and obtain
information being sought.
• Extend ramp-up times where turtles are present; 30 minute ramp-ups are
minimal and 60 minutes preferable, to accommodate turtles’ relativelyslow swimming speeds.  Engås (1996) evidence also suggests that smaller
fish would benefit from slower ramp-ups.
• Adapt the sequencing of seismic lines to account for any predictable
movements of fish across the survey area.
• Consider establishment of a larger exclusion zone to reduce behavioral
effects, especially on species with tenuous populations.  It may be that
observed behavioral disruptions will be better addressed by a 2-5km
radius, rather than the current 1km radius.  In the same way, the current
180 dB re 1
µPa2 standard for acceptable received levels of sound (based on
avoiding physiological damage) may need to be adjusted downward toavoid behavioral disruption.
• Consider cumulative impacts over time in permitting and effects
modeling; include consideration of seasonal and historical impacts fromother activities (shipping, military, industrial, other seismic) in the specific
survey area and nearby region.  Develop databases that track the historyof seismic and other industrial activities, using GIS mapping.
63
• Require passive acoustic monitoring64: can complementing visual
observations by identifying animals vocalizing beneath the surface, down
to the sea bottom.  Passive acoustic monitoring can also extend the zone of
effective observation, which would be important should we choose to
apply a more precautionary approach to acceptable received sound levels.
• Incorporate Environmental Effects Monitoring into all active seismic
surveys.  EEM should include measurement of received sound levels at
ranges of 1-25km, as well as both visual and passive acoustics monitoring
of the responses of marine mammals, fish, and other species present in the
area.

34These “best practices” would require a greater investment in time and money
from companies conducting seismic surveys; a small price to pay for increased
protection.  Over time, as our knowledge increases, it is likely that we will be
able to design both technologies and implementation strategies that can reducethese added costs associated with seismic surveys.
5.3 Establish more coordinated oversight of seismic surveys and of
noise in the ocean in general.
5.3.1 Formation of a Commission charged with developing
coherent operational and mitigation policies regarding
seismic surveys.
An independent, government funded commission is called for, to coordinate
efforts specifically directed at better understanding the impacts of seismic testingand development of improved mitigation and monitoring measures.  Such a
commission must have high standards of transparency and accountability, to
remain free from charges of bias or influence by industry.  It is possible that theNational Science Foundation studies planned to begin in 2004 (see Section 5.3.2
below) could catalyze this effort.
5.3.2 Follow through on calls for better coordination of research
into ocean noise impacts in general.
Recent reports from the National Research Council, the Whale and Dolphin
Conservation Society, and the Office of Naval Research have all called forstronger coordination and commitment to carrying out much-needed research
into the impacts of noise in the sea.  Such basic information as a “sound map”
charting worldwide noise levels and a “sound budget” which attempts to setcaps on total noise so that vulnerable areas will be protected, are still only in theconceptual stage.
Several existing programs are attempting to address either sound-related
research needs, or better coordination among government, academic institutions,and industry.  These efforts all need to be given high priority in funding
decisions; likewise, the coordination efforts should all be encouraged to include
data on sound and noise in their missions, in order to more quickly obtain theglobal baseline data that is so sorely needed.  The National Research Council
Ocean Studies Board recently called for a single Federal agency to oversee and
coordinate these important efforts.
 65 We second that desire for better oversight.
Among the existing efforts that can be coordinated to study noise issues are:
• Marine Mammal Commission.  Mandated by Congress to hold a series of
noise pollution workshops in 2003-4.66

35• National Research Council, Ocean Studies Board.  Laid out an ambient
noise research agenda in their 2003 report.
• NOAA. Plans to begin work on a noise budget.67
• National Oceanographic Partnership Program68 (NOPP). Links
oceanographic research efforts into regional and national coordinationnetworks.  Current focus is on sea state info (temperature, wind, waves,
etc) with some indirect efforts on fisheries and species monitoring.
• Consortium for Oceanographic Research and Education (CORE)
69.
Oversees NOPP and other oceanographic initiatives, including the Census
of Marine Life, which also could put added focus on acoustics research.
• US Integrated and Sustained Ocean Observing System (IOOS)70. This
effort, a sub-set of the NOPP program (itself a subset of CORE) includes in
its formal mission “managing resources for sustained use” and “restoring
healthy ecosystems.”  IOOS appears to be doing the practical work of
coordinating regional data collection networks, but is not including sounddata as a priority.
• National Science Foundation.  Has committed $1 million for research into
the effects of seismic surveys on marine mammals.
71
While it appears that the responsibilities of CORE, NOPP, and IOOP are
bureaucratically nested, the apparent redundancy reinforces the Ocean StudiesBoard’s call for a coordinating entity.
5.4  Research in need of industry and government support
There are several areas in which investment in research could lead to better
monitoring of biological effects and/or lower-impact technologies for conductingsurveys.  Government and industry should share the burden of increasing our
knowledge in the following areas:
• Use of ambient noise imaging as an added passive monitoring tool, in an
effort to observe animals beneath the surface that are not vocalizing.
• Use of temporary tags to gather information on received levels of sound,
as well as physiological indicators of stress.  Development of the least
invasive tags is preferred, likely focusing on suction-cup tags that remainattached for hours, rather than skin-piercing tags that remain attached for
days or weeks.  Free-floating acoustic monitoring devices that are not
attached to animals can also provide important information aboutreceived sound levels in and around survey areas.
72
• Studies of the acoustic perception and use of sound by species at the
bottom of the food chain.  This is important both to balance the current
focus on charismatic larger sea creatures, and to assure that feeding
patterns of larger species are not disrupted.
• Development of technologies to reduce the source levels of airguns.  These
efforts could include limiting the frequency output (range) of airguns to
better avoid frequencies important to marine species, development of

36techniques that can adjust sound levels during the survey, to maintain the
most modest sub-surface penetration necessary, development of moresensitive hydrophones or improved data analysis algorithms that could
discern the needed geological information in much weaker echoes, use of
bubble-curtains to provide some sonic baffling near the source, andinvestigations of lower power sound-generating technologies includingevacuated spheres
73 or other now-experimental techniques (this would
involve a degree of industry cooperation, as new techniques may be
considered proprietary).  Research could also be encouraged towarddeveloping geological interpretation techniques that could make use ofsurveys which do not penetrate so deeply into the ocean-bottom crust;
alternatively, such lower-power surveys could become the norm, with
very site-specific return surveys to probe more deeply into areas of specialpromise.
5.5 Uniform application of regulatory procedures (Gulf/Beaufort)
There are two areas within US territorial waters that have been subject to seismic
surveys and oil and gas development in recent years.  One is the Beaufort Sea,north of Alaska, and the other is the Gulf of Mexico.  Exploration in the Beauforthas declined in recent years, while the Gulf of Mexico has seen significantly more
seismic survey activity, especially targeting deep-water areas.
In the Beaufort, after failing to gain drilling access to the Arctic National Wildlife
Refuge (ANWR), the oil industry was given increased access to lease areas in the
nearby National Petroleum Reserve as well as royalty relief incentives for
companies (exempting specified volumes of oil from royalty payments, tied intowholesale prices for oil).  This is expected to lead to an increase in drilling, and
perhaps to more offshore surveys, which have slowed to a trickle (rarely more
than one a year, and often none).
The Gulf of Mexico has been subject to a continuing barrage of seismic surveys
over the past thirty years.  Between 1969 and 1999 about 900,000 miles of survey
lines were shot by seismic survey crews; since 1994, about 150,000 square mileshave been mapped by more advanced 3-D seismic surveys
74.  Royalty relief
measures passed during the 1990s led to a massive upswing in surveys and
drilling in deepwaters in the Gulf.  On average, during the late 1990’s over a
hundred survey permits were issued per year, largely reflecting the 7-9 yearcycle of repeat surveying, along with a desire to utilize newer state of the arttechniques and equipment.  Minerals Management Service (MMS) planners
project that these numbers will drop during the 40-year lease cycle currently
being planned.
75
This activity has been subject to relatively modest levels of oversight.  Only in1990 did the MMS begin to actively collect data on marine mammal populations,and in 2003 it first applied to the NMFS for small take permits allowing seismic

37surveys to harass marine mammals.  Meanwhile, MMS and NMFS studies have
repeatedly raised warnings about the cumulative impacts of airgun noise onlocal species:
As the oil and gas industry moves into deeper water along the
continental slope in its continuing search for extractable reserves,information is needed on the distribution, abundance, behavior, and
habitat of cetaceans, especially large and deep-water species in the
Gulf of Mexico. . . The first large-scale vessel surveys to assess marinemammal distribution and abundance in the Gulf were conducted bythe NMFS beginning in 1990. Much of what we've learned regarding
the Gulf's marine mammals is a result of the GulfCet Program, funded
largely by the MMS. Despite recent studies of distribution and
abundance, we know little about the natural history and ecology of
pelagic cetaceans in the Gulf of Mexico.
76
-MMS website, 2003
Although any one seismic survey is unlikely to have long-term effects
on any cetacean species or population, available information is
insufficient to be confident that seismic activities, collectively, would
not have some effect on the size or productivity of any marinemammal species or population.
-MMS Eastern Planning Area EIS, 2002
Until more conclusive results on the effects of seismic activities on
sperm whale behavior are obtained, NOAA Fisheries believes that
precautionary measures to prevent harm to sperm whales should be
taken to reduce the likelihood of any adverse effects to individuals orpopulations.-NOAA Fisheries Biological Opinion, 2002
In 2002, MMS issued new mitigation standards, including requiring marine
mammal observers and establishment of a 500m exclusion zone (i.e. requiringairguns to cease firing when marine mammals are within 500m).  However, the
MMS, which worked closely with the International Association of Geophysical
Contractors in developing its mitigation measures, rejected NMFSrecommendations to use a larger exclusion zone and suspend operations in times
of poor visibility, including darkness.
77
Meanwhile, the MMS’s Environmental Impact Statement for the Central and
Western Planning Areas of the Gulf78 (focus of over 90% of development) gives
little attention to sound issues.  After the NMFS identified debris, vessel traffic,
and airgun noise as potential sources of “takes,” MMS’s EIS included mitigationsfor debris and traffic, but not for noise; they likewise providedestimates/projections of ship traffic, helicopter trips, platforms to be constructed,
but not of surveys
79.  The “Impacts on Marine Mammals” section of the EIS had

38only this to say about noise: “There is no conclusive evidence whether
anthropogenic noise has or has not caused long-term displacements of, orreductions in, marine mammal populations.” (p70)
Since 1994, oil and gas exploration in the Beaufort area (along Alaska’s North
Slope) has required NMFS issued “small take permits” in order to harass marinemammals, in the form of Letters of Authorization (LOAs).  These LOAs are
issued contingent on permittees following NMFS-approved mitigation plans
designed to assure negligible impacts; among the restrictions in place in theBeaufort is seasonal suspension of operations during the bowhead whalemigration.
The NMFS has yet to officially place seismic
 survey activities under its Small
Take Authorization Program, even though there has long been concern about
marine mammals and seismic testing in the Gulf, and Small Take permitting
regulations are in use in the Beaufort Sea.  Despite the vastly greater level ofexploration and drilling activity in the Gulf of Mexico, until 2002 the MMS issuedpermits in the Gulf without NMFS involvement; and once embarking on the
required Endangered Species Act consultations, MMS chose to adopt weaker
mitigation measures than those recommended in the NMFS Biological Opinion.
On March 3, 2003, the Minerals Management Service (MMS) finally formally
petitioned the NMFS to allow authorization for petroleum companies to harass
small numbers of marine mammals, principally the sperm whale, incidental toconducting seismic testing in the Gulf of Mexico.  As it stands now, the wheelsare slowly turning to bring management in the Gulf up to the standards long
used in the Beaufort, whereby NMFS must issue LOAs with binding mitigation
plans, before MMS can issue its permits. The issuance of NMFS permits for small
takes (primarily harassment of
individual animals) is pending,
awaiting a ProgrammaticEnvironmental Assessmentprepared by the MMS, and its
evaluation by NMFS.  This EA, or
an expanded EIS, will be adapted ordeveloped by NMFS, and will formthe basis for future activities in the
Gulf.  However, until this process is
complete, Gulf industrialdevelopment is continuing on the
current system, by which permits are issued by MMS, along with Notices to
Lessees (NTLs).  These NTLs contain MMS mitigation requirements, though as
noted above, such requirements represent minimal oversight and are not subjectto NMFS approval.On March 3, 2003, the Minerals
Management Service (MMS) finally
petitioned the NMFS to allow
authorization for petroleum
companies to harass small numbers
of marine mammals, principally the
sperm whale, incidental to
conducting seismic testing in the
Gulf of Mexico.

39It is striking that MMS has allowed such extensive development to continue,
when even its own reports confirm that our knowledge of marine mammals inthe Gulf is both recent and lacking in detail.  Given that permanent resident
sperm whale populations were unknown until recently. vague assumptions
based on the fact that sperm whales are still in the area after decades of exposureto surveys, and that they appear to respond only modestly to seismic activity, arenot acceptable as foundations of policy.  Without historic data or better current
monitoring, we are operating in the dark.  It is crucial that future industrial
activities in the Gulf of Mexico are carried out under the combined auspices ofthe MMS and NMFS.  The NMFS’s biological expertise is essential in assuringthat exploration and development activities do not cause further harm to local
marine species.
5.6  Moratorium on new surveys
It is clear that the regulation of seismic testing is based on assumption and hope
rather than clear established science or even a modest application of the
Precautionary Principle. This thinking has resulted in a rampant disregard for
safeguards laid out in the Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) and hascreated a major discrepancy in regulatory policy between seismic testingactivities in the Beaufort Sea and the Gulf of Mexico. It is the responsibility of the
Bush Administration to acknowledge the obvious confusion within the current
system, and to halt all seismic activities in the Gulf of Mexico until a uniformstandard of implementation of the MMPA and improved, consistent mitigationstandards are adopted.
5.7 Reinstate and reaffirm stronger protections during
reauthorization of the MMPA in the next congressional session
Despite strong protests from Senator Olympia Snowe (R-ME), whose
subcommittee is scheduled to address re-authorization of the MMPA this year,
the Senate and House both included negative language in the recent DefenseAuthorization Bill that has dramatic, direct effects on regulation of noise impactson marine mammals.  As regards sound, the two changes that are most relevant
are:
• Rewriting the definition of harassment.  Currently, any military action
that constitutes an "annoyance" to marine mammals and has the "potential
to disturb" the animals is prohibited. The Pentagon has changed the
definition of harassment mean anything that has a “significant potential to
injure” or is “likely to disturb " animals.  This puts the onus on scientists to
prove such impacts and is a move directly away from precautionarystandards.
• Expanding the “small take” permitting process so that a single permit can
cover large numbers of animals (e.g., whole local populations) and large

40areas, rather than the current language, which requires each permit to
cover a specified geographic region and small numbers of animals.
In both cases, the changes point us firmly away from precautionary standards,
and toward the precipice of causing rapid, hard-to-document populationstresses, at a time when more, rather than less, caution is demanded.  The Houseseems poised to affirm these changes in its re-authorization debates.  Prevention
of these environmental roll-backs and harmful rule changes will depend on
steadfast efforts in the Senate.  This year’s amendments to the MMPA explicitlyapply only to “military readiness activities,” so do not affect other noise sources,such as seismic surveys, but vigilance will be required to assure that such
changes are not extended to other arenas, such as commercial seismic surveys.
5.8 Support clean energy alternatives to fossil fuels and strengthened
conservation efforts
Although the purpose of this report remains to highlight the urgency of the
threat seismic testing poses to marine mammals as well as other ocean animals, itcannot go unmentioned that the necessity for seismic testing is born out of anantiquated energy policy.  Today’s clean energy technology is progressing
towards increased use of renewable sources of energy, which means it is only a
matter of time until oil and natural gas technologies become obsolete. The factthat seismic testing is threatening our ocean ecosystems provides just one more
reason to work towards ending our dead-end dependence on fossil fuels.
6.0 Conclusion
The planet’s oceans are in crisis and the human burden on our ocean ecosystems
is increasing by the day. Marine mammals are especially in need of help and it isvital that the laws currently in place to protect them, such as the Marine Mammal
Protection Act, are fully implemented.
But the oceans and the life within them will not be saved through government
action alone. The petroleum industry has a reputation for being a highly
influential force within the U.S. government and perhaps tremendous public
pressure is the only hope left for enforcing environmental values on industry. Asdrilling in the Gulf of Mexico spreads further and deeper into ocean waters, the
risks increase for more species to be harmed by seismic surveys.
Current scientific knowledge of the effects of anthropogenic noise on marine
animals is woefully inadequate. This creates an urgent need for advancing
research into noise with high standards of scientific and public accountability.
This research must remain unbiased and free from interference from the energyindustry or other influenced parties.

41Today the ocean remains a mix of unparalleled beauty and tragic threats. We
watch as the environment continues to pay the price for the steadily
encroaching human imprint on nature. Greenpeace is committed to protecting
the oceans and the many endangered marine animals that inhabit them and to
that end we will continue to do everything within our power as a nonviolent
agent of change to end unnecessary and destructive ocean threats such as
seismic testing.
But Greenpeace alone cannot turn such a devastating tide. With this report we
hope to contribute in a minor way by highlighting the reality of this threat. Ourgovernment and corporate actors must be willing to show leadership on
protecting the environment and take responsibility for ensuring that our oceans
will remain places of wonder and beauty for generations to come.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the following people for advice and support in
the writing of this report:
Kert Davies, Robert McCauley, Michael Stocker, Mark McDonald, Elliott Bergerand John Potter.
Sections 1 through 5.4 were written by:
Jim CummingsAcoustic Ecology Institute
45 Cougar Canyon
Santa Fe, NM 87508cummings@acousticecology.org
Sections 5.5 through 6 reflect the writing and recommendations of:
Greenpeace USA702 H Street, NWSuite 300
Washington, D.C. 20001
kert.davies@wdc.greenpeace.org
                                                
1 Bahamas, 2000; Canary Islands, 2001.
2 Haro Strait, off Vancouver Island, May 2003, Seattle Post-Intelligencer, 7/12/03,
http://seattlepi.nwsource.com/local/130609_sonar12.html
3 Lamont-Dougherty project examining subsurface geology; a press release from the American Geophysical
Union addressing the lawsuit’s settlement can be seen at http://geophys.seos.uvic.ca/cassis/Eos.html
4 CASSIS project, http://geophys.seos.uvic.ca/cassis/index.html.
5 The Canadian Press 11/14/03, http://www.canada.com/search/story.aspx?id=3157e062-08c6-4480-8f5f-
053e1b2db3c4
6 The Age, 10/16/03, http://www.theage.com.au/articles/ 2003/10/16/1065917549657.html
7 Lamont-Dougherty project, source: Environmental News Service, 11/17/03

42                                                                                                                                                
8 See Section 3 below for details; Richardson (1995) and McCauley (2000) provide comprehensive
summaries.
9 See Gausland (2000).
10 See McCauley (2000).
11 This is noted in National Research Council (2003), among other places.  Potter/Delory (1998) raise this
point clearly: “Marine mammals are perhaps the hardest mammalian group to study. Virtually all relevant
aspects of their biology (including sensory capabilities, undisturbed behaviour and its adaptive significance,distribution and abundance) are only poorly understood. Conducting marine mammal research at sea isalways difficult and costly.. . Given such a background of ignorance, it is extremely difficult to evenestablish a meaningful framework for estimating the impact of noise on these animals.” (p8)
12 Note that this is a non peer-reviewed conference presentation.
13 National Research Council (2003) has led the call for more and better-coordinated research. See press
release at http://www4.nationalacademies.org/news.nsf/isbn/0309085365
14 Corridor Research project; The Canadian Press, 11/13/03,
http://www.canada.com/search/story.aspx?id=3157e062-08c6-4480-8f5f-053e1b2db3c4
15 See ESCOOT website, http://www.geosurv.gov.nf.ca/ecsoot/tfunck/z-40km.html (40km),
http://www.geosurv.gov.nf.ca/ecsoot/tfunck/z-20km.html (20km)
16 This summary of operations is based on info in MMS (2003).
17 National Research Council, 2003
18 Caldwell and Dragoset, 2000
19 See Richardson (1995), p297-299
20 Stocker, personal communication
21 See Richardson (1995), p 298
22 There is an added factor of confusion, but this one can be, for now, relegated to the footnotes.
Richardson (1995) notes that not all studies are careful to note the sampling bandwidths used to generatepressure density spectrum curves; these bandwidths are crucial, as they allow other researchers to convertthe results in ways that allow useful comparisons between studies.  Likewise, McCauley (2003) notes thatthere was an optimal sampling rate for recording the output of airgun arrays, and that this optimal rate
would change for different arrays and different locations.
23 See Richardson (1995) for an overview of other studies of note, including several studies of behavioral
responses of bowhead whales by Richardson, Malme, and Ljungblad (individually and in teams) in theBeaufort Sea and of grey whale responses by Malme and Ljungblad, all during the 1980’s.  These includedboth opportunistic observations and controlled exposure in the wild.  There is a surprising dearth of studieson toothed whales.
24 Caldwell (2000) and McDonald (personal communication, 2003). At distances greater than twice the
depth of the water, reflected sounds tend to increase horizontal received levels to within a few decibels ofcalculated propagation of vertical source levels.
25 National Research Council (2003), Figure 1-4.
26 Caldwell, 2002, p77
27 Figures in this section are from Richardson (1995) and National Research Council OSB (2003).
28 Estimated by APPEA, an Australian oil and gas trade association; see
http://www.appea.com.au/Publications/factsheet1.asp
29 Estimated by McDonald (personal communication) See.  McDonald, M.A., Webb, S.C., Hildebrand, J.A.,
Blue and fin whales observed on a seafloor array in the Northeast Pacific, J. Acous. Soc. Am.,98(2), Pt. 1,712-721, 1995.
30 See National Research Council (2003), Chapter 2.  Ross (1987) found to a 12-14dB increase in low-
frequency noise in the period between 1950 and 1975, and projected it to increase another 5dB by the endof the century.  Extrapolating back to the beginning of the century, it seems likely the increase has been atleast 20dB.
31 The following discussion is based on figures in Cato (1997), as referenced in National Research Council
(2003), and Richardson (1995).
32 Also referenced in National Research Council (2003): RANDI model as referenced in Emery (2001) and
Mazzuca (2001)
33 This line of reasoning informed the debate on the ATOC experiments in the mid 1990s. See especially
National Research Council (2000)
34 These are very rough estimates, presented to suggest the relative difference, and similarity, in the sounds
as received at distance.
35 In-air sound levels (RMS) taken from Berger (2003), OSHA standards from comparison chart of noise
regulations: http://www.aearo.com/html/industrial/pdf/comparechart.pdf

43                                                                                                                                                
36 Adding a straw that will hopefully not break our camel’s back, dB levels in air, when being rated in order
to judge effects on human hearing, are weighted to better match our frequency sensitivity.  Since ourhearing is not very sensitive at lower frequencies, the absolute dB value of lower frequency sounds isREDUCED by this weighting system (to reflect the fact that, due to our poor sensitivity, they sound lessloud to us).  There are a couple of weighting sytems in use; dBA, or “A-weighted” is the one most
commonly used when setting safety thresholds.  A-weighted values are lower than absolute dB levels in
frequencies below 1kHz, the range we are most interested in. The corrections are much higher at the lowestfrequencies, and become smaller up to1kHz, where there is no correction applied (26dB are subtracted at63Hz, 16 decibels are subtracted at 125Hz).  By contrast, we do NOT create weighted dB scales for eachocean species; though each species does have its own frequency response curve (ie can more easily hearcertain frequencies, with others at which sounds appear quieter than their absolute value); rather, we are
content with absolute dB measurements.  The bottom line of all this is that if we want to compare the sound
of, say a jet take-off on land measured in dBA with the sound of seismic airguns underwater in unweighteddB(peak, mean, or energy), there is a case for adding roughly 25dB to our water values when consideringfrequencies under 100Hz, and 15dB if considering frequencies 100-200Hz (these are the frequency rangesin which airgun energy is its highest).  Of course, if our point is to create a comparison that shows how wemight hear a sound in air and water, then there is no need to consider this correction, since low frequency
sounds in water will likewise need to be weighted to suggest how human ears would perceive them
(ignoring the fact that our eardrums are generally very poor sound conductors in higher pressures ofunderwater…).  For many reasons, comparisons such as this can only be valid when comparing how thesame species, in this case, humans, would perceive a sound.  Thus for this chart, we are only making thepreviously noted mathematical corrections for the different dB references, density of water, and differences
between ocean sound measuring systems.  Please do bear in mind that, given all the translations involved,
all parties are on very thin ice in making any definitive claims about how sea creatures may respond to anygiven dB level.  This is why scientists tend to rely on behavioral responses and observed physiologicaldamage caused by ocean-based sound, and to avoid trying to make these sorts of comparisons with humanhearing, and especially human safety thresholds, in the air.
37 Difference calculated using 62dB standard correction, less 13dB correction of mean to equivalent energy,
to match the figures above.
38 To be as modest as possible in these comparisons, this column adds the full 62dB correction to create a
comparable RMS level in water; figures for peak levels would be higher by 15dB.
39 Mark McDonald, personal communication.
40 McCauley (2000) notes that the sound signature of airgun pulses closely resembles that of a breaching
humpback falling back into the water.
41 The following section owes much to the review of animal hearing that is included in Michael Stocker’s
work-in-progress, Hear Where We Are.
42 Darlene Ketten, perhaps the world’s foremost authority on cetacean hearing systems, stated at a marine
mammal health conference that “a surprisingly large number of stranded animals, nearly 50%, showevidence of some form of auditory compromise or pathology that correlates with low to profound hearing
loss in other species.” (Ketten,  2002)
43 See Jepson, et all (2003) and NMFS report on Bahamas stranding
(http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/prot_res/overview/Interim_Bahamas_Report.pdf)
44 In late November 2003 a series of strandings of sperm whales, pilot whales, and dolphins in southeast
Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand coincided with seismic surveys 300-500km away.  The greatdistance stretches the limits of possible causality, yet a stranding of sperm whale mothers and calves last
year during a similar survey raises the question of whether there may be a connection, possibly indirect.
See article: http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2003/12/05/1070351793772.html
45 The most work has been done with pinnipeds, measuring TTS in response to airborne sounds.
46 See Aquatic Bioacoustics Laboratory summary of research, with chart,
http://www.life.umd.edu/biology/popperlab/research/intensesounds.htm
47 Note that both of the following excerpts are from non peer-reviewed presentations, reflecting a more
speculative tone on the part of the researchers.
48 Summarized in Richardson (1995), p 297
49 Studies by Malme (1984, 1985, 1986, 1988) and Lj ungblad ( 1982) summarized in Richardson (1995),
p293.
50 Figures in the next four paragraphs based on McCauley (2000)
51 The MMS GulfCet program has been gathering population data since 1990.  In 2001, a long-term study
was initiated, led by Peter Tyack of Woods Hole, that is designed to measure sperm whales’ responses to
controlled sounds in a more systematic way.

44                                                                                                                                                
52 Minerals Management Service Environmental Studies Program project description,
http://www.gomr.mms.gov/homepg/regulate/environ/ongoing_studies/gm/GM-01-04C.html
53 Richardson (1995), referencing Mate et al, 1994
54 Richardson (1995), referencing Bowels et al, 1994
55 These studies are referenced in MMS (2002), citing David et al (2000) on the GulfCet study, and Swift et
al (1999) for the Atlantic study.
56 An annual report is due to be published in December 2003.  For a description of the research, see
http://www.gomr.mms.gov/homepg/regulate/environ/ongoing_studies/gm/GM-01-04C.html
57 Richardson (1995), p346.
58 As noted above, controlled exposure trials with a group of resting cow and calf humpbacks showed much
lower tolerance for airgun sounds: avoidance was seen at received levels of 97-132dB re 1 µPa2.s and stand-
off at levels of 116-134dB re 11 µPa2.s.  This would translate to avoidance of an airgun array at 7-12km.
59 The Standard, 2/14/03; http://the.standard.net.au/articles/2003/02/14/1044927789927.html
60 McCauley (2000) found a variation of up to 9dB re 1 µPa2.s in the intensity of individual shots; averages
over time were fairly consistent, but this variation around the mean “again. . . exemplified the difficulty ofpredicting the received air-gun level for a specified air-gun array and the requirement for a detailed study of
the source and environment.” (p172)
61 See USGS Soundwaves newsletter (11/1999): Report on the regulatory and mitigation process and costs
for a geology survey off the California coast using a small (40 cubic inch) airgun:http://soundwaves.usgs.gov/1999/08/fieldwork2.html
62 See Canadian and UK reports on mitigation measures: Department of Trade and Industry, UK (2003),
Turnpenny, et al (2002)
63 The UK has initiated such a project, with maps available on a publicly-accessible website,
www.ukdeal.co.uk.
64 Passive Acoustic Monitoring utilizes listening devices to eavesdrop on vocalizations beneath the surface;
systems have been developed that can identify a large number of species based on such acoustic data.Active Acoustic Monitoring, using low-power sonar, can locate animals that are not vocalizing, but species
identification is difficult, and these systems add, in a modest way, to the acoustic pollution of the area.
Especially if we are trying to gauge the behavioral effects of an ongoing seismic survey, passive systemsare much preferable.  There are some situations, such as assessing the behavioral responses of fish or ofcetaceans at moderate distances from a survey, where an active acoustic system could be used as in Engas(1996) to estimate changes in the numbers of animals in an area.
65 See press release: http://www4.nationalacademies.org/news.nsf/isbn/0309085365
66 John Hildebrand, MMC science advisor, personal communication
67 Malakoff (2001)
68 http://www.coreocean.org/Dev2Go.web?id=220628&rnd=5987
NOPP includes U.S. Navy, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , National ScienceFoundation, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Department of Energy, Environmental
Protection Agency, U.S. Coast Guard, U.S. Geological Survey, Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency, Minerals Management Service, Office of Science and Technology Policy, Office of Managementand BudgetDepartment of State,U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
69 http://www.coreocean.org/
70 http://www.oceans.us/
71 Reported in settlement to lawsuit brought against NSF in regards the 2002 survey in the Gulf of
California. See http://geophys.seos.uvic.ca/cassis/Eos.html
72 For example, see description of PANDA system, a lightweight easily deployable acoustic monitoring
system that can remain in place for months at a time:http://www.arl.nus.edu.sg/objects/PANDA_MTS_2003.pdf
73 “Imploding acoustic sources offer potential advantages in terms of operation depth, ease of field
operation, bandwidth for shallow reflection purposes, and a significantly reduced bubble pulse presence.
While their peak energy output may be relatively high, …their overall energy output is generally low.
However, the ability to detect a light globe implosion at 1.2km range is promising.” Hoffman 2000
74 Minerals Management Service (2000)
75 Minerals Management Ser vice (2002b)
76 From MMS website, http://www.gomr.mms.gov/homepg/regulate/environ/marmam/gulfcet4.html

45                                                                                                                                                
77 According to the Oil and Gas Journal, 8/19/02, the IAGC was engaged in an active dialogue with MMS
in order to bring the new regulations in line with standards in force in other regions, including the NorthSea.
78 Minerals Management Service (2002). Gulf of Mexico OCS Oil and Gas Lease Sales: 2003-2007,
Central and Western Planning Areas, Final Environmental Impact Statement. OCS EIS/EA MMS 2002-
052. Vol. I, 674pp, Vol II, 180pp.
79 It is likely that surveys will be better addressed in the Programatic EA for Geological and Geophysical
Exploration, which is still in process.  However, it appears that MMS is skirting the issue at present.