# Archivo original: state-of-conflict.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:41:17 -03 2025

An investigation
into the landgrabbers,loggers and lawlessfrontiers in Pará State,AmazonSTATE OF
CONFLICT 



Greenpeace campaigns to protect the world’s biological diversity,
particularly forest ecosystems. We campaign to ensure that the use ofthese resources is ecologically and socially responsible and includesthe establishment of networks of protected areas around the world.Our actions are dedicated to protecting the world’s remaining ancientforests and the plants, animals and people that depend upon them. 
We investigate and expose the causes of ancient forest destruction.
We support the rights of forest people and consider them thelegitimate protectors of their environment. We challenge governmentsand industry to end their role in ancient forest destruction. Wepromote real alternatives such as products certified to internationalstandards set by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), which helpto ensure that timber comes from environmentally and sociallyresponsible forest management. We consider that forests play acrucial role in maintaining climate equilibrium and water supply, andthat additional threats to the forests represent an unacceptable risk forthe future of the planet as a whole.
This report is compiled from official and authoritative data, including
testimonies, field investigations and expert opinions. A list of referencepapers from other institutions is at the end of this report. Greenpeaceis indebted to the generosity of countless people who made thisreport possible, and to activists for their dedication and workuncovering evidence of forest crime.
1

FOREWORD
In 1992, Greenpeace began to investigate illegal and predatory
logging in the Brazilian Amazon. In October 2001, it released areport introducing the actors and accomplices in the illegal trade inmahogany – 
Partners in Mahogany Crime – which gave crucial
information to the Brazilian government’s environmental agency,IBAMA, in support of suspending the logging of, and trade in,mahogany.
This latest report is the result of an investigation into the timber
sector in Pará State, the largest producer and exporter of woodproducts in the Brazilian Amazon. Pará is also the site of one-third ofthe region’s total deforestation. 
State of Conflict concentrates on the two most aggressive logging
frontiers in Pará: the regions of Porto de Moz and Prainha, on the leftbank of the Xingu River, and the Middle Land, a large area ofrelatively intact forest, between the Xingu and the Tapajós rivers. TheTransamazon Highway and the legally protected Indian lands, southof the Highway, separate these two regions. 
Logging and cattle ranching are now the main driving forces behind
the illegal assault on land in these regions. The development of theseindustries is surging ahead, leaving the law behind. In both regionslocal communities, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) andsectors of the Brazilian government are engaged in a fight for analternative model of land-use based on community ownership of landand protected areas. 
This report exposes an alarming picture of land invasions and illegal
occupancy of public land, of violence, murder and modern-dayslavery that is the secret face of Amazon destruction. Considered inisolation, each of these cases is an offense against human dignityand human rights. Combined, they create a dramatic picture of aBrazilian region that appears to be forging its way into a futurewithout law. 
During our investigations it became clear that the economically
aggressive logging sector in Pará cannot be fully understood inisolation and must be framed in a broader context of forestdestruction in this region – the process of invasion and conquest ofremote and pristine areas of this immense territory. This rapidprocess of development has been fuelled by the actions of economicgroups operating under little or no control from the Brazilian Federalgovernment or Brazilian society.
As more and more high-value timber species are exhausted in older
logging frontiers, the remaining unprotected frontier areas, includingPorto de Moz and the Middle Land, are increasingly under threat.More and more loggers are migrating into these areas in search ofthe last remaining commercial stocks of high value timbers in Pará,and more and more cattle ranchers are eager to increase the size oftheir herds and the land to raise them. Soya farming is now addingto the deforestation equation. The cycle of predatory logging anddeforestation therefore continues.Almost half of all known species live in the
Amazon Basin. Among them are 353 speciesof mammals, 3,000 fish species, 1,000 speciesof birds, 60,000 plant species and anestimated 10 million species of insects.
2

In many cases this destruction has been the result of government
initiatives, such as road-building, tax incentives for rural projects,settlements and dams, aimed at bringing a pattern of economicdevelopment to the region. Both scientists and economists haveshown that this predatory pattern of development is whollyinappropriate for the Amazon, a region with poor soil and intenselevels of rainfall.
As with many other areas of the Amazon, environmental problems in
Pará are often associated with social injustice and the lack of lawenforcement. The victim is not only the forest, commonly seen as acheap source of valuable commodities or as a barrier to ‘economicdevelopment’. It is also the traditional communities and indigenouspeople, for whom the Amazon is their home and their way of life.
To date, Federal and State authorities, lacking funds and
infrastructure, usually react to the problem on a case-by-case basis.Environmental enforcement agents are sent to fight illegal operationshere and there; the Federal Police raid farms that are using slavelabor to clear the forest and make cattle ranches. Necessary as theyare, these limited operations do not begin to solve the overwhelmingset of problems facing Pará. The roots are too deeply embedded in aperverse model of boom and bust development and in the structuraldeficiencies of the Brazilian public sector.
To refer to Pará in terms of warfare, as a ‘State of Conflict’, is no
exaggeration: there is an undeclared war going on – over land, overforest resources and over rapid profit at any price. If the conflict isnot brought under control, the weaker side, local communties andindigenous groups, will pay the highest price. Ultimately, Brazilstands to lose hundreds of thousands of square kilometers of theAmazon, along with millions of animals and plants, with somespecies becoming extinct. Not only Pará State, but Brazil may losethe opportunity of opening the way to a better and sustainable future.“
Pará leads the way on the use of slave labor.
During the first half of 2003, Pará accountedfor over 60% of all workers liberated by thegovernment’s antislavery Mobile EnforcementTeam.”
3“[São Félix do Xingu] , where the law
values nothing and death costs R$100. ”
O Estado de S. Paulo newspaper, 
September 2003.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Around 40 percent of the world’s remaining tropical rainforest is
found in the Amazon Basin, a place of enormous ecologicalimportance in sustaining global water and climate systems. Despitedecades of intense focus in the spotlight of internationalenvironmental concern, the Amazon is today, more than ever, undersiege from the loggers, farmers, and politicians who view it as amodern Eldorado to be plundered for profit.
Of all Brazil’s Amazon regions, it is Pará State that has suffered the
worst impact from logging. The largest timber exporting region of theentire Amazon, Pará has lost an area of rainforest the size of Austria,the Netherlands, Portugal and Switzerland combined. 
Pará’s story is one that resonates throughout the Amazon. It tells of a
‘boom and bust’ cycle whereby loggers exploit the land, strip it offorest cover and abandon it to cattle ranchers or other large-scalefarming ventures. The period of boom, fuelled by the extraction ofhigh-value species such as mahogany and cedar, quickly gives wayto decline as lesser species of timber are exhausted in their turn, andthe land is transformed into nutrient-poor grazing or farmland,providing little economic opportunity for the community.
Fuelling this cycle is a state of lawlessness in which land invasions
and illegal occupancy of public land are backed by violence andeven murder. Pará has Brazil’s highest rate of assassinations linkedto land conflicts, and these are hardly ever investigated. As localforest dwellers who depend on the land for hunting, fishing andsmall-scale farming are forced away from their territory, the gulfbetween rich and poor in Pará widens. 
In remote, hard-to-police areas of the forest, deforestation is
frequently driven by slavery. Workers are lured into forest areas withpromises of well-paid farm work, and become trapped in debtbondage, working under dangerous and inhumane conditions forlittle or no pay. Those who try to escape are sometimes killed. 
The variety of methods of land title falsification that enable loggers
and others to lay claim to the rainforest are described by the term
grilagem . Grilagem is made possible by the legal quagmire which
characterizes land ownership in the Brazilian Amazon, with littlechecking by land registration authorities. Loggers exploit the legaland bureaucratic vacuum to seize land using a mixture of grilagemand physical force. Greenpeace produced a detailed map showinggrilagem linked to Forest Management Plans in Porto de Moz. Thismap – the first of its kind – was submitted to IBAMA in October2003 along with a demand for action.
The conflict for land and forests today is raging most intensely in two
key frontiers in the west of Pará, the Middle Land and Porto de Moz.Here, the Federal Police force has been cut to a quarter of its sizetwenty years ago, and an illegal assault on the rainforest is underway.Assisted by their political allies, a number of companies which have
4In Pará there is an undeclared war going 
on over land, over forest resources and overrapid profit at any price. Today, illegaloccupancy of public land, violence, murderand modern-day slavery form the secret faceof Amazon destruction.


exploited the legal and bureaucratic tangle to seize land, using a
mixture of grilagem and physical force, are leading the charge. 
In the face of the threat to their traditional lands, local inhabitants are
joining forces to propose the creation of Extractive Reserves, areasprotected by Federal law for conservation and sustainable use bytraditional communities. The proposed 
Verde para Sempre (Green
Forever) and Renascer (Reborn) reserves have become the target of
angry opposition from logging and political interests, particularlysince 400 community members took direct action in late 2002 toblockade barges loaded with illegal timber destined for export.
Greenpeace has investigated and documented many cases of illegal
and predatory behavior by logging interests. Yet the landholders whohave already devastated large swathes of the forest are nowdemanding that the government authorize new areas for exploitation,arguing that they create jobs and contribute to the economicdevelopment of regions like Pará. Under pressure from thesepowerful interests, the Federal and State governments arediscussing a new system of concessions.
While the debate is reaching the press, and the public to some
extent, Greenpeace recently discovered that the first ‘authorization ofuse of public state property’
1has been issued by Pará State to a
logger in Porto de Moz. Nothing in the contract obliges the logger todo even basic regeneration of the forest after exploiting itsresources.
Greenpeace believes that the real long-term future of Pará lies in a
new social and economic model of sustainable use of the forestscombined with areas of protection. Logging companies committed totruly legal, sustainable and certified operations have a place in thisfuture, but the main effort must be concentrated on bringinggovernance and environmental and social justice to the Amazon. Theonly way to achieve this is through the strong commitment of theBrazilian Federal and State governments, backed by internationalcooperation, to empower the traditional communities and other forestdwellers to become the driving force for economic development andenvironmental protection in the Amazon.
5Brazil stands to lose hundreds of thousands
of square kilometers of the Amazon, alongwith millions of animals and plants, withsome species becoming extinct.


SECTION 1
PARÁ UP FOR GRABS 
The Amazon Basin covers five percent of the land surface of the
planet, extending over some 7 .8 million km2. It has 25,000 km of
navigable rivers and contains around 20% of the Earth’s fresh water.Its forests represent one of the most important ecosystems on Earth,accounting for 45% of tropical forests and storing 40% of the carbonresiding in terrestrial vegetation.
3Almost half of all known species live
in the Amazon. Among them, 353 species of mammals, 3,000 fishspecies, 1,000 species of birds, 60,000 plant species and anestimated 10 million species of insects.
4The Amazon plays a vital role
in maintaining biodiversity, regional hydrology and climate. 
This region has long been regarded by those wishing to exploit it as a
latter-day Eldorado, a place of fabulous wealth and opportunity and thelast frontier on Earth to be conquered. Short-term political andeconomic interests have fuelled boom and bust predatorydevelopment in the region, which has undergone rapid deforestation inrecent years. 
According to a report published in 2002 by IMAZON (Institute of 
Man and the Environment of the Amazon), around 95 percent of thetimber exploited in the Brazilian Amazon (Amazon)
5is produced by
predatory logging.6
The Amazon has one the world’s highest absolute rates of forest
destruction, currently averaging around 18,000 km2per year.7The
latest data shows a forty percent increase in deforestation, reaching25,476 km
2in just one year.8Today, loggers, farmers, private
enterprises and many politicians, local public administrators andlegislators still view the Amazon as a vast territory to seize, occupy and exploit.
9
Pará is the second largest Brazilian state, covering an area over 
1.2 million km2, about twice the size of France. Today it is the largest
timber producing and exporting region in the Amazon, accounting for40% of production
10and 60% of all exports from all Amazon States.11
An estimated one-third of timber produced in Pará is now exported,
making it the second most valuable commodity exported from the state(after minerals).
12In 2002, Pará exported at least US$312 million in
timber products, to markets in the USA (34.9%), France (13.7 %),Spain (8.1%), the Netherlands (7 .4%), China, Portugal, the DominicanRepublic, Japan and the UK, amongst others.
13(See Markets of timber
and timber products from Brazil, Amazon and Pará State , page 7)
At the same time Pará accounts for over one-third14of the total
Amazon deforestation in Brazil amounting to an area larger than thesize of Austria, Netherlands, Portugal and Switzerland combined.
15
Satellite images released by INPE – the Brazilian Institute of Space
Research – in 2003 show that the majority of the illegal deforestationoccurred in areas surrounding Pará’s Middle Land.
Deforestation in Pará has been driven by over four decades of
predatory and unsustainable logging. Land-use is largely a question of the illegal seizure of public lands, which are exploited for logging,then turned over to cattle ranching.
16
6The Amazon region is of critical importance to
forest dwelling communities and to wildlife,sheltering numerous species including jaguars,giant alligators, spider monkeys and anteaters.
Pará accounts for over one-third of the total
Amazon deforestation in Brazil. Deforestationfor timber and cattle ranching is commonlylinked with the employment of slave labor. 

This development has been an environmental disaster and has had a
lasting detrimental impact on indigenous people who have lived inthe region since colonial times, and forest dwelling communities whomigrated to the region during various waves of occupation of theAmazon. This short-lived cycle of forest destruction, often justified bythose who defend it in the name of economic development,concentrates lands in the hands of a few landlords, resulting in asituation of poverty for those communities who live in the region astheir means of subsistence is degraded, affecting hunting, fishingand other traditional resources.
17
In 1997 , over one-third of the rural population, who depend on the
Amazon were considered to be living in a situation of “ critical
poverty .”18The value of the land diminishes once it has become
degraded so that the ‘economic development’ is short-lived even forthose exploiting it.“Essentially, the dynamic of destruction
and pillage of natural resourcesattempts to make unfeasible anotherkind of project to the region, based onthe sustainable use of environment andits resources
”. 
Brazilian National Report to the UN High
Commissioner on Human Rights, April 2003.2
7Destination Brazil Amazon Pará State Pará Pará Pará
Country (as % of all Brazil (as % of all (as % of all
exports to country Amazon exports Pará exports)of destination) to country of 
destination)
USA 741,933,092 147 ,683,262 109,199,517 14.72 73.94 34.92
China 78,254,200 57 ,650,189 17 ,865,821 22.82 30.99 5.71
France 61,074,110 51,132,084 42,913,010 70.26 83.93 13.72
Spain 50,430,469 29,438,824 25,462,037 50.49 86.49 8.14
UK 142,822,928 28,776,927 7 ,030,310 4.92 24.43 2.25
Netherlands 33,672,476 27 ,097 , 150 23,176,419 68.82 85.53 7 .41
Portugal 47 ,927 , 179 20,734,299 16,557 , 741 34.55 79.85 5.30
Japan 63,420,604 18,104,826 7 ,377 ,957 11.63 40.74 2.36
Belgium 62,616,433 18,072,704 3,250,470 5.19 17 .98 1.04
Hong Kong 22,378,676 14,275,283 2,427 , 161 10.85 17 .00 0.78
Italy 34,020,824 9,752,361 2,550,910 7 .49 26.14 0.82
Germany 48,729,952 5,081,574 1,592,554 0.31 19.65 0.51
Canada 41,131,029 4,668,754 3,801,081 9.24 81.42 1.22
Others 336,946,205 87 , 797,741 49,469,591 14.82 56.34 15.82
Total 1,765,358,177 520,265,078 312,674,579 17 .70 60.09 100.00Markets for timber and timber products from Brazil, Amazon and Pará State 
Exports by value US$, January to December 2002 (source: SECEX, 2003)

Illegal land grabs have become one of the most powerful means of
land-based domination in the Amazon – resulting in a major socialdisparity.
20Known as grilagem in Brazil, the falsification of land titles
is the method employed by a large number of loggers, cattleranchers and land speculators to exploit public land. Illegallandholders take over public lands by forging titles of ownership withthe complicity of land registration offices, and by using violence toexpel informal settlers and Indian communities who have legitimaterights to the lands.
21(See Methods Commonly Used by Land
Grabbers , page 20.)
The legal quagmire of land ownership in the Amazon was
characterized by the prominent Pará legal expert Professor OtávioMendonça, in a debate on land ownership in May 1980.“
Unfortunately, with very few exceptions, the Amazon Cartórios
[private offices authorized by the government to legally register
documents] registered every paper and claim that any prospective
landowner brought forward .”22Due to multiple claims and the lack of
a central registry in Brazil, the total area of land registrationsrecorded in one region can exceed the size of the region itself.
23
In Pará, the main economic motives for grilagem have shifted with
time, according to the availability of natural resources and the market.Between the 1960s and 1980s, gold, bauxite and tin ore miningwere the primary motives. From the 1990s onwards, the motive waslogging and the vast expansion of large-scale cattle ranching, whichsupplies the timber sector. 
In 1999, the Federal government carried out an initial investigation
into 
grilagem and concluded that at least 100 million hectares had
suspicious documentation. After the investigation INCRA, theagency in charge of regulating tenure on federally held land in Brazil,cancelled the registration of over 70 million hectares. One-third ofthis area was in Pará, some 20.8 million hectares in 422 farms.
24
Cancellation of INCRA registration prevents public funds from being
used for development, but does not lead to the land title becomingvoid as, in many cases, claimant owners started suing INCRA .The
legal battles are far from over.
The INCRA investigation was followed up with a more detailed
investigation into 
grilagem in the Amazon by a special Parliamentary
Commission of Inquiry (CPI), set up by the Federal House ofDeputies.
25It should be noted that both the CPI and INCRA
investigations failed to include the region of Porto de Moz, which hasa high incidence of 
grilagem by logging companies.
One of the extraordinary cases documented by both the INCRA and
CPI investigations was of land in Pará registered under the name of‘Carlos Medeiros’. According to the CPI investigation a gang of
grileiros (land-grabbers) used documents under the name Carlos
Medeiros to seize about 12 million hectares of land, some 10percent of Pará. However, the CPI report concluded that, based onthe ambiguous documentation, “
the total area controlled by
Medeiros could span 35 million hectares .” This would represent
some 30% of Pará. Medeiros’ lawyers and representatives broke this
8“…all illegal action aimed at transferring
public land to the assets of third partiesconstitutes grilagem”
White Book of Illegal Land Appropriation in
Brazil, INCRA 2000
“It’s not an improbable connection that
wood extraction and ‘grilagem’ are usedto launder money.” 
Police Marshal José Alcântara Machado, São
Félix do Xingu, Pará.19GRILAGEM - USING FALSE LAND TITLES TO EXPLOIT PUBLIC LAND
Illegal land grabs have become one of the most
powerful means employed by a large numberof loggers, cattle ranchers and land speculatorsto exploit public land. 

9Extraction of high-value timber species including mahogany and cedar finances
the pioneer roads that cut through previously unavailable frontier areas. 

massive area of land into parcels and sold them to dozens of third
parties, with both real and invented identities.26
Lawyers claiming to represent him stated that Medeiros, in the
1970s, received land from the heirs of two Portuguese settlers whohad claimed ownership of large sections of Pará. A Pará judge in1975 recognized the legitimacy of the claim of Medeiros, but waslater removed from office for irregularities.
27
Carlos Medeiros has never come forward. His lawyers said they
could not locate him to bring him to the CPI investigation. Hisexistence has never been confirmed. He is almost certainly a ‘ghost’.
Medeiros was not the only huge case that the CPI investigated in
Pará. They also looked closely at land acquired by one large Braziliancompany, C.R. Almeida S.A., established by Mr. Cecílio do RegoAlmeida, who was listed by 
Forbes magazine in 1992 as one of the
richest men in the world, and considered by Vejamagazine to be the
largest landholder. Almeida is a self-made businessman who claimsownership to some 7 million hectares of forest, almost the size ofBelgium and Holland together, in two large farms (
Fazenda Curuá
and Fazenda Xingu ) in the Middle Land.28(See Cecílioland , page
22–23.)
Both the Federal and State authorities contest his legal ownership.
“The CPI considered illegitimate the ownership and property of
Fazenda Curuá… registered in the name of Sr. Cecílio do RegoAlmeida,
” at the Cartório Moreira land registry office in Altamira as
4.7 million hectares.29After analyzing the documents and maps, Dr.
Cândido Paraguassu Élleres, former director of ITERPA (the ParáState Land Institute), declared that he had personally found a largerarea – 5.7 million hectares
30— controlled by the company C.R.
Almeida. “ The CPI states that it is clear that a lease contract for
30,000 hectares made possible the registration of almost 6 millionhectares
[in the region of the Middle Land] in the Book of Properties
in the name of the company C.R. Almeida .”31
The tangled web of land ownership in Pará is being further
exacerbated by offers of millions of hectares of land for sale over theinternet. For example, www.imoveisvirtuais.com.br offers dozens of‘farms’ for sale, including one of 306,000 hectares in the MiddleLand. The advertisement offers “
all virgin forest, at the right margin
of the Iriri River, with excellent documentation ” for R$60 (around
US$20) per hectare. Despite the large area of land on offer, the admakes clear that only 4,356 hectares have 
escritura – or a legal land
title. According to the Procuradoria Jurídica do Instituto de Terras doPará, the legal department of ITERPA, the sales are illegal. “
The
lands of this region belong to Pará State and can’t be sold unlessby the state itself
”, says the Procuradoria Jurídica.32
10
“In the Brazilian Amazon, the expansion
of cattle ranching is occurring at such arapid pace that concerned analysts haveadopted the term ‘cattelization’ to depictthe extraordinary increase in the cattleherd.”
Viega et al. 2001 

“Only by integrating the Amazon with the
Brazilian territory through developing the region and increasing its security will we befree from the threat of international control.”
General Rodrigo Otávio, former Director of the 
Superior Academy of War, 1971.34
The process of grilagem has historical roots: “ In Brazil
all lands were originally public in that they belonged tothe Kingdom of Portugal by right of conquest. Laterthey were transferred to the Brazilian Empire, and thento the Republic, but always as dominion of thenation
.”35With the dissolution of the Brazilian Empire,
the 1891 Brazilian Constitution of the Republictransferred all 
terras devolutas (public lands lacking
official documentation) from Federal dominion to thedominion of individual states, except for land alongBrazil’s international frontiers. The new Republicanconstitution recognized previous documents of landuse, and effective private occupation of lands registeredat 
paróquias (churches) and municipalities.36Proof of
payment for the land, as well as demarcation of theborders and proof of occupation were required toobtain final legal private ownership of an area, even forland that had previously been registered. 
Throughout the entire country, fewer than 10% of the
properties complied with the new law.
37The immense
majority of properties in private hands thereforecontinued to be based on titles that didn’t prove legalprivate domain. The transfer of authority from Federal toState level made it very difficult, if not impossible, toconfirm private land use and occupation as the stateshad neither the infrastructure nor, in many cases, the willto check that land registrations were legitimate. Theseprecarious land titles were later registered in 
Livro 3
(Book 3), the public registry for land title transfers – i.e.
for sales and purchase of land between private owners,and transfer through inheritance. In remote areas suchas the Amazon, it became common to increase the areaof land on paper by thousands of hectares, or to havemore than one claimant for the same area. 
Despite the lack of definitive proof, and the precarious
nature of the land titles, areas larger than permittedunder the new law were recorded in 
Livro 3 , resulting in
thousands of hectares of public lands being transferredillegally to private ownership. In the 1960s and the 1970s the military government
pushed forward with large scale development plans forthe Amazon – roads, railways, dams and otherinfrastructure projects, aided by incentives such as low-interest loans for farming and ranching. This caused anincreased demand for land, and an influx ofentrepreneurs keen to exploit the riches of the Amazonusing government loans and grants to fund theirenterprises. It also triggered a massive immigration fromother regions of poor people who were promised smalllandholdings by the military government, under thebanner “
A land without people for people without land ”.
The overall situation was further aggravated by a 
Military Government decree on April 1, 1971, Decreto-Lei N° 1.164, transferring back to the Federalgovernment ownership of all land 100 km on either sideof existing and planned Federal roads and highways.Under this decree, two-thirds of the entire area of ParáState reverted to Federal government ownership. Theconfusion over land ownership increased, with the Stateand Federal governments disputing who had the right toissue land titles. This legal vacuum has been used, andis still being used, by 
grileiros to access new areas or
force traditional communities to renounce their landrights. 
However, the decree was considered crucial to the
military dictatorship’s ambition of integrating theAmazon with the rest of Brazil by means of rapiddevelopment. In June 1970, the military announced theconstruction of 12,000 km of roads in the Amazon, themost important one being the Transamazon Highway,crossing the Amazon from east to west. The road hasbeen one of the main vector for the development of theregion. To attract companies, farmers and settlers, themilitary dictatorship ordered INCRA to createsettlements along the Highway. Between 1971 and1975, 100,000 families were transferred from poorregions of Brazil to INCRA settlement areas of 100hectares each in size.
38The ambitious highway remains
unpaved, with large areas now eroded and reclaimedback by the forest. Abandoned by the State, thosesettlers who remained in the region support themselvesby subsistence activities, or work for cattle ranchers and loggers.
11THE LEGAL AND POLITICAL QUAGMIRE OF LAND OWNERSHIP 

WOOD FOR BLOOD
Grilagem , along with logging, is often accompanied by the use or
threat of physical violence. Loggers and large landowners pressurepowerless traditional communities to leave their land and, in somecases, simply expel the residents by destroying their crops, burninghouses, firing at them or even by killing them.
40
Pará has the highest rate of assassinations linked to land conflicts in
Brazil. Between 1985 and 2001 nearly 40 percent of the 1,237 ruralworkers killed in Brazil were killed in Pará, according to the PastoralLand Commission (CPT), a Catholic organization campaigning forlandless people and the poor.
41An inventory conducted by the Pará
State government during the same period reported that there were804 victims of assassination.
42In 2002, the number of victims
increased by almost 50 percent compared to the previous year, andhalf were killed in Pará.
43
Although numerous cases of violence, including murders, are
reported, they are hardly ever properly investigated. Thoseresponsible are rarely if ever punished, often because witnesses areintimidated or killed. Public intervention is unstructured, sporadic,partial and fragmented. Different levels and sectors of governmentdo not converse or interact. Some organized communities, whorefuse to accept ruin and devastation and have proposed alternativedevelopment projects based on the sustainable use of naturalresources, live under frequent threats and the risk of being killed.
44
In August 2001, Ademir Alfeu Federicci (known as ‘Dema’) was
assassinated inside his house in front of his family. Dema, acoordinator of the Movement for the Development of theTransamazon and the Xingu Area (MDTX), had voiced numerouscondemnations of corrupt politicians and illegal logging inside Indianlands in Pará, including mahogany logging.
45Federal Police officers
and the MDTX believe his murder was a contract killing. However,the civil police claimed that Dema was killed during a bungledburglary, and obtained a confession from Julio Cesar dos Santosshortly after the event. Santos has since claimed that he onlyconfessed to the burglary after being tortured by Pará State CivilPolice officers. The people believed to been behind the murder ofDema reportedly attempted to silence Santos.
46
In the town of São Félix do Xingu, the main frontier for the Middle
Land, 30 people have already been murdered this year in casesrelated to disputes for land and mahogany. The Brazilian newspaper
O Estado de S. Paulo reported in late September – under the
evocative title: “ Where the law values nothing and death costs
R$100 ” – that at least three groups of gunmen are operating in the
area. According to O Estado , the violence was related to the dispute
for wood stocks, in particular mahogany, and is linked with other illegal activities.
47
A week before the article was published, eight rural workers were
assassinated by gunmen on a farm in São Felix do Xingu. Accordingto preliminary investigations, the massacre was related to the disputeover land and rich wood stocks.
48Mario Lúcio de Avelar, the Federal
Prosecutor who was leading the investigation into crime in the regionand its relation with drugs and money laundering, was on the
12In July 2002, a rural worker’s leader known 
as Brasília was assassinated one month aftersending a letter to the authorities denouncingthreats he and local families were receivingfrom loggers and farmers.
In August 2001, Dema, a coordinator of the
Movement for the Development of theTransamazon and the Xingu Area (MDTX), was assassinated inside his house in front ofhis family. He had voiced numerouscondemnations of corrupt politicians and illegallogging inside Indian lands in Pará, includingmahogany logging. 

receiving end of a death threat and was moved to Brasília, the
Federal capital, for his protection.49In his report, Avelar states:
“According to preliminary data from Customs, the existence of
much financial movement of groups, persons and companies wasidentified… Some of those people, due to ‘grilagem’ activities andthe establishing of farms, were denounced as responsible for thecrime of keeping their workers under conditions similar to slave work
”.50
VICIOUS CYCLE OF PREDATORY LOGGING,
DEFORESTATION AND ‘CATTELIZATION’ OFTHE AMAZON
In 2003 Brazil became the largest exporter of beef in the world.51
Around 80 percent of Amazon deforestation areas currently in use
are occupied by the cattle-ranching industry – much of it in thehands of large landowners.
52In the 1990s almost all of Brazil’s
expansion of cattle farming took place in the Amazon – in Pará theherd was increased by nearly six million.
53This rapid expansion has
led some analysts to adopt the term ‘cattelization’ to depict theextraordinary increase in the Amazon cattle herd.
54
In the boom and bust cycle of predatory logging and deforestation,
madeireiros (loggers) exploit the land, deplete it of forest cover and
abandon it to the fazendeiros (farmers). On average, ranching
requires the clearing of 1.4 hectares of Amazon forest to support onecow; it generates very limited revenue and employment.
55‘Gunmen are often used to push 
and throw local people off their pieces of land.’
National Report to the UN High Commissioner
on Human Rights, April 200339“Cattle ranchers follow the direction of
loggers into the region, because loggingactivities capitalise, directly or indirectly,the actual and potential cattle ranchers.” 
Instituto Socioambiental, 2003
13


The short-lived economic booms of predatory logging are created by
the extraction of high value timber species – including mahoganyand cedar – which finances the pioneer roads that cut throughpreviously unavailable frontier areas. Thousands of kilometers ofillegal logging roads have been opened across Pará by those insearch of high value timber species, which have helped facilitate aprocess of colonization. The ‘boom’ economy begins to decline afterseveral years, when the supply of high value timber has beendepleted and a second round of logging begins.
56
Once the second or third wave of loggers starts to exploit the
medium-value timber species – including jatobá, tauari and ipê –farmers or cattle-ranchers come in search of land to transform intograzing areas, profiting from the existing roads created by loggers.Where buyers are available, farmers or cattle ranchers sell remaininglogs resulting from the final clearcutting of land to timber companiesto finance the transformation of forest into grazing land.
57For the
timber companies it is easier and less expensive to buy logs fromareas of illegal deforestation than to obtain them through authorizedForest Management Plans (FMPs).
58
Approximately 20 years after the start of the ‘boom’, the complete
exhaustion of marketable wood occurs, and the local economyenters a crisis. Loggers abandon the region, leaving behind only low-productivity land for ranching.
59
This unsustainable pattern of an illusory rapid economic growth
followed by a severe decline in forest resource, revenues andemployment has led to a drastic reduction in timber production in theold logging frontiers in the east and south of Pará, also the mainareas of deforestation (see 
Pará Battlefield , inside front cover).60
Today a new cycle of deforestation is emerging in the Amazon region
with the expansion of Brazil’s soya market. Soya farmers areincreasing their foothold on more valuable areas of land in theAmazon, within reach of export facilities in Pará. Cattle ranchers arenow starting to sell their existing pastures and simply migrating toopen up new areas of the Amazon. Over three-quarters of a millionhectares of soya had been planted within the Amazon deforestationbelt by the end of 2001.
61In Santarém, where the Tapajós and the
Amazon rivers meet, Cargill has built a huge granary and a shippingterminal, and the town is now a strategic port for accessing theexternal market.
14
Over three-quarters of a million hectares of
soya had been planted within the Amazondeforestation belt by the end of 2001. Cargillhas built a huge granary and a shippingterminal in Santarém, which is now a strategicport for accessing the external market.
“Impunity and lack of control make
possible that most of the wood isillegally exploited, with no concern about the reproduction and conservation of the species.”
Brazilian National Report to the UN 
High Commissioner on Human Rights,April 2003
80

The trade in timber is only legally permitted where it
originates from authorized Forest Management Plans(FMPs) or authorized deforestation for the purpose ofland settlement. Both have to be approved by IBAMA.
62
(1) Total log production in Pará – 10,800,000 m363
The exact figure of log production in Pará is almost
impossible to determine due to rampant illegality in thetimber industry. The above figure is based onconservative statistics from IMAZON for 2001.
(2) Log production in Pará from authorized FMPs
– 4,665,383 m3
In 2001 the total authorized log production from valid
FMPs in Pará amounted to 4,665,383 m3.64It is well
known in the Amzon that many FMPs are onlyinstruments for legalizing illegal logs through documentsissued by IBAMA.
(3) Log production in Pará from authorized
deforestation – 121,571m3
The vast majority of timber coming from deforestation in
Pará is illegal. In 2001, for example, the area approvedby IBAMA for deforestation was only 5,342 hectares,
65
whereas the actual area of deforestation detected by
INPE was a staggering 523,700 hectares.66In otherwords, in 2001 only one percent of the total area was
authorized for deforestation – and the figures inprevious years are similar.
67 The authorized volume of
timber produced from deforestation was 121,751 m3.
Balance of legality 2001
An initial analysis of IBAMAs authorized log prodution in
Pará for 2001, shows that the total volume of logs fromboth FMPs and deforestation was 4,786,954 m
3, or 44
percent of the total production estimated by IMAZON.This is, an incredible 66 percent of all timber producedin Pará would be illegal. 
However, the majority of the FMP holders do not
respect the legislation for harvesting or the FMPs arelocated in forest areas that are in fact public land, asconfirmed by Greenpeace in the Porto de Moz region(see page 35–37). According to an initial assesmentcarried out by IBAMA-Pará in 2003, some 88 percentof all FMPs in the state have been inappropriatelyplanted on public land. IBAMA is now giving allcompanies one year to present valid land titledocuments or their FMPs will be suspended. Until thesecompanies can prove the legality of their properties,their legal production cannot be considered withoutsuspicions. 
15THE BALANCE OF TIMBER LEGALITY IN PARÁ STATE –2001Federal government agents, accompanied by Greenpeace’s investigations team, converge on illegal mahogany
logging on public and Indian lands around the Middle Land, October 2001.


SLAVERY – ALIVE AND WELL IN PARÁ
Slavery in the Amazon is a more covert process than the one which
provided forced labor for the plantations of the New World in pastcenturies, but it is equally inhumane. Thousands of impoverishedpeople are lured away from squalid city slums or small villages ofMaranhão State, east of Pará, and other poor states of the northeastof Brazil, by hopes of making their fortunes. However, they end up invery isolated areas of Pará, generally at gunpoint, clearing areas offorest to make way for enormous cattle ranches producing beef.Between 1995 and 2001, 49% of the cases of slavery in Braziloccurred in cattle ranches and 25% were related to deforestation.The expansion of the soya frontier into the Amazon is drawing onslave labor – already six percent of all known cases.
69
Pará leads the way on slavery, a rampant problem that is affecting
many other Amazon states. During the first half of 2003, Paráaccounted for over 60 percent of all the workers liberated in Brazilby the government’s antislavery Mobile Enforcement Team.
70The
Ministry of Labor has concluded that for every enslaved person whois freed, a further three remain in a state of servitude.
71Of the 116
cases located by the Mobile Enforcement Team in Pará in 2002,72
the majority originated within the timber-producing and cattle-
ranching region in the south of Pará. Forty-nine of the workers werechildren. The region of Iriri in the Middle Land is also known to havea major concentration of slave workers.
73□
According to CPT, the Pastoral Commission on Land, Pará has more
than 25,000 rural people working in slavery or semi-slaveryconditions in 167 farms in the south and southeast of Pará.
74In 2001,
CPT found 45 cases involving 2,416 slave workers: this increased to147 cases involving 5,559 workers in 2002. São Félix do Xingumunicipality, on the eastern border of the Middle Land, leads the wayin these perverse statistics.
775
Workers fall into the trap of slave labor most commonly by being
recruited for fazendas (farms) by their agents, known as gatos
(literally meaning cats), on the basis of fraudulent promises of well-
paid work, accepting a verbal contract without knowing their realfuture. They are then taken to areas deep within the forests andbecome indebted with the expense of travel to the area, thenthrough having to pay exorbitant prices for accommodation, clothes,medicine and food.
76They receive very little or no salary and become
trapped in debt bondage – defined as a form of slavery under Article 1 of the UN Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery, 1956.
77
16
In 2002, the majority of cases of slavery
originated within the timber-producing andcattle-ranching region in the south of Pará.
“Three of Brazil’s most important exports
are steel, timber and beef. They accountfor billions of dollars in foreign earnings.All three are tainted with slavery.”
Dr Kevin Bales, Consultant to the UN Global
Program on Trafficking in People, 2003.68

They are forced to live in inhumane sanitary and health conditions,
sleeping under a canvas and under constant surveillance by armedguards.
78Those who try to rebel against the subhuman conditions or
to escape are sometimes simply killed.81A few lucky ones do
escape. In 2002 the BBC carried out an investigation into slavelabor and deforestation in Pará. They interviewed Evandro Rodrigueswho had spent most of his life logging mahogany. “
We were cutting
mahogany deep in the rainforest you cannot reach by plane. Thepower saw slipped and went into my leg. I was bleeding andcouldn’t walk. But the foreman said you’ll have to walk 30 km tothe farm or die. So I walked all night, with the shirt tied around mylegs. My boots were full of blood
.” The BBC concluded that when
“Evandro reached his village after a week there was a man who
was sent to shoot him: they were afraid he would denounce theirlogging to the authorities
”.80
17Workers fall into the trap of slave labor on
the basis of fraudulent promises of well-paidwork. They are then taken to areas deepwithin the forests and become indebted withthe expense of travel to the area, thenthrough having to pay exorbitant prices foraccommodation, clothes, medicine and food.This picture illustrates that people are givennumbers, not names.


SECTION 2
LAND WITHOUT LAW - THE MIDDLE LAND
AND PORTO DE MOZ
The struggle for land has become most significant, and often violent,
in two key frontiers in the west of Pará – the Middle Land and Portode Moz regions. Having plundered much of the rest of Pará, loggers,cattle ranchers and land speculators, amongst others, are turningthese regions into the new lawless frontiers.
Brazil has far-sighted environmental laws, but policing them has
proved almost impossible. The lack of governance and lawenforcement has led to a situation where murder, violence, slavery,land invasions and illegal occupancy of public land are characteristicof this region of Pará. This complete lack of the rule of law makes iteasy for the logging companies or large-scale farmers to seize andexploit public lands. 
There is often little financial support for the Federal or State law
enforcement agencies, or what support there was has been almostentirely withdrawn by cuts in the government’s annual budget. This isa disastrous consequence of an agreement between the Braziliangovernment and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which madereducing public expenditure a precondition to continuing to receiveinternational financial aid.
82Brazil currently contributes around 10.53
percent of its Gross Domestic Product to honoring the interestpayments on its external debts.
83Brazil is one of many countries in
the Amazon region that remains in ‘debt-bondage’ – slaves to the IMF.
Cuts in the Federal budget have affected the whole administration,
including IBAMA and the Federal Police. Over 20 years ago, withfewer crimes than today, the Federal Police in Santarém employed48 agents, five marshals and five lawyers. In September 2002, theFederal Police office was reduced to a dozen people (most of theminvolved in administration), who have to cover more than half of Pará,an area the size of France. There was no fuel for the police cars.Electricity, water supply and telephones were cut off at the beginningof the year due to lack of payment, but were kept working by judicialorders. The situation became so dire that the Chief Marshall startedpaying bills out of her own pocket.
84Conditions at IBAMA’s office in
Santarém were no different. 
Even when there is funding for a handful of inspection agents, bribes
become an important source of income for those who work inremote regions.
85The new IBAMA administration is investigating
various cases of corruption among its own agents in the Amazon.Recently, the new manager of IBAMA-Santarém, Geraldo Pastana,created a commission to investigate agents accused of receivingbribes and having a better lifestyle than their salaries would allow. On September 16, 2003, the Federal Police arrested three IBAMAinspectors and ten loggers in the Amazonian state of Rondôniaduring an operation against this corruption.
86
18Satellite images released by the Brazilian
Institute of Space Research in 2003 show thatthe majority of the illegal deforestation occurredin areas surrounding Pará’s Middle Land.
“In our region there are so many 
families that don’t have any land leftbecause big logging companies havetaken everything.” 
Community woman, Porto de Moz, 2002.147 

19


The name grilagem comes from a traditional process to
give forged documents the patina of age. Papers wereplaced in a box of crickets (
grilos ). The crickets would
chew and foul the documents, making them appearworn and older than they actually were. A 
grileiro is a
land-grabber who “ pretends to have legitimate title to
the land through a vast repertoire of deceptions .”88
Below are some common methods used by grileiros to
become ‘owners’ of public land in the Amazon.
Step 1. Grileiro identifies the land for grilagem
Step 2. Grileiro gets control of land, commonly
by the following four methods:
Method A –using invalid rubber concessions
(seringais).
During the 1940s and 1950s, prompted by the
demands of the Second World War, Brazil required a large production of rubber and granted rubberconcessions that were valid for only one year (i.e. nowillegal). However decades later – mainly during the1980s – these concession documents were still beingused as a basis for applying for a land title. Most of thetime, the imprecise description of land limits in the titlefacilitates the registration of areas much larger than the original concession. Large areas of the Middle Land have been illegally privatized based on these old 
seringais .
Method B –physical occupation of an area without 
any previous physical occupants.Grileiro
arrives in a forest area, demarcates this new
land and guards the area with gunmen.
Method C – use of invalid concessions (sesmarias)
Between 1531 and 1822, concessions of uncultivated
lands called sesmarias89were assigned to settlers to
work on these lands.90Recently these old concession
rights have occasionally been used as a basis forregistering land titles, despite the fact that the systemwas abolished when Brazil became independent fromPortugal in 1822.
91
Method D – occupation, purchase or ‘false renting’ 
of land occupied physically by others (traditionalsettlers, such as ribeirinhos).
When there are several traditional small communities
occupying a chain of small posses92along a river or a
road, a grileiro purchases all of the posses, or only
some, including those posses at edge of thecommunities. He then marks a large area with pathsaround communities, claiming the entire area. Thosewho don’t accept the 
grileiro’s claims of ownership of
their land are frequently expelled from the area with theuse of violence.
Step 3. Grileiro selects a municipal ‘‘cartório”
(local notary’s office) to declare ownership of the land.
Normally the grileiro forges papers stating that he has
occupied the area for a long time – or he depends onthe complicity of notaries who declare so. Municipal
Cartórios register the limits of properties located
hundreds of miles away in the forest. Normally they donot check the validity of the 
grileiro’s claim, or cross
check the application with existing land titles registeredat other offices.
Step 4. Grileiro submits the Cartório document
to the official land agencies and the Federal Tax Authority. 
Government land agencies93usually agree to register
the title of uncontested land based on Cartórios ’
documents. In theory, a map should be submitted alongwith a description of the land, proof of the origin of landtitle and testimonies, etc. The official agencies usuallyaccept these questionable documents from 
Cartórios
and issue a certificate of registry showing that the
institution is in the process of analyzing the ownershipof land (a precarious document which in theoryrecognizes that the 
grileiro is in possession of the land
until further decision). Therefore, overlapping land claimsare very common. The land agency can issue apossession title, can sell or even donate the land in thecases of ‘relevant economic or social interest’. In thetwo last cases, the land will have a definitive title(
escritura definitiva ) of property. By law, if the total land
area is greater than 2,500 hectares, its purchase ordonation must be approved by the Congress. To avoidthis complication, the 
grileiro registers multiple posses
of less than 2,500 hectares each under the names ofmultiple people, some of whom may be ‘ghosts’, sayinghe is leasing the land for a project, such as logging (see
Crime File 3 – Grupo Madenorte , page 43).
Usually, the grileiro registers the documents at the State
agency (which is ITERPA in the case of Pará), as wellas at INCRA (the Federal agency) and even at theReceita Federal (the Brazilian Tax Authority). Theobjective is to cross-register the fraud giving theconsistent appearance of legality.
94
20METHODS COMMONL Y USED BY LAND GRABBERS87 

MIDDLE LAND UNDER SIEGE BY LAND
GRABBERS, LOGGERS AND FARMERS
Situated between the Xingu and Tapajós rivers, the Middle Land is
one of the largest relatively undisturbed areas of rainforest in theeastern Amazon. Surrounded by Indian lands, the Middle Landcovers over 8 million hectares, an area about the size of Austria.
95
Most of the Middle Land is located in the municipalities of Altamira
and São Félix do Xingu, with a small part in the municipality ofTrairão. 
The presence of indigenous groups, natural geographic barriers such
as rivers with strong variations in water level and the inaccessibility ofthe area have contributed to making the Middle Land one of themost biologically unknown regions in the Amazon.
96The best studies
available are still those carried out by the RADAM project in the1970s, when the Brazilian government mapped the whole Amazonby satellite. In the same decade, some scientific expeditions exploredthe Tapajós river valley. In 1990, more than 100 scientists andresearchers participated in “Workshop 90” in Manaus to definepriority areas for conservation in the Amazon. As a result, two largeareas in the Middle Land, showing a very high level of endemism(species only found in this area) and many rare or threatenedspecies of fauna and flora, were considered “
very high priority ” for
conservation.97
The region is of critical importance to Indian communities and to
wildlife, sheltering numerous species including jaguars, giantalligators, spider monkeys and anteaters. The largest remainingconcentrations of mahogany (
Swietenia macrophylla ) in Brazil are
located inside the Middle Land and the surrounding Indian Lands. 
The Indian Lands and the Middle Land were invaded by miners in the
1970s and loggers in the 1980s. Even though not all Indian Lands inthe region are demarcated, they have some status of legalprotection. The Middle Land is, however, currently legallyunprotected – either on paper or otherwise. Various parties haveclaimed the vast majority of the area by using invalid rubberconcessions (
seringais ) granted in the 1940s and 1950s.98
Most of the Middle Land is under the jurisdiction of the Pará State
land institution, ITERPA, but part is regulated by INCRA. With theBrazilian government’s suspension of the exploitation and trade inmahogany in October 2001, there are no FMPs are currently legallyauthorized in the Middle Land.
According to a private map drawn up in the 1980s, a total area
covering 6.1 million hectares was based on 21 individual seringais.
99
A number of these and other properties in the region have since
been sub-divided or sold on to third parties and have been underinvestigation by INCRA since 1999.
100The investigation has dealt
with a total area on paper covering some 118,000 km2, equal to
around three-quarters of the municipality of Altamira, and suspectedof being illegally held.
101
21
According to a private map of the Middle Land
drawn up in the 1980s, land ownershipcovering 6.1 million hectares was based on 21 invalid rubber concessions (seringais).
Step 5. Grileiro applies for a permit to
exploit the area
When the grileiro wants to log the land or raise
cattle, he has to apply to IBAMA, the Federalenvironment agency, to get approval for a ForestManagement Plan (FMP) or a DeforestationPermit, providing proof of land ownership. Priorto 2000, IBAMA used to issue authorizationsbased on either a declaration (
Declaração ) from
ITERPA or INCRA, or a contract of sale orpurchase between individuals (
Escritura de
Compra e Venda ) from a Cartório .
Since August 2003, IBAMA, due to rampant
forgeries, no longer accepts precariouscontracts of sale or purchase issued by
Cartórios and ‘ITERPA declarations’’ as
legitimate proof of final land title and does notauthorize deforestation or FMPs based on thesedocuments. 

CECILIOLAND
Two of the properties in the Middle Land, which have been under
investigation by INCRA are Fazenda Curuá and Fazenda Xingu ,
covering some 7 million hectares claimed through the company C.R.Almeida,
102which was founded by Cecílio do Rego Almeida.103In
1995, Cecílio obtained control of a company named INCENXIL,104
whose owners, according to him, had a mortgage on 4.7 million
hectares of land with the Bank of Pará.105After analyzing maps and
documents, ITERPA stated that the area, named Fazenda Curuá ,
had in fact 5.7 million hectares.106
In August 1996, ITERPA launched a lawsuit in the local court in
Altamira to cancel the registry of Fazenda Curuá107but Cecílio’s
lawyers issued a counter-attack. However, the long legal battle hasbeen complicated by the fact that 
Fazenda Curuá includes three
indigenous lands (Xipaia, Curuaia and Kayapó-Baú-Mekragnoti), oneNational Forest, four settlement areas (two under ITERPA and twounder INCRA) and one area belonging to the Brazilian ArmedForces. There are also about 200 families of 
ribeirinhos and
extractivists who have lived in the area since the 1940s.108In March
2003, the Federal Prosecution office in Belém asked the FederalJustice in Santarém to cancel all land titles and registries of 
Fazenda
Curuá claimed by C.R. Almeida at the Cartório de Altamira (4.7
million hectares).109In the same document he also laid criminal
charges against the seven people involved, including the Cartório deAltamira’s notary and her brother.
110According to the newspaper O
Liberal , Cecílio was excluded on the grounds that he was older than
70 (i.e. protected by the Brazilian law).111
Veja magazine, which dedicated a feature story to Cecílio, stated
that the price of the land was R$6 million (some US$1 per hectareat the time). According to 
Veja, the size of ‘Cecíloland’ increased in
1997 when he bought several continuous areas of original seringais
totaling 1.2 million hectares. The seringais were inherited by the
brothers Moura along the Xingu River and were later registered as
Fazenda Xingu . Vejaaccused Cecílio of being the largest grileiro in
the world, controlling an area with billions of dollars worth ofmahogany. Cecílio brought a court case against 
Veja, attacking the
publication in an interview with Istoé magazine a week later,112in
which he said that Fazenda Curuá was owned by his son, Roberto
B. Almeida, and the company Rondon Projetos Ecológicos,controlled by C.R. Almeida.
113Cecílio told Istoé that he wants to
develop ‘ecological projects’ in the region. Rondon commissioned aconsultancy company named Phorum to produce a substantial study,called 
Amazônia: Floresta para Sempre (Amazon: Forest forever ).114
This has not, however, been implemented.115□
In October 2001, Greenpeace visited and investigated Cecílioland,
and, during a joint operation with IBAMA, seized, outside the areaclaimed by C.R. Almeida, 7 , 165 m
3of mahogany and 1,169 m3of
cedar illegally extracted in the Middle Land. At the time, Cecílio’scompany INCENXIL had received a mandate from the judge ofAltamira to seize timber stolen from 
Fazenda Curuá .116INCENXIL
accused the mahogany king Osmar Ferreira of being responsible forthe illegal harvesting.
117Greenpeace and IBAMA landed their planes
on an airstrip at the region known as Entre Rios, property of C.R.Almeida, and were well received by a C.R.
Almeida lawyer, who stated that the companywas protecting a large area of Pará from beinginvaded by 
grileiros and loggers. Later, through
his lawyers, C.R. Almeida claimed ownership of all timber – those logs seized by his teamand those seized by IBAMA. The judge ofSantarém, however, decided in favor of IBAMAand ordered the timber to be donated to
local communities.
118
22
Veja magazine have accused Cecílio of being
the largest grileiro (land grabber) in the world,controlling an area with billions of dollars worthof mahogany. 

23


THE ASSAULT
Despite numerous investigations and legal proceedings being
initiated by various government departments against grilagem, theillegal assault on the Middle Land has long since begun, leaving thelaw behind. Logging and cattle ranching are the main driving forcesbehind the five advancing frontiers into the Middle Land.
• Southeast frontier – São Félix do Xingu
Invasion 1: From the southeast, loggers and cattle ranchers are
leading the advancing frontier towards the heart of the Middle Landfrom the town of São Félix do Xingu, on the right bank of the XinguRiver. This is by far the most aggressive of all the advancing frontiers.
São Félix is a traditional mahogany logging town at the end of a 
250 km section of unpaved road which connects it to the town ofXinguara on the state road PA-150. Cattle farms have replaced therich forests alongside the Xinguara-São Félix road following manyyears of intensive logging for mahogany. For many years, the XinguRiver has contained the advance of the farming frontier. 
In response to the decreasing availability of high value species and
new land for cattle farming in other areas, the natural barrier of theRio Xingu has been crossed. An ex-mining road, linking the RioXingu to Vila Canopus, a mining settlement on the Rio Iriri, hasbecome a principal route of the invasion for loggers and large
fazendeiros into the heart of the Middle Land.119From this main road,
loggers have opened over 600 km of illegal roads to reachmahogany trees.
120The majority of loggers came from the logging
region covering Redenção, Rio Maria, Xinguara, Tucumã, Ourilândiaand São Félix do Xingu, all of them traditional mahogany towns untila few years ago. Many are linked in some way to the mahoganykings – Osmar Alves Ferreira and Moisés Carvalho Pereira – whoare notorious for logging inside indigenous lands.
121
These illegal logging roads form an extensive secondary road
network between the Rio Xingu and Rio Iriri, offering entry points forloggers and farmers.
122During late August 2003, Greenpeace
conducted aerial monitoring – between Itaituba, in the northwest ofthe Middle Land, and Vila Canopus in the center of the Middle Land– and documented massive areas of large-scale illegal deforestation.A number were already burned or ready to be burned, but otherswere already in green pasture with cattle. At the current rate in theregion, illegal deforestation is soon likely to cross Rio Iriri to the BR-163, the Cuiabá-Santarém Highway at the west of the MiddleLand.
125
In July 2003, an agent of IBAMA and the Federal Police
apprehended a truck transporting 3,500 liters of herbicide in 175barrels. According to the manager of IBAMA-Pará, Marcílio Monteiro,the toxic chemical,
126similar to the ‘Agent Orange’ used by the
Americans during the Vietnam War, was to be used to deforest anarea of the Middle Land near São Félix.
123
• Western frontier – Novo Progresso
Invasion 2: From the west the loggers are leading the advancing
frontier from Novo Progresso (New Progress), a turbulent town with
24
The illegal assault on the Middle Land has long
since begun, leaving the law behind. Loggingand cattle ranching are the main driving forcesbehind the five advancing frontiers into theMiddle Land. 

2523,000 inhabitants 750 km south of Santarém. Companies moved
to the town of Novo Progresso along the Cuiabá – Santarémhighway (BR-163) during the late 1990s with the expectation that itwould be paved. In 1998, there were nine active sawmills,consuming around 300,000 m
3of logs a year. In 2001, the industry
was in boom as the consumption of timber increased to 700,000 m3
of logs a year, with around 60 sawmills operating.128There are now
around 200 mills in the region,127a number which will surely only
increase when the road is paved.
Conflict over land and the rich forests of the Middle Land is rampant
in this area. In July 2002, a rural workers’ leader known as ‘Brasília’
(Bartolomeu Morais da Silva), was assassinated one month aftersending a letter to the authorities denouncing threats he and localfamilies were receiving from loggers and farmers. In the letter,entitled 
Revolt of the settlers , Brasília described in detail how the
local police were colluding with farmers and gunmen to threaten andexpel families that denounced 
grilagem .128
In late 2002, a group of French journalists who went to Novo
Progresso were expelled by armed loggers and farmers, arriving attheir hotel in seven pickup trucks. The pilot of the chartered airplaneand their guide were threatened with death. According to one of thejournalists, a farmer told them that the “
BR-163 is not yet paved
because of pressures from Greenpeace and WWF ”. Another of the
gang, mistaking the French journalists for Americans, stated: “ You
already killed all your Indians. Leave us in peace to kill ours ”.131
The paving of the BR-163, yet to be decided by the new Lula
government, is predicted to induce massive deforestation in theregion, increasing the exposure of the Middle Land to destructivelogging and agriculture. In an article published in 
Science magazine,
it is forecast that up to 49,000 km2of forest will be destroyed within
the next 25 to 35 years by the paving of the road, with a similar areaput at risk of fire.
129
The asphalt will make it cheaper and quicker to transport timber to
the port of Santarém for export and to the domestic markets in thesouth of Brazil, providing the motivation for a second and third waveof loggers to exploit low-to-middle value timber species.
130Crop
producers from Mato Grosso State are also pushing for the Federalgovernment to pave the BR-163. This will provide easy access to theport facilities in Santarém, which is becoming a major point of exportfor ships accessing the Atlantic Ocean via the Amazon River.
The section of BR-163 already paved in Mato Grosso illustrates
what the future holds in store for the highway in Pará. Fifty-sevenpercent of the area immediately along BR-163 in Mato Grosso isalready deforested, while the buffer along the unpaved road as far asSantarém is only nine percent deforested. Novo Progresso, however,has had the largest increase in deforestation rate between 2000 and2001 – some 340 percent. In 2001, 225 km
2of forest was cut down
and in 2002, 767 km2.132
In response to the decreasing availability of
high value species, an ex-mining road hasbecome a principal route of the invasion forloggers and large cattle ranchers into the heartof the Middle Land. From this main road,loggers have opened over 600 km of illegalroads to reach mahogany trees. 

Recent satellite data analyzed by Greenpeace shows that two illegal
logging roads from the BR-163 have extended across the Baúindigenous lands and reached the Rio Curuá. Many other illegal roadnetworks are developing on the east side of the BR-163.
• From the northwest – Trairão
Invasion 3: This invasion of the Middle Land, from the Itaituba and
Santarém part of the Cuiabá-Santarém highway (BR-163),133is 
being led by the loggers and followed by large cattle ranchers.134
Already a network of illegal logging roads is developing, and during
Greenpeace’s aerial monitoring in the region in late August manyareas of deforestation were observed. 
• From the north – Transamazônica Highway 
Along the Transamazônica Highway, loggers, cattle ranchers and
governmental settlement projects are leading the advancing frontierfrom the north from the following two locations:
Ruropólis Municipality
Invasion 4: In Ruropólis Municipality – towards the mouth of Riozinho
do Anfrísio – the advance is from a mixture of governmentalsettlement projects and also logging and cattle ranching. 
Uruará Municipality
Invasion 5: In Uruará Municipality an illegal logging road, known as
the Trans-Iriri road, now crosses the indigenous land of theCachoeira Seca do Iriri and meets the Rio Iriri, which has become animportant route for smuggling illegal logs to feed mills in the region.In Uruará there are powerful economic groups involved in logging inthe Middle Land, including Uruará Madeireira Ltda (considered byIBAMA to belong to Osmar Ferreira, one of the mahogany kings)and Vargas and Vargas Ltda.
135
26
In 2000, Greenpeace investigated an illegal
road opened by the company Porbras on theXingu River. 

27The long-standing absence of any legitimate
government in the Middle Land region has the ultimateirony. Much of the local population has becomedependent for their very livelihoods on an economyrooted in illegal operations by loggers and farmers andsee no alternative but to stand alongside them inopposition to government intervention.
In March 2003, the Minister of Justice, Dr Márcio
Thomaz Bastos received a dossier
136on organized crime
in the south of Pará, including the Middle Land. Thedossier, produced by the Institute of Amazon Studies(Instituto de Estudos Amazônicos – IEA), showed theconnection between the violence in the region and
grilagem , the illegal extraction of wood in Indian Lands,
traffic of guns and drugs, and bio-piracy. The reportlisted various large farms – Três Poderes, J. Veríssimo,Santa Cruz, Tibórnia, Santa Cristina and Belauto,“
under the control of criminals and defended with
heavy weapons ”. One of the cases reported was the
invasion by three gunmen of the farm Barra do Triunfo,in São Felix do Xingu. During the invasion, the ruralworker Antônio Queiroz was murdered – shot 16 times.Three other workers were wounded. “
The wounded
and the dead were transported to São Félix, where nohelp could be found, not from the police, not from thelocal hospital
.” The hospital director was threatened by
an anonymous caller stating that “ none of the workers
injured would remain alive to tell the story ”.137
This relationship between violence, farming and illegal
logging in Pará has attracted the attention of theBrazilian press. 
O Liberal , reported the case of two
farms, Terra Roxa I and Terra Roxa II , composed of 35
contiguous plots of 4,356 hectares, totalling 152,460hectares in São Félix do Xingu: “
Men with heavy
weapons [were] hidden there. ”138The area was sold by
Madeireira Serra Dourada Ltda to the companiesAluminal Com. e Participações and AgropecuáriaCaraíbas Ltda, according to a contract of sale andpurchase obtained by the newspaper. 
O Liberal stated
that Serra Dourada belongs to the mahogany kingOsmar Ferreira. This company has record of numerousinfractions in IBAMA’s files for illegal logging and theiroperations were suspended by IBAMA in 2001. Thearea controlled by Serra Dourada technically could notbe sold as it is public land, 
grilada from Pará State,
INCRA and Indian Lands. In spite of this, the land wassold. The contract between Serra Dourada and the twocompanies obligated the buyers to “
extract all trees of
the species mahogany and cedar in the area ”.139The
area was later invaded again by at least seven men,140and the two companies, who had purchased illegal
land, went to the courts to demand the removal of theinvaders, and the return of the land to the companies.
According to ITERPA, however, the 35 plots were not
located in the places described in the sales contract.“
The grileiros got 35 areas spread throughout the
region and put them all together in a paper, andregistered them at the cartórios in Altamira and SãoFélix ... these two cartórios are famous for supplyingfalse documents to grileiros and are now under thecontrol of the State Justice Tribunal.
”141
According to O Liberal , Antonio Lucena Barros
(‘Maranhense’) has been under prosecution by theFederal Court of Marabá since 1998 for illegalmahogany logging inside the Kayapó Indian Reserve.IBAMA suspects that he is linked to the mahogany kingMoisés Carvalho Pereira, a powerful man inRedenção.
142Maranhense has a long criminal file. He
was arrested in Redenção on 26 February 2003 by theFederal Police after being accused by five federalprosecutors
143of numerous crimes, including slavery
and destruction of protected areas. His arrest wasordered by the Judge of Marabá, Herculano Nacif.
In October 2002 the TV network, Record, aired a
special program about São Félix do Xingu and theregion of Porto de Moz. Record TV accompanied 70agents of IBAMA and the Federal Police in a raid on thelogging towns on the Xinguara-São Félix do XinguRoad, and discovered that bridges had been sabotagedin an attempt to stop the official convoy from arriving inSão Félix. The agents inspected 8 sawmills along theroad and seized both mahogany logs and sawnmahogany.
144The manager of one sawmill was arrested
and transported to Marabá. In São Félix, the agentswere received by a mob of angry farmers and loggers,accompanied by some small landholders. Although theywere heavily armed, the agents were obliged to leavethe town after being trapped by the mob in a restaurant.Record TV described the conflict as the fight between‘the real Brazil’ (loggers and farmers) and ‘the officialBrazil’ (the government trying to enforce the law).
“
What is happening here is that the principle of
authority is broken ”, explained IBAMA agent Julio
Silva.145His point was that because farmers and loggers
have become the only significant economic force in theregion, much of the populations in the towns havebecome dependent on these industries, and fightalongside them against the government.‘THE PRINCIPLE OF AUTHORITY IS BROKEN HERE’ 

28
In 2002, as a late reaction to the exposure of illegal
mahogany logging in the Middle Land, the Federalgovernment commissioned ISA – an important BrazilianNGO – to produce a conservation proposal for the area. The result was a proposal for a network of conservation
units throughout the Middle Land, including NationalForests, Indigenous Lands and Extractive Reserves. Todate, this proposal remains locked in a drawer in theoffices of the Federal government. NGOs and local GOVERNMENT FUNDED PROPOSAL 
TO PROTECT THE MIDDLE LAND GATHERS DUST 

29
ISA’s government-funded conservation proposal to
establish a network of conservation areas for theMiddle Land, including National Forests,Indigenous Lands and Extractive Reserves. 
communities recently decided to take ‘ownership’ of the
maps and demand the proposal’s implementation with aparticipatory planning process that would look at thesuggested zoning. Greenpeace considers this proposal an important step
towards the objective of protecting the Middle Landagainst predatory activities and 
grilagem . However, a
moratorium on all industrial scale activities in the area isnecessary until the zoning process is complete and theprotected areas are established. 

STATE OF CONFLICT - PORTO DE MOZ 
Known as Porto de Moz, the large area of the municipalities of Porto
de Moz and Prainha, on the left margin of the Rio Xingu, has becomethe battleground between the forest communities who live in theregion and depend on its natural resources for their survival, andlogging companies who have invaded the area either with or withoutofficial sanction from the authorities. 
The area is the eastern part of an immense rectangle named ‘Low
Amazon’ that covers eight million hectares of forest and small riversbetween the Transamazon Highway and the Amazon, Xingu andTapajós rivers.
148The Porto de Moz rural area is home to 125
communities with a total population of around 20,000. The area wasfirst occupied during the rubber boom, which eventually collapsed in1914. Nowadays, communities’ livelihoods are based on fishing,hunting, subsistence agriculture and the extraction and sale of forestproducts.
149
In recent years, the arrival of loggers and disputes over the
communities’ resources have created a situation of violent conflicts.Many cases of violence and death threats have been reported. TheBrazilian 
National Report on Human Rights and Environment,
presented to the United Nations High Commissioner on Human
30
Fearing the loss of their traditional lands, and desperate to put an end to illegal and predatory logging, the communities
from Porto de Moz are demanding the creation of an Extractive Reserve in the region.
Rights in April 2003, chose Porto de Moz as
one of three municipalities in Pará in which togather testimonies and accusations of victimsaffected by 
grilagem and violence.150A number
of the cases are associated with illegal logging,by the timber industry or large-scale farmers inthese municipalities.
There are almost no local police in Porto de
Moz, and the Federal Police, who could protectthe community leaders and their families, are285 km away in Santarém. Although they arethe most respected police force in Brazil, theFederal Police don’t have enough agents toaccomplish their tasks, nor money to transportagents to the scenes of crimes.
Loggers started to move into the Porto de Moz
region in the early 1990s, to take advantage ofthe new markets in medium-value timberspecies (such as ipê, jatobá, tauari, cedar, etc.),and the development of the ports of Santarémand Breves.
151Most of these logging companies
are small- to medium-sized Brazilian firms, which 

supply traditional Amazon wood exporters such as DLH Nordisk,
Eidai, Curuatinga, Rancho da Cabocla and Madesa according tocontracts registered at IBAMA.
The Porto de Moz region has become a new Eldorado for the timber
industry. The rate of logging has rapidly increased in the region. By2001, a staggering 50,000 cubic meters of logs per month wasbeing transported along the Rio Jaurucu, a tributary of the RioXingu.
152The Jaurucu has become the principal route for smuggling
illegal logs to feed mills in Santarém as well as mills further away inAltamira and Belém.
153
Greenpeace has identified and mapped 50 FMPs in the region, and
found that between 2001 and 2003, 90 companies directly exploitedor traded timber from the region. Two of these groups are of specialinterest due to the size of their operations, the fact that they areexploiting large forest areas and the methods they use to ensuretheir access to wood stocks. The groups are: Grupo Campos andGrupo Madenorte.
It was in the late 1990s that communities here really started to feel
the impact of the logging companies’ invasion of their traditionalland. At this time the Grupo Campos became the biggest companyin the region, and also achieved political and economic power.Gérson Salviano Campos was elected Mayor in 1996 and re-electedin 2000. He appointed half a dozen relatives to positions in hisgovernment, controlling all the institutional space of the municipality,and dictating the rules in order to exercise local power in economic,social and environmental planning.
154Led by the mayor, the Grupo
Campos is accused by IBAMA and the Federal Prosecution office ofmany irregularities – including illegal logging, 
grilagem155and misuse
of federal public funds.156
Also economically and politically influential is Madenorte and its
subsidiary, Marajó Island Business, controlled by the powerfulentrepreneur José Severino Filho. Local communities accuseMadenorte employees of imposing a regime of fear in the region.
157
Another important player is Porto de Moz Ltda, controlled by the
President of the influential AIMEX (the Pará association of timberexporters).
158There are no reports of violence attributed to this
company. Politically less influential, but economically very aggressive,is the Portuguese company, Porbras, which has a sawmill in SenadorJosé Porfírio, a town on the right bank of the Xingu River. In 2000,Greenpeace investigated an unauthorized road opened by Porbrason the left bank of the river for the exploitation of the rich stocks ofjatobá and other wood species in Porto de Moz’s forests.“For every 100 families, an average 99
percent have problems with their landsand the remaining one percent isthreatened with losing their land. Nobodylives well. To have this life, I believe it isbetter to die than live like this.” 
Community leader, Porto de Moz Sustainable
Development Committee, September 2002.146
31


PROPOSED EXTRACTIVE RESERVES –
‘VERDE PARA SEMPRE’ AND ‘RENASCER’
Fearing the loss of their traditional lands, and desperate to put an
end to illegal and predatory logging, in 1999 community leaderscreated a resistance movement
160 called the Porto de Moz
Sustainable Development Committee.152In April 2000, the Rural
Workers Union, representing the communities, sent a letter toINCRA, IBAMA and SECTAM – Pará State’s Department ofScience, Technology and Environment – demanding the creation ofan Extractive Reserve.
The first seminar on the creation of the Extractive Reserve was held
in November 2001 in Porto de Moz and was attended by 300community leaders who gave the reserve a name: 
Verde para
Sempre (Green Forever). Two years later, in a similar movement,
local communities of the adjacent rural municipality area of Prainha(to the west of Porto de Moz) proposed the creation of anotherreserve, 
Renascer.161The proposed reserves are contiguous and
would together create the largest area of protected forest and riverunder the collective control of communities in Brazil, covering around1.6 million hectares.
The Federal government, through the CNPT (National Center for the
Sustainable Development of Traditional Populations), part of IBAMA,agreed to initiate studies into the viability of the
Verde para Sempre
reserve, but these have yet to be completed due to lack of money
and political will.162□Meanwhile, executive powers of the state of Pará
and local mayors have been outspoken in their opposition to thecreation of the reserve. The President of ITERPA-Pará, RonaldoBarata, wrote to the then State Governor, Almir Gabriel, claiming: “
If an extractive reserve is established in the area, it would be a
serious impediment to the economic development of the region,since the principles on which the idea of an extractive reserve arebased contain very restrictive measures
.”163
Also opposing the Verde para Sempre reserve are the Mayors of
Porto de Moz and Painha , both from the PSDB political party, the
party of former Governor Almir Gabriel and of the new GovernorSimão Jatene, elected in October 2002. Gerson Campos, MayorofPorto de Moz, expressed his opposition to the reserve in aninterview with Greenpeace in 2002.
164Gandor Hage, Mayor of
Painha, “incited scenes of violence” at a public meeting discussingthe creation of the reserve in February 2002, according to an IBAMApress release.
165O Liberal newspaper reported that he tore up the
book of signatures of community members and delegates who hadattended the meeting.
166Hage had been officially invited to
participate in the meeting by CNPT/IBAMA as part of theassessment process for the creation of the reserve.
At the time of writing this report, the Extractive Reserve remains only
an area defined on an IBAMA map and an incomplete set of viabilitystudies. What is missing is the political will of the Federal and Stategovernments to resolve their differences.
Tired of waiting, in September 2002 about 400 community members
blocked the Rio Jaurucu, to protest against the destruction of their
32
Community leaders in Porto de Moz discuss
the next steps in their campaign to create anExtractive Reserve which will guarantee theirland rights and protect their natural resources.
forests and to ask for the creation of the Verde
para Sempre reserve. During the protest, metal
barges loaded with illegal logs exploited by theCampos Group were stopped and later seizedby IBAMA. The company received two fines
167
by IBAMA, totaling R$196,291.50 (around
US$67 ,000).168A day after the blockade, some
community people, journalists and activistsreceived death threats and were physicallyattacked on arriving in the city of Porto de Moz.In a national TV broadcast, a journalist from theRecord TV network accused Mayor Campos ofinciting violence, which she and her crew hadsuffered.
169
Since the river blockade, the anger of the
loggers in the Porto de Moz region against localcommunities and their leaders and theopposition to the creation of 
Verde para
Sempre has increased – as have the risks for
social movements. For example, on the day apublic meeting was held to announce the
National Report to the UN High Commissioner
on Human Rights , a local leader, Mr Idalino
Nunes Assis, received a phone call warning himnot to go out of his house at night, or he wouldrun the risk of being killed
170(see Crime File 1:
Grupo Campos , page 38–41). 

EXTRACTIVE RESERVES
“Today RESEX is the only judicial instrument
which recognises the right of ribeirinhos to the land.” 
Felício Pontes Jr., Pará Federal Public Prosecutor –
April 2003171
Extractive Reserves (RESEX) are areas protected by
law designated for the conservation and sustainablemanagement of natural resources by the traditionalcommunities inhabiting them. This model wasdeveloped in the 1980s by forest dwellers under theleadership of Chico Mendes and the National Councilof Rubber Tappers (CNS) and adopted by the BrazilianFederal government in 1990. 
These reserves guarantee local families the collective
right to land and its natural resources, allowing them tosupport themselves by their traditional economicactivities, while preserving the environment. The responsibility to create a RESEX lies with the
Federal government, but it is up to local communities toteam up and request its creation. 
The murder of Chico Mendes by farmers in December
1988 led to his worldwide recognition as anenvironmental martyr. In 1990, the Federal governmentissued the Extractive Reserves General Decree
164which
established the legal basis for the creation of suchareas. In March 1990, the Brazilian government createdthe ‘
Extractive Reserve Chico Mendes ’, covering
970,570 hectares in the Amazon state of Acre. Sincethen, another 12 reserves have been created in theAmazon, giving collective ownership and control to localcommunities in a total area of 3.5 million hectares. 
A further law from 2000, and a Decree issued in 2002,
proclaims that Conservation Units should be createdthroughout the national territory as an instrument forconsolidating public environmental protection policiesestablished by the Ministry of the Environment.
33
Tired of waiting, in September 2002□ about 400 community members blocked the Rio Jaurucu, to protest against the
destruction of their forests. Greenpeace supported their activities. 

SECTION 3
PARTNERS IN CRIME
Between 2001 and 2003, 90 companies were identified by
Greenpeace as trading in logs or sawnwood originating in theproposed extractive reserves all directly exploiting the forests in the region.
166
Most of the 90 companies are small- or medium-sized national
companies. However, toward the end of the processing chain, thereare large exporters, such as Curuatinga, Rancho da Cabocla,Madesa, Eidai and DLH Nordisk.
174
Three of the identified companies, Grupo Campos, Comabil
(Madeireira Biancardi) and Grupo Madenorte, have been accused ofinvolvement in violence against local community members andactivists in the Porto de Moz region.
175
Greenpeace’s investigation identified and mapped FMPs in the
region of Porto de Moz and Prainha. All areas have been mapped byGreenpeace using information and data from IBAMA, and includeland titles and/or maps of the FMP as presented by the proponents(see map on page 36–37). Not all of the FMPs show the fulldelimitation of their area as some documents contain nogeographical reference perimeters: these projects are included onthe map, but the exact geographic limits are unknown (see casestudy on page 35).
34“Declarations of posse (possession) 
and other precarious instrumentssupplied by state and federal landagencies are vague and imprecise, and do not offer legal security forenvironmental authority decisions on forest management plans ordeforestation authorizations.”
IBAMA’s President Marcus Barros, 
August 2003.


In total, 54 FMPs were submitted to IBAMA between
1991 and 2003 in the region of Porto de Moz andPrainha. Of these, 48 are located in the municipality ofPorto de Moz, and six in Prainha. However, anotherFMP, located in Medicilandai, just outside Porto de Moz,was identified and mapped as it was harvestingtimber
176inside the areas proposed by the local
communities for the Extractive Reserves Verde para
Sempre and Renascer , and their surrounding areas (see
Crime File 2: Comabil , page 41).177The total number of
FMPs mapped is therefore 55.
Of these 55 FMPs, 26 were submitted between 1991
and 2000 and covered a total area of 92,879 hectares.Since 2000, 20 more new FMPs were officiallysubmitted to IBAMA, adding 184,434 hectares to thetotal area of proposed exploitation of 277 ,314 hectares.
All six FMPs in the region of Prainha were submitted to
IBAMA between 2000 and 2003, covering an area of87 ,322 hectares. There are other FMPs in the area butinsufficient information exists to plot them on the map.
Of the grand total of 48 plans in Porto de Moz
Municipality submitted to IBAMA between 1991 and2003, only four are outside the area requested by thecommunities to become registered as an ExtractiveReserve. Three of these plans are on the right bank ofthe Xingu River: the ones under the names of RivaldoSalviano Campos (brother of the Mayor of Porto deMoz, Gerson Campos),
178Dilcilene Tenório de Souza
(wife of Mayor Campos)179and Magebras (Madeiras
Gerais do Brasil),180near the town of Senador José
Porfírio. The fourth plan, Madeireira Cruz Machado,181is
near the village of Vitoria do Xingu.
All 26 FMPs submitted to IBAMA between 1991 and
2000 contain a copy of a ‘contract ( escritura ) of sale
and purchase’ registered by a Cartório (registry office)
as proof of land ownership. However, in 13 cases, the
escrituras did not supply sufficient proof of the chain of
custody of ownership, which is necessary to prove legaltitle of the land, and therefore cannot be considered‘legal’. Of the remaining 13 FMPs, Greenpeace isawaiting additional information from ITERPA.
After 2000, the practice of showing land ownership
changed: only three of 29 FMPs submitted to IBAMAcontained an 
escritura as the land title document. The
other 26 FMPs, totalling 166,336 hectares, included an‘ITERPA declaration’ as the land title document. One, inthe name of Francisco Cunha da Silva, covering 2,515hectares, introduces an ‘innovation’: it is based on an‘authorization of use of public state property’
182issued
by the President of ITERPA. Another one has no datayet available. The remaining 24 FMPs are located withinpublic lands and therefore are not eligible for an IBAMAauthorization for exploitation, as confirmed by IBAMA’smemorandum No. 001/Diref/Proge of 12 August 2003.
183
The memo instructed executive managers not to
approve any FMPs or deforestation plans based on landagency declarations, including those from ITERPA.
184
Among 29 FMPs submitted between 2001 and 2003,
five were submitted by the company Madenorte in Portode Moz and Prainha, to harvest areas leased from 50people claiming ownership of public land. Another threeare under the names of individuals from the same list ofMadenorte leasers. Three FMPs in Porto de Moz areregistered in the names of shareholders of theSantarém based company Curuatinga, and one is in thename of Rivaldo Campos (shareholder of Maturusawmill and brother of Mayor Campos). One FMP is inthe name of Elias Salame, president of AIMEX, the ParaAssociation of Timber Products Exporters.
In a letter to INCRA (the Federal land agency) IBAMA’s
President Marcus Barros states that “
declarations of
posse (possession) and other precarious instrumentssupplied by state and federal land agencies are vagueand imprecise, and do not offer legal security forenvironmental authority decisions on forestmanagement plans or deforestation authorizations.
”185
IBAMA also makes clear that documents “ of lease or
other means of use and temporary possession ofpublic land contracted between individuals cannot beaccepted by IBAMA for authorization of deforestationand forest management plans.
”186
35CASE STUDY OF PUBLIC LAND APPROPRIATION BY LOGGING
COMPANIES IN PORTO DE MOZ AND PRAINHA 

36


37


CRIME FILE 1: GRUPO CAMPOS
Grupo Campos is controlled by the Mayor of Porto de Moz, Gérson
Salviano Campos. He is joint owner of the sawmill ExportadoraCariny. Two of his brothers, Rivaldo Salviano Campos (a citycouncilor in Porto de Moz) and Francimeire Saviano Campos (alawyer), are co-owners of Indústria Madeireira Maturu Ltda (Maturu).The Campos brothers are also among the biggest cattle ranchers ofthe municipality, holding around 5,000 to 6,000 stock.
188
Maturu has contracts to purchase logs from at least two companies,
Marajó Island Business (Grupo Madenorte) and Acaraí Comércio eTransporte Rodofluvial Ltda, both accused of involvement in illegallogging.
189In 2001, Maturu supplied 5,167 m3of sawn wood to
Nordisk Timber Ltda (DLH Group).190In the same year, 150 sawmills
in Pará supplied Nordisk, four of which, including Maturu, wereinvolved in illegal operations in the Porto de Moz region.
191
Mayor Campos is now one of the biggest landowners in the
municipality, with 100,000 hectares or perhaps two to three timesthat area. He claims to own land that is considered to be federalpublic land – a farm that invades the Caxiuanã National Forest andthe Pracupi settlement area, which was already demarcated byINCRA. The Federal Public Prosecution Office has denouncedCampos for involvement in “
fraud and grilagem ”.192He has also
received fines for deforestation.193
CASE IN POINT 
The case which most illustrates the Campos family’s involvement in
forest crime is that of the trade between Maturu and Nordisk –documented by an inspector from the Belém branch of IBAMA,Formentini. Although there is ample evidence of crime in this case,including documents and videos, the final report was never actedupon by IBAMA itself.
In August 2002, an IBAMA inspection team discovered a sawmill
operating illegally, close to Rio Maruá, near the Caxiuanã NationalForest. The sawmill belongs to Rivaldo Campos, the joint owner ofMaturu.
194At the sawmill, the inspection team found 227 packages
of special gauge sawn timber (angelim vermelho and maçaranduba)and 381 m
3of logs (cumaru and jatobá). A document bearing
Nordisk’s name was reportedly found with the sawn timber, whichwas ready for export. In addition, 476 logs (around 853 m
3) of jatobá,
maçaranduba, muiracatiara, angelim vermelho and angelim pedrawere located in the forest during the investigation.
195
Although the timber and documents were seized by IBAMA and
Rivaldo Campos was fined R$212,583 (US$70,000), Formentini’sreport explains that when IBAMA agents returned to the area theyfound that the confiscated sawn timber was gone and had alreadybeen sent to Breves to be exported. Also the confiscated logs hadbeen loaded onto a barge, the 
Rainha de Rondônia, with a tugboat
Comandante Campos III , ready to be brought to the Maturu sawmill,
at the request of Rivaldo Campos. Three police officers were thenappointed to accompany the tugboat with the confiscated wood andmachinery, to transfer it to Breves. According to Formentini, MayorCampos intervened in the confiscation, with the intention of stopping
38“My position? My position is contrary 
to the creation of the Reserve.” 
Mayor of Porto de Moz, September 2002.
Gérson Salviano Campos, logger (Campos
Group) and Mayor of Porto de Moz 

its transfer to Breves. Also, an unknown woman came to inform them
that Rivaldo Campos would be “ calling some armed people, to
lynch the team, topple the boat and, even, if it would be the case, toreach ultimate consequences.
”196
Ultimately, Mayor Campos managed to become the legal depository
of all the confiscated goods, according to the then ExecutiveManager of IBAMA-Belém. According to Formentini, Mayor Camposasked him “
several times ” how much he wanted to be paid to keep
quiet about the wood in Breves. The inspection team went to Brevesto identify the confiscated sawn timber. However they received anurgent call from the Executive Manager of IBAMA to return to Belém.Two days later, IBAMA-Breves office staff reported to the IBAMA-Belém office that there were authorizations for some of the wood inquestion. Two weeks later, Formentini was discharged.
197The then
head of IBAMA-Belém explained to Greenpeace that Formentini waspunished not because of the substance of his report but for his lackof respect for authority as a manager of IBAMA. IBAMA-Belémreceived a parallel report, written by agents of the state police whowere accompanying Formentini in the investigation to Porto de Mozand Breves. The police document listed offensive comments madeby Formentini towards his boss.
In September 2002, a month after these incidents, both the metal
barge 
Rainha de Rondônia and the tug-boat Comandante Campos
IIIseized by Formentini’s team in August were stopped by a blockade
organized by 400 community people on the Jaurucu river. Bothvessels should have been out of commission pending further judicialdecisions. However, the metal barge was loaded with logs destinedfor Maturu, according to the skipper, another brother of MayorCampos.
198The logs had no transportation documents (ATPFs).199
Greenpeace has video footage of the pilot saying to an IBAMA agent
that the wood was extracted “in a project up river owned by [José]
Biancardi ” (see Crime File 2: Comabil , page 41). In the video, the
pilot states: “ This wood is illegal, 100% illegal. ” 
39
In August 2002, an IBAMA inspection team
discovered an illegal sawmill belonging toRivaldo Campos, the joint owner of Maturu. At the sawmill, a document bearing Nordisk’sname was reportedly found with the sawntimber, which was ready for export.
“So he [Mayor] sent a group of soldiers
to humiliate me so that I would sign adocument, probably so that I wouldauthorize them to pull down my fence, as they did. His gangsters were allarmed, with revolvers, machine guns. My son asked if 
[they] had brought any
judicial order for this. And they broughtfour chainsaws to destroy my fence.”
Senhor Carnaci, a farmer of about 70 years 
of age from Colônia Majari, Porto de Moz. 

The Brazilian National Report to the UN High
Commissioner on Human Rights highlights many casesof land invasion and violence by the Campos Group.
188
The following cases are excerpts from this report:
•João Pinheiro de Souza, a farmer, whose land – 
100 hectares along the PA-167 – was reportedlyinvaded by Gérson Campos. João tried many times todiscuss a solution with Gérson. However, accordingto de Souza, at his last attempt, he was threatenedwith death and impeded from working on his land andgetting sustenance for his family because the land‘belonged’ to the mayor. 
•At Colônia Majari, Senhor Carnaci, a farmer of about
70 years of age, is said to have had his land violentlyinvaded by Gérson Campos, with participation bymilitary police. He testified, “
On 29 December 2001
the mayor called me and said that from that day on Icannot put even one nail on my land, which is 500meters by 1000 meters. He entered 300 meters intomy area. I resolved to make a fence at the limit of myland and his land. This was when he sent threearmed men to tear away my fence, more than 700meters. My lawyer told me to put up a fence again. I did that. So he 
[Mayor] sent a group of soldiers to
humiliate me so that I would sign a document,probably so that I would authorize them to pull downmy fence, as they did. His gangsters were all armed,with revolvers, machine guns. My son asked if (they)had brought any judicial order for this. And theybrought four chainsaws to destroy my fence. Themayor’s cows invaded my land and destroyed myfield. I was forced to rent another area…The case isin the court, but nothing is solved. What I can do isto stay quiet, wait for the court, for the good will ofthe judge. I hope that they can resolve our situation. I am Brazilian, I have a right to a piece of land. I wasborn and grew up in the farm from where I getsustenance for my family
.”
•In Nazaré Community, a man known as Santo Baiano
had his land invaded by order of Mayor GérsonCampos. People entered his land to open trails, butended up leaving the area because of resistance byMr Baiano. The police were called to arrest him, butSTR (
Sindicato dos Trabalhadores Rurais ) looked for
a judge during the night to communicate the illegalarrest and Mr Baiano was eventually released. MrBaiano accused a gunman known as ‘Pastor’ ofacting under orders of Gérson Campos and showedas evidence the cartridge of a bullet which was shot by Pastor at him. Idalino Nunes Assis of STR stated:
“
We came to court asking for a security mandate for
Mr Baiano, and asking also to keep him in his ownland, because he is threatened and people said thatthey want revenge and to take him from his land. Mr Baiano has been living on that land for more than40 years
.”
•Farmers Cândido Pinheiro Sanches and Lucina Froes
Castro, residents of Rio Quati, Bom JesusCommunity, reported being prosecuted by MayorGérson Campos, alleging invasion of property. TheMayor is accused of hiring a man to open a trail in themiddle of their land and field, partially destroying theircrops, and threatening the couple’s young childrenwith death. According to the farmer, at the firsthearing on 27 October 1999, he received an arrestwarrant for refusing to sign a document that forcedhim to leave his lands to the mayor’s wife. Eight dayslater, a court order authorized the destruction of hishouse. Mr Sanches tried to obtain a copy of thedocuments to inform his lawyer and constitute it in thelawsuit, however, the judge denied access to them. Inorder to keep his house, the farmer said he signed adocument that forced him to leave the areaimmediately. During the trial, the victim reported theinvasion by the Mayor’s loggers into the communityarea (11 landowners) to IBAMA. IBAMA confiscatedchainsaws, but three days later the logging started.The invasion of the other plots continues. Accordingto Mr. Sanches, João Leite is the person in charge ofcarrying out the orders of the Mayor in the field,including giving support to the court officials whenforcing court decrees, and is always armed. With thehelp of the STR lawyer, the farmers won the firstverdict, thus temporarily keeping the land they haveowned for more than 20 years. However, an appeal tothe Tribunal has not yet been heard. The
varzea
(flooded forest) area of Mr Sanches’ land is still being
disputed at court by a city councilor, the Mayor andothers. Mr Sanches tried to enroll his children in theBolsa Escola (school scholarship) project, but has notreceived any reply from the government and suspectsthat as an object of political persecution hisapplication is being kept at the city hall.
40GROUP CAMPOS AND THEIR INVOL VEMENT IN VIOLENCE 

CRIME FILE 2: COMABIL 
(MADEIREIRA BIANCARDI)
Separating Verde para Sempre from the Arara Indigenous Land and
the Middle Land, is the town of Medicilândia with 21,000 inhabitants,14,000 of whom live in rural areas. José Biancardi claims ownershipto 14,173 hectares of forests in the municipality of Medicilândia,which includes areas in the southern part of 
Verde para Sempre.
The town of Medicilândia, on the Transamazon Highway, was named
after former President Médici, a general who governed Brazil duringthe military dictatorship and conceived the Transamazon Highwayunder the banner of “
a land without people for people without land ”.
Biancardi, who trades with Maturu and other sawmills in the region,
is the owner of the ‘project’ with “ 100% illegal wood ” mentioned by
the pilot of the Comandante Campos during the Jaurucu river
blockade in September 2002 (see Crime File 1: Grupo Campos ,
page 38–40). According to the newspaper O Liberal, José Biancardi
is accused of many forest crimes in the region, including illegalexploitation of timber in the Arara Indigenous Land, at the north ofthe Middle Land. The newspaper accused Biancardi of being linkedwith the murder of Ademir Federicci (Dema) and of receivingpersonal protection from agents of Pará’s Military Police (StatePolice).
201
In 1999, Biancardi submitted a forest management project to IBAMA-
Santarém under the name of Comabil Ind. Com. MadeireiraBiancardi. He was hoping to exploit 12,000 hectares, producing41,000m
3of wood in the first year in an area of 1,040 hectares. The
area is located between the Penentecaua and Jaurucu rivers, in thePorto de Moz region. ITERPA document No.182, dated 9 December1998, was presented to IBAMA as proof of ownership of the area tobe exploited. However, ITERPA declared on 12 November 2001 thatthis document was false. On 30 April 2003, the Legal Department ofIBAMA recommended cancellation of the project. This gave Biancardienough time to exploit the land before being stopped by IBAMA.
In July 1999, IBAMA agents seized 140 mahogany logs being
extracted by Comabil in the Arara Indian Reserve. Biancardi and hispartner Constante Trezeciak were both fined.
202Prior to this, both
had been denounced by the Federal Prosecution office fordevastation of another area in the same Indian land.
CASE IN POINT
In October 2003, the police of Altamira arrested José Biancardi,
following the orders of the Judge of Medicilândia. Guns were seizedand a gunman accused of involvement with drug dealing was alsoarrested. In an interview on local television, Biancardi claimed hisinnocence and said he was a victim of Fetagri (the rural workersunion) and the social movements in the region. According to thepolice, there was a large volume of logs in the place where Biancardiwas arrested, which came from the 
Verde para Sempre.203
41“He has people with heavy guns
threatening residents… to protect a large area of grilagem disputed by other grileiros”.
Letter from the Rural Workers Union of
Medicilândia to the State Prosecutor MauroMendes, accusing logger Biancardi, 18 September, 2003
Mayor Campos 

A month before his arrest, the Rural Workers Union of Medicilândia
sent a letter192to the State Prosecutor of Altamira, Mauro Mendes,
accusing Biancardi of grilagem and of closing a secondary road(known as Travessão 75),
205asking local people for payments for use
of the road. Some 200 settlers live along this road, which departsnorth from the Transamazon Highway. It is one of the three mainlogging roads draining timber from the proposed reserve 
Verde para
Sempre area to sawmills in Brasil Novo and Medicilância
municipalities, according to Greenpeace’s own investigations.206
A month before being arrested, Biancardi had asked the Military
Police in Altamira to act against three other loggers who invaded theforest area he claims to own. On 16 September 2003, four policeofficers went to the region, accompanied by José Biancardi,following the orders of the captain of the Military Police. In a report
207
submitted to his commanders three days later, the sub-lieutenant in
charge of the operation claimed that “ there is some doubt about the
ownership rights in the complex of properties that constitutes thearea
”, mentioning the fact that the land title document submitted to
him by Biancardi was “ a term of agreement without legal value ”,
filled out by a lieutenant and signed by Biancardi and another mannamed Claudio Goiano. The sub-lieutenant states that some“
100,000m3of wood ” was illegally extracted, including Brazil nut
trees which are protected by law. The report says that loggers“
devastated 20,000 hectares ”. The police team seized two trucks,
four bulldozers and a chainsaw. According to the sub-lieutenant, hisgroup also found 546 logs illegally extracted by order of two loggers,Erich Horst Peper (known as ‘Jiló’), and his brother known as‘Pipoca’. He states that the logs were due to be transported by ametal barge to “
clandestine sawmills in Porto de Moz ”. 
The report exposes not only conflicts amongst individual loggers, but
bizarre behavior by the authorities. According to the sub-lieutenant,Jiló went to the area the next day with a lieutenant and a soldierunder instructions from the Altamira’s captain to liberate “
all the
seized equipment and leave the place ” until he could get clarification
from IBAMA on the status of exploitation. He obeyed. The sub-lieutenant also stated in this report that IBAMA had previousknowledge of the problems as their agents fined Pipoc and Jiló in2001. “
Their embargo didn’t stand for more than a week ”, he said in
the report.208
42
Logs stacked at Mayor Campos’s sawmill in
Porto de Moz.In September 2002, a barge loaded with 
logs from Biancardi and destined for Maturu(Grupo Campos) was brought to stand still by 400 local communities during theirblockade of the Jaurucu river. The skipper, a brother of Mayor Campos, confirmed withan IBAMA agent that “this wood is illegal,100% illegal.” 

CRIME FILE 3 - GRUPO MADENORTE
Grupo Madenorte is one of the most important players in the area
proposed by the Porto de Moz and Prainha communities as futureextractive reserves.
209The group is controlled by Mr José Severino
Filho, and includes Madenorte S/A Laminados e Compensados,Norte Madeiras Importação e Exportação Ltda and Marajó IslandBusiness Ltda.
210They produce sawn timber and plywood, 90% of
which is destined for export, mainly to the USA (55%), Europe(30%) and Asia (10%).
211
Madenorte claims to hold 200,000 hectares of forests in Breves,
Portel, Prainha and Porto de Moz municipalities.212However, under its
Forest Management Plan (FMP),213the company claims that the
group has a total area of only 144,700 hectares in three properties:24,900 in Portel (
Fazenda Sta. Catarina ); 72,400 in Prainha
(Fazenda Uruará ) and other of 47 ,400 in Porto de Moz, on the left
bank of the Juarucu River ( Fazenda Jauruçu ).214
Madenorte admits that it would need to have a total area of 360,000
hectares under management (in a 30-year harvesting cycle) in orderto supply their actual timber requirements of 240,000 m
3. The group
consumes 175,000m3of logs per year, of which 60 percent comes
from third parties.215
Documents issued by ITERPA and INCRA, which were submitted by
Madenorte to IBAMA requesting a permit to exploit Fazenda Uruará,show that the company does not own the land. The areas are leasedfrom 31 individuals who do not own the land either. Between 2001and 2002, they made declarations of ownership to the state landagency ITERPA for various areas, all somewhat smaller than 2,500hectares.
216Curiously, none of the individuals lives in Porto de Moz:
all have declared that they live in Breves, the town where Madenortehas its mill. All share the profession of ‘industry worker’. Thecoincidences grow: of four of the people, two share identical ID andCPF (tax)
217numbers and addresses. Analyzing INCRA’s documents,
Greenpeace discovered another curiosity: two individuals born in1977 declared to INCRA that they had begun occupation of theirarea in October 1988 – when one was ten years old and the othereleven. Greenpeace has checked the names of all 31 individuals tosee if they appeared on the list of more than 2,500 members of STR– the rural workers union of Porto de Moz. However, none of themwas found to live in the area proposed for the extractive reserve. 
Despite this bizarre situation, according to ITERPA documents, all of
these people have legal rights to the land.
218However, IBAMA did
not approve Madenorte’s FMP at the Fazenda Uruará “ because land
cannot be leased out by someone who doesn’t own it ”.219Following
this rejection, a number of the individuals submitted new FMPs oftheir own to IBAMA, all using the same forest engineer, an employeeof Madenorte, and these plans were approved.
220
The various fines received by the group are proof that companies in
Grupo Madenorte have been involved in systematic illegal logging.Between October 1999 and November 2002, IBAMA issued finesto the value of at least R$1.1 million – around US$300,000 attoday’s exchange rates.
221
43“Our biggest conflicts have been with
grileros of lands, typical in the region.With the communities, we do not haveproblems.”
José Severino Filho, Group Madenorte
FSC Public Meeting in Belém, 3 September 2002

For the period of October 2002 to April 2003, IBAMA’s records for
Madenorte S/A Laminados e Compensados show 340 salestransactions between themselves and suppliers of timber.
222An
analysis of the records shows that 193 contain irregularities.
CASE IN POINT
In Rio Arimum, a tributary of Rio Acaraí, a communal area is in
conflict with Madenorte and residents say they suffer threats fromemployees who pressure the families to sell their lands. In theItapéua Community, neighboring Caroçal (claimed by Madenorte),people cannot hold a meeting, because the company’s employeesalways arrive first to occupy the place, armed, to discourageparticipation by the residents.
223
Greenpeace, who attended the Porto de Moz community meeting,
observed that the company was accused of grilagem (illegal land
acquisition) and irregularities in their forest management. RobertoBaunch, the representative of SCS in Brazil, confirmed toGreenpeace a week later that the certification process was nowparalyzed until the company resolved some of the disputespresented at the meeting. It remains paralyzed to this day.
Madenorte also claimed that, since July 2002, IBAMA had
authorized its FMP for the 
Fazenda Caroçal , which the company
claimed to be 56,000 hectares. However, at the Porto de Mozmeeting, representatives of Itapéua Community, adjacent to 
Fazenda
Caroçal , stated that this is a small area of land of less than 500
hectares, belonging to Mr Edson Tenório, and the lands behind this
fazenda are for his traditional use. Raul Porto, another director of
Madenorte, answered these accusations by saying that ITERPA soldthe lands to the company. However, this contradicts Severino Filho’sstatement at the Belem meeting: “
...with the communities we do not
have problems. ” Other loggers in the region and small wood
extractors also questioned the legality of these lands. 
44
The National Report to the UN High
Commissioner on Human Rights documented a number of testimonies by community members in Porto De Moz 
–
a number of them involved violence, death
threats and even deaths. 

45The National Report to the UN High Commissioner on
Human Rights documents a number of testimonies by
community members located within the proposedextractive reserve 
Verde para Sempre . A number of
them involved violence, death threats and even deaths.
• Benção dos Lares Community (Rio Jaurucu):
José Orlando Duarte Souto (known as ‘Ponga’) and his
brother invaded this community’s land, demarcated thearea and sold it to Sílvio Tadeu Coimbra, of Santarém.Coimbra came to Porto de Moz in January 2002,claiming to be the landowner. Death threats, without anynegotiation proposals, have hindered farmers fromworking on their lands since December 2001. 
• Batata Community (Rio Jaurucu): A farmer, aged
76, who has been working on her land for 48 years,testified that Sílvio Tadeu Coimbra “
has personally
threatened me and also sent people to threaten me toexpel me from my land
”. She resisted these threats and
her plantations were burned: she says she lost almosteverything.
• José Orlando makes death threats to an entire family
who reside in the area named Vista Alegre orCasa
Queimada . The parents and eight children are all
farmers, working in an area which they can only reachby boat at present, since José Orlando guards a roadand trails to the river, day and night. Wood extracted inthe area goes to the company of Senhor Deti. Thefamily contacted the police and the chief police officersummoned José Orlando; however, he did not show upand no other action was taken.
• Cristo Libertador Community (Rio Jaurucu):
Death threats are intense in this community and the
wood extracted is sold by Osmarino Filho andRaimundo brothers to Senhor Dedeca, city councilorand madeireiro at Porto de Moz. • São Francisco de Assis Community (Igarapé
Aí):This area, where 20 to 25 families live, was invaded
by two men, Deti and Nivaldo. In November 2002, theresidents discovered that more than 300 trees hadbeen logged. Nivaldo refused to pay any money forthese trees but told the farmer who owns the land tolook for another place to live and work. In 1999, the landof another resident who had lived in the area for 26years was invaded by a gunman, hired by Nivaldo, andknown to be the manager of his company.
• São João Batista Community (Igarapé Juapi):
This land was illegally apprehended and sold to a
madeireira who exploits the adjacent region. Thecompany threatened and intimidated the residents byinvading their homes. They are hindered from working inthe area; in fact, there have been records of peoplebeing killed for doing so. 
• São João do Cupari Community: A trade unionist
who cares for this 13,000 hectares community, wherethe residents want to make a management plan, isindignant to see the 
madeireiras rapidly snatching land.
The area was demarcated by piques (narrow trails in the
forest, informally accepted as land dividers) by residentswith the help of Laboratório Agroecológico daTransamazônica (LAET). However, today the land issurrounded by 
piques placed by the company Celvapi.
She has been threatened with death because of herrole as a community leader.TESTIMONIES BY COMMUNITY MEMBERS LOCATED WITHIN THE
PROPOSED EXTRACTIVE RESERVE VERDE PARA SEMPRE 

46Although Brazil is the tenth largest economy in the world, it faces
enormous social and economic disparities. Highly sophisticatedupper and middle classes hold most of the assets and opportunities,while millions of Brazilians are condemned to poverty and hunger.Land is concentrated in the hands of a few, an inheritance fromcolonial times, helping to keep Brazil near the top of world rankingsof inequitable revenue distribution: 10 percent of the populationcontrols 46.8 percent of the revenue and the bottom 20 percentcontrols only 3.6 percent.
226
Brazilian President Luís Inácio Lula da Silva was elected to power in
November 2002 on a platform of ending poverty, establishing socialjustice and protecting the environment. But he also made acommitment to keep Brazil attractive to foreign investors and torecuperate economic growth in order to generate 7 .8 million newjobs. In the current reality of a country lacking strong currency andweak in law enforcement, these objectives appear contradictory.
During the electoral campaign, the importance of the Amazon was
highlighted by Lula; it was the only region to be the subject of athematic paper
227published by the coalition of political parties.228The
paper, The Role of the Amazon in Brazil’s Development , contains an
extensive diagnosis of the region’s historical problems and potential,and concludes with a long list of initiatives to be undertaken afterLula’s election. The promises in this paper helped the ‘left’ to win thePresidential election for the first time in Brazilian history. 
Lula’s coalition recognized that the Amazon’s potential and its vast
territory are vital to the development of the entire nation of more than170 million people: “
The country needs the opportunities offered by
the Amazon and that can’t be found anywhere else on the planet…however, such opportunities will only exist if the region will beconserved.
”
Lula’s paper proposed a careful shift from the past economic model
of boom and bust cycles of development (“ a predatory logic that
ignores the basis of natural reproduction of the ecosystems in theregion
”) towards a new development paradigm geared toward social
and environmental justice that respects cultural diversity andtraditional knowledge. This aimed to reverse historical patterns ofunsustainable exploitation of the region’s natural resources that havebrought benefit to a minority of the population. The paper concludesthat the “
challenge our government proposes to face in the Amazon
sees environmental investment and the sustainable use of naturalresources as an opportunity for development that encompassessocial concerns.
”
CONCLUSIONS – WHERE IS THE NEW GOVERNMENT? 

47According to Lula’s platform for the Amazon, “ the region must
generate social and economic opportunities based on its richbiodiversity and natural resources, on its population, and on theenvironmental services the region provides to the rest of the countryand the planet. A priority is to manage, on a sustainable basis,activities contributing to deforestation, including the use of fire forland clearing, and logging extraction, whose impacts threatenregional and global climate change, loss of biodiversity anddegradation of hydrological regimes affecting all of society
”.
Despite the good intentions of the Presidential campaign, the new
four-year plan of government submitted to Brazil’s Congress inSeptember 2003 – 
Plano Brasil para Todos (Brazil for Everyone
Plan) – shows clear signs of heading in another direction. The plan,known as PPA (Multi-Annual Plan), is the result of a series of publichearings in all Brazilian states, coordinated by the Ministry ofPlanning. 
Lula’s government intends to invest R$1.85 trillion (US$620 billion)
from the Federal budget between 2004 and 2007 in programsaiming to ensure social inclusion, reduce social disparities and kick-start economic growth. The Plan aims for an annual economicgrowth of 5% by 2007 (GDP), at the same time reducing inflation to4%. This development will be “
environmentally sustainable and will
reduce regional disparities ”.229
The PPA commits R$595 billion (US$205 billion) to projects
generating revenue. Economic growth will be fuelled by thegeneration of an additional 14,085 MW
230of electrical energy and
the construction of 12,425 km of new transmission lines. 
Of this huge investment, only R$6.4 billion is allocated to the item
‘environment’. Balancing the disparity in the environmental debtseems to be far from a real priority, as 60 percent of the totalinvestment in the Plan will be used to address social inequityaccording to the item ‘Social inclusion and reduction in socialdisparities’.
Lula’s PPA intends to increase annual national crop production (led
by soya) from the current 120 million tonnes to 150 million tonnes by2007 , and to triple beef exports from 1 million to 3 million tonnes peryear. Both the beef and soya exporting sectors are in the hands ofbig land owners. Both sectors are shifting production more andmore into the Amazon. Both are linked to slavery, violence and
grilagem . Both are implicated in deforestation and have a direct
partnership with the logging sector, and are far away from beingconsidered examples of ‘social inclusion’. 
To transport this massive production of crops and meat to export
ports and consumers, Brazil will build or improve 5,500 km of roads,and repair another 43,000 km, as well as install 2,400 km ofrailways, and implement 10,000 km of waterways. 
“In the Amazon, the State is the 
main driver for transformation of theeconomy”.
Brazilian Presidential Candidate Luís Inácio da
Silva Lula’s Program of Government, 2002.224
“…[the Program of Government would]
create extractive reserves in areas
occupied by traditional communities that use natural resources in asustainable way”
Brazilian Presidential Candidate Luís Inácio da
Silva Lula’s “Program of Government”, 2002.225

Pará State will benefit from numerous investments from the Federal
government. Among the roads to be paved or upgraded are BR-163(Cuiabá-Santarém) and the Transamazon (between Marabá andAltamira). The exporting ports of Belém and Santarém will bedredged and modernized, the Tucuruí hydroelectric project will haveits capacity expanded, and feasibility studies will be completed forBelo Monte – a controversial proposed hydroelectric project inthe Xingu River near Altamira, between Porto de Moz and the Middle Land. 
All these projects are bad news for both the environment and the
local communities in the Amazon. In the last 50 years, Brazil hastried to fast-track development by attracting international investment,speculative capital and transnational companies, offering in exchangemassive investments in transport and energy infrastructure. The resultof this model in the Amazon was a complex of roads that remainpartially unpaved and eroded (such as the Transamazonian Highway,Cuiabá-Santarém, and Manaus-Porto Velho); large and destructivehydroelectric dams such as Tucuruí (which supplies subsidizedenergy to mineral exporting companies in Pará), a highly competitiveagribusiness sector that is destroying the 
cerrado (savanna) and the
Amazon rainforest itself, and the ever-increasing concentration ofland and revenues in fewer and fewer hands. Brazil’s resultingimmense financial debt has made the country even more dependenton external funding – and more dependent on the export of naturalresources; primarily cheap commodities such as timber, beef, soyand minerals. 
The largest soya producer in the world, Mr Blairo Maggi, was
elected Governor of Mato Grosso in the same election that madeLula the President of Brazil. Mr Maggi is campaigning for more‘flexibility and malleability’ towards the logging sector and said in July2003 that the 25,000 km
2deforested in the Amazon in one year
“represents absolutely nothing compared to the size of the region ”.23□1
Maggi has supplemented his economic power by adding the political
influence of a Brazilian governor. Meanwhile, the Minister of theEnvironment, Ms Marina Silva, a former rubber-tapper whoseappointment brought immense hope when it was announced byLula, faces a struggle with powerful colleagues such as the Ministerof Agriculture, an aggressive defender of genetically engineered soyaand the expansion of agribusiness. At the same time as shestruggles to run a ministry handicapped by serious underfunding. 
The risk is that the losers of this battle will once again be the
environment and the powerless communities and settlers scatteredthroughout the Amazon. As is the case throughout the world for thepoor and disempowered, they are the people least able to competein the global economy, and the least able to prove ownership of theland they have occupied for generations. They have no documents,they have no lawyers, and they have no politicians or judges in theirback pockets. 
They have only hope that one day both the social and the
environmental debts will be paid. Then they will gain the respect andprotection of their human and civil rights; then they will have theAmazon, upon which they depend.
48
The physical integrity and security of
communities fighting for their forests in Portode Moz, Prainha and the Middle Land willlargely depend on whether the President Lulawill keep his election promise to createExtractive Reserves throughout this region ofthe Amazon. 

49GREENPEACE DEMANDS
Greenpeace calls on the:
Brazilian Federal and State governments to:
Guarantee the physical integrity and the security of communities
fighting for their forests in Porto de Moz, Prainha and the MiddleLand and all the communities demanding their traditional rights in the Amazon.
Expropriate the farms where slave work occurs and designate the
land to sustainable use by communities.
Expropriate griladas (illegally held farms) and designate them as
National Parks, biological reserves, and areas for sustainable use –as already proposed to the Brazilian Congress by nine civil societyorganizations, including Greenpeace, on 19 April 2001.
Reinforce the operational and political capacity of the Ministry of
Environment and its agencies, in particular IBAMA.
Implement the three main objectives of the Convention on
Biological Diversity (CBD) – conservation, sustainable use andequitable sharing of benefits – by immediately:
1. Creating Conservation Units to be used exclusively by the
extractive and riverside communities in the Municipalities ofPrainha and Porto de Moz. This will guarantee the survival of thelocal communities and their development, and guarantee that theforest will be used by its rightful residents – those who depend onand care for it.
2. Suspending all industrial scale exploitation of timber in Porto de
Moz and Prainha.
3. Implementing a moratorium on all industrial activities that
threaten the integrity of the remaining large unprotected areas ofthe Middle Land.
4. Establishing a network of protected areas in the Middle Land by
applying the prior informed consent principles for indigenouspeoples and local communities, and by applying the ecosystembased approach to biodiversity protection.
Timber Sector to:
•Stop buying timber and timber products derived from companies
exploiting the forests in Porto de Moz and Prainha until theExtractive Reserves (
Verde para Sempre and Renascer ) are
agreed and implemented.


MAIN REFERENCES
Aimex. www.aimex.com.br
Aimex. 2003. Notícias Ano VI No. 04. 27 January 2003Amnesty International. 2001.
http://web.amnesty.org/library/print/ENGAMR190312001. 19 December 2001
Amnesty International. 2002. PUBLIC AI Index: AMR 19/031/2001. UA 326/01 Fear
for Safety/Possible extrajudicial execution. BRAZIL Dept. José Geraldo Torres daSilva (m), State Deputy (aka 'Zé Geraldo'), Julio 
Cesar dos Santos (m, aka 'Pelado'). Killed: Ademir Alfeu Federicci (m, aka 'Dema'). Almeida, A.W.B.1995. Carajás: A Guerra dos Mapas. Belém,Antislavery International, 1998. Slavery in Brazil. Submission at the 23rd Session of
Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, Sub-Commission onPrevention of Discrimination and protection of Minorities, Commission on HumanRights, United Nations Economic and Social Council. May 1998http://www.antislavery.org/archive/submission/submission1998-01Brazil.htm
Arima, E. & Veríssimo, A. 2002. Brasil en Ação: Ameaças e Oportunidades
Econômicas na Fronteira Amazônica. Série Amazônia No 19 – Belém: Imazon,2002.
Brazil Network. 1997a. SOCIAL ISSUES. Anti-Slavery Award.
http://www.brazilnetwork.org/?mod=PageMod.showComponent&section_id=2&category_id=7&component_id=7&component_type=feature
Brazil Network. 1997b. SOCIAL ISSUES. Interview with Pureza Loyola
http://www.brazilnetwork.org/?mod=PageMod.showComponent&section_id=2&category_id=7&component_id=9&component_type=feature
Cavalcanti, F.J.D.B, J.D.A Silva, et al. 1997 . Projeto de Controle Ambiental da
Amazônia Legal: Avaliação dos Planos de Manejo Florestal Sustentável daAmazônia – Fase 1 – Análise de Documentos. Brasília, D.F., Brasil, Departamentode Recursos Florestais (DEREF); Coordenadoria de Manejo Florestal (COMAF);Divisão de Manejo Florestal (DIMAF) -– Ministério do Meio Ambiente
Channel 4 and HBO. 2000. Slavery (Brazil section; winner of 2000 Peabody Best
Documentary Award), No Lie Productions.http://www.rte.ie/news/archive/slavery_2001/brazil.html
Chomitz, K. & Thomas, T. (in press). Geographic Patterns of Land Use and Land
Intensity in the Brazilian Amazon. Washington D.C.: World Bank.
CPI. 2002. Ocupação de Terras públicas na Região Amazônica: relatório da
Comissão Parlamentar de Inquérito Destinada a Investigar a Ocupação de TerrasPúblicas na Região Amazônica. Brasília: Câmara dos Deputados.
CPT. 2003. Conflitos no Campo – BRASIL 2002. Goiânia, Edições Loyola.
Comissão Pastoral da Terra. April 2003.
Fearnside, P.M., 2001. Land-tenure issues as factors in environmental destruction in
Brazilian Amazonia: the case of southern Pará. World Dev. 29 (8), 1361–1372.Nature 398, 505–508. Cited by Mertens et al. 2002
Formentini, A.G., 2002. Relatório sobre a apreensão de madeira do Sr. Rivaldo
Salviano Campos em Porto de Moz/PA. 4 p.
Greenpeace. 2001. Partners in Mahogany Crime: Amazon at the mercy of
gentlemens’ agreements. October 2001,
Greenpeace Amazônia. 2003. Porto de Moz: O mapa da disputaGrogan, J., Barreto, P. & Veríssimo, A. 2002. Mogno na Amazonia Brasileira:
Ecologia e Perspectivas de Menejo. Imazon. Belem. 64p. Cited by Veríssimo et al.2002
Holston, James. 1991. The misrule of Law: Land and Usurpation in Brazil.
Comparative Studies in Society and History 33, No.4. 695–725. October 1991
IBAMA Online. Coordenação de Monitoramento e Controle Florestal – COMON.
Dados consolidados: Levantamento dos desmatamentos 1997 a 2001Compilação: Demonstrativo sobre as areas desmatadas.
IBAMA-PA. 2002. Press Release, 23 February 2002IBAMA. 2002. Relatório Técnico Manejo Florestal Sustentável na Amazônia Ano
2001. PROJETO PNUD BRA 97/044. Brasília, DF. April 2002
IBGE. 1997 . Diagnostico ambiental da Amazonia Legal. IBGE/DGC/DERNA-
DEGEO-DECAR. Rio de Janeiro. Cited by Veríssimo et al. 2002
IBGE. 1996. Censo Agropecuário. <http//www.ibge.gov.br>.INCRA. 2000. The White Book of Illegal Land Appropriation in Brazil. Ministry of
Agrarian Development, National Institute for Colonisation and Agrarian Reform(INCRA).
INPE. 2002. Monitoring of the Brazilian Amazonian forest by satellite 2000-2001.
June 2002. http://www.inpe.br/Informacoes_Eventos/amz2000_2001/Capa.htm
INPE. 2003.http://www.obt.inpe.br/prodes/prodes_analogico_arquivos/sheet001.htmIPS. 2001. Fighting Modern-Day Slavery in Northern Brazil. May 15, 2001
http://www.globalmarch.org/virtuallibrary/dailyjl-brussels/fightingmodern.htm orhttp://194.183.22.90/ips%5Ceng.nsf/vwWebMainView/FF525E43479DCDED80256A0700607CA0/?OpenDocument
ISA. 1999. Mapa de áreas protegidas da Amazônia Legal. Instituto Socioambiental.ISA. 2003. Realização de Estudos Preliminares e Formulação de uma Proposta
Ténica para a Implantação de um Mosaico de Unidades de Conservação noMédio Xingu. Relatório Final de Atividades. Fevereiro, 2003.Jornal do Brasil 11/08/94: Former President Collor accused of practicing slavery
(Cited in English by News from Brazil, by Serviço Brasileiro de Justica e Paz.Number 142, August 18, 1994).
Jornal do Brasil. 18/02/03: Lavradores resgatados no Pará. Jornal do Brasil. 24/02/03: Contas de fazenda são bloqueadas. Propriedade de irmã
de PC usava trabalho escravo.
Jornal do Brasil. 28/02/03: Fazendeiro é preso por explorar trabalho escravo.Jornal do Brasil. 28/02/03: Prisão preventiva para irmão de PC.Jornal do Brasil. 04/03/03: Irmãos de PC ficam detidos menos de 24h. Trabalho
escravo determinou prisão.
Jornal do Commercio. 04/10/99: Madeireira é multada em R$700 mil pelo Ibama.Laurance WF, Cochrane MA, Bergen S, Fearnside PM, Delamônica P, Barber C,
D'Angelo S and Fernandes T. 2001 The Future of the Brazilian Amazon, Science2001;291: 438–439.
O Globo. 22/05/03: Peões denunciam à PF trabalho escravo em fazenda no sul do
Pará.
Leroy, J.P. & Silvestre, D.R. 2003. Relatoria Nacional para o Direito Humano ao Meio
Ambiente. Plataforma Brasileira de Direitos Humanos Econômicos, Sociais eCulturais (DHESC). 2003. Relatório da Missão ao Pará.Brasil. 16–28 February2003.
O Liberal. 27/02/03: Empresário é preso por trabalho escravo.O Liberal. 05/03/03: Fazenda de Augusto Farias pode ser desapropriada.O Liberal. 05/05/03: Fiscais libertam 67 trabalhadores escravizados em Marabá.O Liberal. 13/05/03: Justiça Federal denuncia madeireiros por extração de mogno
em Altamira.
Lima E, Leite A, Nepstad D, Kalif K, Azevedo-Ramos C, Pereira C, Alencar A, 
Lopes U, e Merry F. 2003. Florestas Familiares: Um pacto sócio-ambiental entre aindústria madeireira e a agricultura familiar na Amazônia. Instituto de PesquisaAmbiental da Amazônia (IPAM), Belém, Brasil. 106 p.
Machado. 2001. Interview with José Altino Machado, 23 August 2001.
www.nossojornal-online.com.br/7coluna.htm
Madenorte S.A. 2002. Produção sustentável de madeiras na Madenorte S.A.Malhi and Grace. 2000. In:  Amazon Forest Inventory Network (RAINFOR). 2003.
www.geog.leeds.ac.uk/projects/rainfor
Margulis, S. 2003. Causas do Desmatamento da Amazônia Brasileira. World Bank,
Brasilia. June 2003.
MDA & INCRA. 2002. Superintendência Regional do Pará – SR-01. 12 de
Novembro de 2002. Mapa de Controle de Processos de Fiscalização – MCF.Relação de Proprietários por Município (Portaria 558/1999) Altamira.
Mertens B, Poccard-Chapuis R, Piketty MG, Lacques AE, Venturieri A. 2002.
Crossing spatial analyses and livestock economics to understand deforestationprocesses in the Brazilian Amazon: the case of São Félix do Xingú in South Pará.Agricultural Economics; 27: 269–294. Elsevier.
MMA & IBAMA. 2003. Plano de ação para a prevenção e controle de
desmatamento, queimadas e exploração madeireira ilegal na Amazônia Brasileira.(Versão revisada: 16.06.2003) Brasília – DF. June 2003
Nepstad, D., Veríssimo, A., Moutinho, P. and Nobre, C. 2000. O Empobrecimento
Oculto da Floresta Amazônica. Ciência Hoje; 27 (157): 70–73.
New York Times. 2002. Brazil's Prized Exports Rely on Slaves and Scorched Land.
25/05/02
Pined-Vasquez M, Zarin DJ, Coffey K. 2001. Post-Boom Logging in Amazonia.
Human Ecology; 29 (2)
Porto de Moz Rural Workers Union and Paróquia São Braz. 2001. A questão
fundiária do município de Porto de Moz. Dossier written by the Porto de MozRural Workers Union and by the Paróquia São Braz – Catholic Church, sent tothe Chamber of Deputies Commission in charge of investigating land invasions inthe Amazon, May 23rd, 2001. 
Salgado, L. & Kaimowitz, D. 2002. Impacto da Descentralização Político-
Administrativa sobre o Uso de Recursos Florestais em Oito Municípios daAmazônia Brasileira. Estudo de caso: município de Porto de Moz (Pará).
Mímeo. 2002. Trabalho realizado pelo Laboratório Agroecológico da Transamazônica
(LAET), sob a coordenação do Centro Internacional de Pesquisa Florestal(CIFOR), cited by Leroy & Silvestre (2003).
Scientific Certification Systems. 2002. Convite. Reunião Pública. Certificação
Florestal da Madenorte S/A – Laminados e Compensados. Fazenda Caroçal –Município de Porto de Móz (Pará).
Schneider, R., Arima, E., Veríssimo, A., Barreto, P. & Souza Jr., C. 2000. Amazônia
Sustentável: Limitantes e oportunidades Pará o desenvolvimento rural. BancoMundial/Imazon. Brasilia/Belem, 58p. Cited by Veríssimo et al. 2002.
SECEX. 2003. Secretaria de Comércio Exterior, Exportação Brasileira, Ministério do
Desenvolvimento, Indústria e Comércio Exterior, viewed athttp://aliceweb.desenvolvimento.gov.br 
Silva Moreira, E. & Hebette, J. 2003. Considerações preliminares sobre a dinâmica
econômica, social política e ambiental do município de Porto de Moz, Estado doPará. Mimeo. Fevereiro 2003, cited by Leroy & Silvestre (2003).
Social Justice. 2001. Bonded (slave) labor in Brazil. #43. 24 April 2001.
50

Stone, S. W. 1998. Using a geographic information system for applied policy
analysis: the case of logging in the eastern Amazon. Ecological Economic. 27:43-61.
Time Pacific. 2000. The road to disaster, by Eugene Linden, Santarem. 9 October
2000.
Trade Union World. 2002. New slaves in Brazil. 13 May 2002.Treccani, G. D. 2001. Violência & Grilagem: Instrumentos de Aquisição da
propriedade da terra no Pará. Belem: UFPA, ITERPA 2001. ISBN 85-901783-1-5
Uhl, C., Veríssimo, A., Mattos, M., Brandino, Z. & Vieira, I. 1991. Social economic and
ecological consequences of logging in the Amazon frontier: the case of Tailândia.Forest Ecology and Management 46: 
243-273. Cited by Veríssimo et al. 2002Veiga, J.B., Alves, A.M., Poccard-Chapuis, R., Thales, M.C., Da Costa, P.A., Grijalva,
J.O., Chamba, T.V., Costa, R.M., Piketty, M.-G., Tourrand, J.-F., 2001. CattleRanching, Land Use and Deforestation in Brazil, Peru and Ecuador. Annual reportfor the Inter-American Institute, Gainesville, USA. Cited by Mertens et al. 2002
Verissimo A, P Barreto, et al. 1995.  ‘Extraction of a high-value natural resource from
Amazon’ Forest Ecology and Management 72: 39-60
Veríssimo, A., Lima, E. & Lentini, M. 2002. Pólos Madeireiros do Estado do Pará.
Imazon, Belém, Brazil.
ENDNOTES
1. ITERPA, document 0001/2003, from 10 October 2003, named “Autorização de
Uso de Bem Público Estadual”, signed by ITERPA’s new president Sérgio LuizAlmeida Maneschy.
2. Leroy & Silvestre. 20033. Malhi and Grace. 20004. Biologist Alberto Val, from INPA – National Institute for the Amazon Research. In
Revista Ciência Hoje. Rio de Janeiro. April 2001
5. The Brazilian Amazon is from hereon referred to as the Amazon6. Arima & Veríssimo 20027 . INPE 20038 Between August 2001-August 2002: INPE 20039. Leroy & Silvestre 200310. Veríssimo et al. 2002: This figure is based on studies from Imazon (Amazon
Institute of Man and Environment), the best source of information available.However, the number must be used as an indication only, as it is very difficult, ifnot impossible, to estimate the real size of Pará’s logging sector due to therampant illegality that characterizes this industry.
11. The exact figures are higher as large volumes of wood harvested in Pará are
being exported through the ports of Paraná and Santa Catarina states, in thesouth of Brazil.
12. Wood products, the second most exported products, represented 13.8% (by
value) of the total Pará exportation in 2002 The mineral sector accounted for64.9% of the total with a total of US$1.7 billion
13. Veríssimo et al. 2002; SECEX 2003; AIMEX 200314. The extent of gross deforestation in Pará in August 2001 was 207 ,041km2
(5,237km2 increase since August 2000), corresponding to 34% of the total gross
deforestation in the Amazon (607 ,957km2)
15. SECEX 2003; INPE. 200316. Schneider et al. 2000; Veríssimo et al. 2002, Arima & Veríssimo 200217 . Leroy & Silvestre 2003; Mertens et al. 200218. Roberto Cavalcanti de Albulquerque and Sonia Rocha (Economists), in a study
commented by the Amazon expert Lúcio Flavio Pinto
19. O Estado de Sao Paulo, 21 September 200320. Generically, all illegal action aimed at transferring public land to the assets of third
parties constitutes "grilagem" or "grilo"  "cricket", that starts in offices andconsolidates in the countryside through the granting of land possession. INCRA2000
21. Leroy & Silvestre 2003; Schneider et al. 2000; INCRA 200022. Lecture in the First Cycle of Studies on Land rights, Belém, Pará, 10 May, 198023. Almeida 199524. INCRA 200025. Câmara dos Deputados. 2002. 26. CPI 2002; INCRA 200027 . CPI 200228. Veja Magazine, Brazil. 13 January 1999 29. Cartório Moreira, Certificate of registry number 6411, Book 2-V, sheets number
039/ 1 to 14. Altamira, Pará. Certificate issue in October 26, 1998, signed byEugênia Silva de Freitas, registry officer
30. 5,694,964 hectares31. CPI 2002.32. O Liberal, 7 July, 2002. ” Terras do Pará estão postas à venda na Internet”33. eg CPI 200234. Interview to Realidade magazine, October 1971.35. Hely Lopes Meirelles, in “Direito Administrativo Brasileiro”, Editora Revista dos
Tribunais, 1991.
36. In 1854, the registration of all land titles at the “paróquias” was made mandatory
by  Decree 1318.
37 . CPI 200238. Revista Realidade “Amazônia”, October 197139. Leroy & Silvestre 200340. Leroy & Silvestre 200341. CPT 200342. Secretaria Especial de Estado de Defesa Social, Governo de Pará. 2002.
“Inventário de Registros e Denúncias de Mortes Relacionadas com a Posse eExploração de Terra no Estado do Pará – 1980-2001”
43. According to CPT, 43 people were assassinated in land conflicts involving rural
workers during the 2002. This was 48.3% increase from the previous year.
44. Amnesty International 2001, Leroy & Silvestre 200345. Indigenous area of TI Arara – north of the Middle Land, close to the Transamazon
Highway
46. Amnesty International 2001, Leroy & Silvestre 200347 . “Onde a lei nada vale e a morte custa R$ 100”, in O Estado de S. Paulo, 21
September, 2003
48. ‘Chacina no Pará deixa 8 agricultores mortos’, in O Estado de S. Paulo, 15
September, 2003, page A4.
49. According to the Prosecutor, Mário Lúcio de Avelar, a man who is accused of
being an important drug dealer, Leonardo Dias Mendonça, has farms and otherbusiness in S. Félix. Mendonça is now in jail.
50. O Estado de S. Paulo, September 21, 200351. O Globo. Brasil è o maior exportador de carne carne no mundo, 12 September
2003
52. Cavalcanti, F.J.D.B, J.D.A Silva, et al. 1997; Chomitz and Thomas 2000;
Schneider et al. 2000; Arima & Veríssimo 2000; Lima et al. 2003; Verissimo et al.1995; Uhl et al. 1991; Pinedo et al. 2001; Fernside 2001
53. IBGI 2000 cited by Margulis 2003.54. Viega et al. 200155. The current Amazonian herd is estimated at 32 million cattle, making the average
stocking rate only 0.7 animals per hectare. Schneider et al. 2000
56. Schneider et al. 200057 . Before the early 1990s, they used to burn the timber but now it is a saleable
commodity. Personal communication with Veríssimo
58. Cavalcanti, F.J.D.B, J.D.A Silva, et al. 1997; Chomitz and Thomas 2000;
Schneider et al. 2000; Arima & Veríssimo 2000; Lima et al. 2003; Verissimo et al.1995; Uhl et al. 1991; Pinedo et al. 2001; Stone 1998.
59. Schneider et al. 200060. In the east of Pará, the old logging frontier of Paragominas has witnessed a
steep drop in timber production. During its “boom” this region – the largest timberproducing region of Pará - used to process almost 10 percent of the Amazon totalproduction. In 2001, the rate was around 55% lower than at the height of activitiesin the late 1980s. Paragominas’s boom was made possible by the paving of theBelém-Brasília highway, which allowed easy access to export markets, through theport of Belém, and to domestic markets. In the south of Pará, including Sáo Félixdo Xingu, which processed 10 percent of the logs produced in the region in1998, logging practically eradicated mahogany stocks during the late 1990s. Nowthe forest cover is drastically reduced and much of the remaining forest isconcentrated in legally protected indigenous lands, which are frequently invadedby illegal loggers. (Veríssimo et al. 1995, Nepstad et al. 1999a, cited by Lima et al.2003; Grogan et al. 2002; Veríssimo et al. 2002)
61. IBGE/LSPA in Gilney 200362. Lima et al. 200363. Veríssimo et al. 200264. IBAMA 2002: IBAMA surveyed 301 FMPs and only 205 were considered apt.65. IBAMA online66. INPE 200367 . In 2000 the figure was 1.1%, 1999 – 2.5%, 1998 –1.4%, 1997 – 0.4%68. Preface in “Trapped: Modern-day Slavery in the Brazilian Amazon” by Binka Le
Breton, 2003
69. Secretaria de Inspeção do Trabalho (SIT), summary data70. Grupo Móvel do Trabalho Escravo (Mobile Group on Slave Work). Up until 1
August 2003, 1805 slaves had been freed in Brazil, 1147 of which were in Pará.
71. Channel 4 & HBO 2000; IPS 15 May, 2001; CPT 200372. 116 cases out of 147 involving 4,227 out of 5,559 workers were in Pará in 200273. Trade Union World 2002; CPT 200374. O Liberal, March, 8, 200375. http://www.cptnac.com.br76. Antislavery International 1998; Channel 4 & HBO 2000; CPT 2003; Social
Justice 24 April 2001; and many news articles on slave workers
77 . Each of the States Parties to this Convention shall take all practicable and
necessary legislative and other measures to bring about progressively and as
51

soon as possible the complete abolition or abandonment of the following
institutions and practices, where they still exist. Debt bondage, that is to say, thestatus or condition arising from a pledge by a debtor of his personal services or ofthose of a person under his control as security for a debt, if the value of thoseservices as reasonably assessed is not applied towards the liquidation of the debtor the length and nature of those services are not respectively limited and defined
78. Antislavery International 1998; Channel 4 & HBO 2000; CPT 2003; Social
Justice 24/04/01; and many news articles on slave workers
79. Brazil Network 1997a; IPS 15 May 2001; New York Times 25 March 200280. BBC 2002. Brazil’s rainforest slaves, by Olenka Frenkiel. Crossing Continents,
30 July 2002
81. Leroy & Silvestre 200382. Brazil – Letter of Intent, Memorandum of Economic Policies, and Technical
Memorandum on Understanding, signed by Minister Pedro Malan (Finance) andthe president of the Central Bank, Armínio Fraga Neto, Brasília, August 29, 2002.The documents can be found athttp://www.imf.org/External/NP/LOI/2002/bra/04/index.htm
83. Mercopress. 2003. Brazil on schedule with IMF.
http://www.mercopress.com/Detalle.asp?NUM=2666. 30 September 2003
84. In a meeting between Greenpeace, the Head of Ibama (Santarem) and the Chief
Marshall of the Federal Police (Santarem) on 24 September 2002, the ChiefMarshall explained that nowadays the Federal Police office was reduced to 2marshals (one was leaving), 2 notaries and 14 agents. Eight of these are inbureaucratic positions - such as passport control, reception etc. The remaining 6can only work in shifts of 8 hours. So, she has in fact two agents on duty at anyone given time  to control an area larger than most European countries
85. Lima et al. 200386. In “O Estado de S. Paulo”, Sep 16, 2003.
http://www.estadao.com.br/ciencia/noticias/2003/set/16/175.htm
87 . examples from the Middle Land and Porto de Moz88. Holston 199189. Concessions of 6 léguas quadradas (1 légua=4,356ha)90. In Para, between 1700 and 1818, 35 “cartas de sesmarias” were confirmed with
the total area approximately of 302,742ha (Instituto Socioambiental February2003. p.127)
91. INCRA 200092. Usually about 100ha per family, considered a “modulo rural” by INCRA93. Two governmental institutions are responsible for the lands in the region: INCRA
(federal) and ITERPA (Land Institute of the State of Pará). INCRA is responsiblefor the land within 100km on both sides of Transamazon highway, where it grantedtitles of even up to 3,000 ha as “land of Union (terra da União)”, with theobjectives of colonization or for the farming and cattle ranching projects. The restof the area falls under the responsibilities of ITERPA, who acknowledges tenures(“posses”) of up to 2,500 ha as soon as a series of requirements are met(including a local inspection)
94. CPI 200295. ISA 200396. Phorum Consultants - report prepared for Rondon Projetos Ecológicos, no date97 . Workshop 90, Manaus, January 199098. Paulo Adário, personal communication with CPT99. Mapa Demonstrativo Dos Seringai Existentes no Município de Altamira depicts a
total area of 6.146,950.49 hectares within the Municipality of Altimira, through 21seringais
100. A total of 11,812,757 .30 was under investigation in Altamira, covering
16,075,500 hectares
101. MDA & INCRA. 2002; Portaria INCRA/P/No 558/1999; ISA 2003102 Treccani 2001; INCRA 1999; CPI 2002; ISA 2003103. Cecílio do Rego Almeida is a wealthy self-made businessman born in Pará and
based in the State of Paraná, who made his fortune building roads and largeinfrastructure projects.
104. INCENXIL (Indústria, Comércio, Exportação e Navegação do Xingu Ltda.)105. Declaration of Cecílio Rego de Almeida and his lawyer published by Agência
Estado, August 2002
106. 5,694,964 hectares in total107 . Processo n.o 270/96 – Comarca de Altamira (Ação Ordinãtia de Nulidade e
Cancelamento de Matrîcula, Transcipriçães – ITERPA vs. INCENXIL.
108. INCRA 1999; CPI 2002; Processo n.o 270/96 (as previous endnote)109. O Liberal, 16 March, 2003, “Posses de 4,7 milhões de hectares é uma fraude”110. The seven accused were Roberto B. Almeida, the engineer from CR Almeida
Jose R. Morais, the 3 sellers of the property to CR Almeira Carlos Oliveira,Sebastião Oliveira and Humberto Oliveira; the notary Eugênia Silva de Freitas andher brother Sebastião Lima da Silva. Mr. Cecílio was excluded for being older than70 (i.e. protected by the Brazilian law). The name of Sebastião Silva will be alsoexcluded as he died during the investigations. The same happened with the mainaccused of fraud, Umbelino Oliveira, dead in 2002. O Liberal, 16 March, 2003 
111. Seis denunciados por fraude no Xingu”, in O Liberal, June 22, 2003.(www.oliberal.com.br/arquivo/noticia/policia/n22062003default.asp)
112. Istoé, 20 January, 1999, “Para não dizer que não falei de flores”113. Industria, Comércio, Exportação e Navegação do Xingu Ltda. Between 1994
and 1995, shares of INCENXIL were sold to Rondon Agropecuária Ltda. andRoberto B. de Almeida (son-in-law of C.R. Almeida), since then the shares wereseparated between various companies and people related to C.R. Almeida
114. Greenpeace has a copy of the project115. Istoé, 20 January, 1999, “Para não dizer que não falei de flores”.116. Mandate issued by the Judge Jackson Sodré Ferraz in 25/09/2001. Altamira,
Pará
117 . In “Sobre a Guerra do Mogno”, public response from CR Almeida published by
Agência Estado. August 28, 2002
118. Paulo Adário, personal communication with Federal Prosecutor, Ubiratan
Cazetta, and IBAMA
119. ISA 2003120. Machado 2001121. ISA 2003 122. Mertens et al. 2002123. Greenpeace flights over the Middle land between 31 August and 1 September
2003
124. Herbicide U-46 D (diletiamina)125. Marcílio Monteiro, head of Ibama in Pará, quoted by the newspaper “O Liberal”
in July 14, 2003
126. Veríssimo et al. 2002127 . Amazonie, La Guerre du Bois”. Témoignage Chrétien, no 3025, August 29,
2002. Paris, France
128. Brasilia’s letter “Revolt of the settlers”. Greenpeace has a copy of the letter129. Paulo Adario, personal communication with journalists, 28 August 2002130. Laurance et al. 2001131. Lima et al. 2003; Veríssimo et al. 2002, Arima & Veríssimo 2002132. INPE , 2003133. towards Riozinho do Anfrisio134. ISA 2003135. ISA 2003136. The dossier was a respected entity created in the 1990’s by the current
Secretary of the Amazon, Mary Allegretti.
137 . In “O Liberal”, 23 March 2003138. Disputa de terra expõe o terror em São Félix, O Liberal, 20 October 2003139. Item I of the contract, according to O Liberal, 20 October 2003140. Named in the article141. O Liberal, 20 October 2003142. Moisés Pereira activities are described in the Greenpeace report “Partners in
mahogany Crime”, Greenpeace, October 2001.
143. Federal Prosecutors Mário Lúcio Avelar, Raquel Dodge, Maria Eliane  Menezes
de Farias, Ubiratan Cazetta and the prosecutor of the Ministry of Labor, LórisPereira Júnior.
144. Mahogany extraction, transport and trade was already forbidden by the Brazilian
Government
145. TV Record, “Reporter Record”, wired in October 9, 2002. Greenpeace has a
copy of the video.
146. Name omited for security reasons147 . Name omited for security reasons148. Municipalities includes Medicilândia, Brasil Novo, Altamira, Uruará, Trairão,
Santarém, Prainha, Porto de Moz and Vitória do Xingu
149. In general, tenure holders (“posseiros”) who live near the rivers or the
Transamazon highway are the only ones who have legal rights to the landsrecognized by the government, even when they do not have titles to their landproperties. Socially, “pique” – a narrow trail in the forests - is accepted asdivisions of lands. On average, “posses” at the riverbanks are 100 ha (500m alongthe river x 2km from the river) and they are registered by INCRA, but beyond the2 km from the river is a lawless area
150. The National Reporter was nominated by the Brazilian Economic, Social and
Cultural Human Rights Platform
151. Until the 1990s, industrial scale logging was non-existent in the region, largely
because markets at that time were focussed on high-value species. As there wasa gradual a shift in the market, particularly in the export markets to more mediumvalued species several logging companies moved into the region taking advantageof the new situation
152. Porto de Moz Rural Workers Union and Paróquia São Braz. 2001153. Greenpeace Amazonia 2003154. Silva Moreira, Edma & Hebette, cited by Leroy & Silvestre 2003155. Civil Public Action against the mayor Gerson Campos, Federal Prosecution
Office of Santarém, March 1st, 2003. 
156. Controladoria Geral da União: “Síntese dos Relatórios de Fiscalização, 4o
sorteio. Município 25. Porto de Moz”, 25 October, 2003. 
157 . José Severino Filho is the president of Madenorte (source: Aimex, list of
52

members – www.aimex.com.br. In Madenorte website (www.madenorte.com.br)
11 September, 2003, Marajó was mentioned as “a company of Madenorte group”.
158. Leroy & Silvestre, 2003159. Four local executive groups represent the movement: the Rural Workers Union,
the Artisanal Fishermen’s Association, the Rural-Urban Women’s Association andthe Fishermen’s Association of Porto de Moz.  Other groups that take part in theCommittee are four rural community associations and the Catholic Church,through the Pastoral Land Commission, which also supports the movement.  TheCommittee is also supported by Greenpeace and by the MDTX (Movement forthe Development of the Transamazon Highway and of the Xingu River)
160. Comitê de Desenvolvimento Sustentável de Porto de Moz161. Renascer Reserve would have some 400,000 hectares according to the
memorandum 204 send in August 2003 by the Santarém’s representative ofCNPT –Traditional Populations National Council – to her boss in Brasília. CNPT isan IBAMA’s institution in charge of extractive reserves, among other things
162. Investigation 02001.007795/01-48: At present, the CNPT has finished its land
survey and but its report on the area’s biological and socio-economic conditions isyet to be finalised
163. Letter 067/2002-PG164. Greenpeace interview with Mayor Campos, September 2003 (video)165. IBAMA-PA 2002166. IBAMA-PA 2002; O Liberal 2002167 . Act of Infraction numbers 370010 and 370090, from September 2001, 2002168. At October 2003 exchange rate169. Journalist Fernanda Fernandes, in Reporter Record, special TV program
nationally broadcasted on 9 October, 2002. Record TV Network
170. Leroy & Silvestre 2003171. Felicio Pontes Junior, Public Prosecutor. Ideira e Debates - Terra do Meio: Poder,
Violência e Desenvolvimento. Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi, 28 April 2003
172. Federal Decree 98.897/90173. Leroy & Silvestre 2003174. Greenpeace Amazônia 2003175. eg Leroy & Silvestre 2003; “Relatório da missão na área da gleba Surubim/
Medicilândia”, Sep. 19, 2003; O Liberal, September 20, 2003, “Madeireiroforagido bloqueia estrada para cobrar pedágio”
176. According to the Operation Report in the area of Surubim/ Medicilandia, Military
Police of Altamira, 19 September, 2003.
177 . Currently, 16 are suspended, but only after the forest had been exploited; 10 are
considered by IBAMA as “pending”; 12 are authorized for exploitation; and 17 arenew plans still under analysis and therefore not authorized by IBAMA.
178. Plan number 2882/01179. Plan 16825/02180. Plan 9118/95181. Plan 2484/00182. ITERPA, document 0001/2003, from 10 October 2003, named “Autorização de
Uso de Bem Público Estadual”, signed by ITERPA’s new president Sérgio LuizAlmeida Maneschy.
183. Memorandum signed by the Director of Forests, Antonio Carlos Hummel and
IBAMA’s General Prosecutor Sebastião Azevedo, and sent to IBAMA’s executivemanagers in all the Amazon states.
184. Letter from 12 August 2003185. Letter from 1 August 2003, memorandum number 166/2003186. Letter from 1 August 2003, memorandum number 166/2003187 . Greenpeace interview with Mayor Campos September 2003 (video)188. Salgado & Kaimowitz 2002, cited by Leroy & Silvestre 2003, Leroy & Silvestre
2003
189. Ibama Santarém record of files190. Angelim vermelho, maçaranduba, piquia, quaruba, quaruba-cedro etc191. Greenpeace Amazônia 2003192. Leroy & Silvestre 2003; Salgado & Kaimowitz 2002, cited by Leroy & Silvestre
2003
193. Leroy & Silvestre 2003194. Formentini 2002; Greenpeace Amazônia 2003195. Formentini 2002; Greenpeace Amazônia 2003196. Formentini 2002; Greenpeace Amazônia 2003; Leroy & Silvestre 2003197 . Formentini 2002; Greenpeace Amazônia 2003; Leroy & Silvestre 2003198. Greenpeace Amazônia 2003199. Authorisation for Transport of Forest Products (ATPFs)200 Leroy & Silvestre 2003201. O Liberal, September 20, 2003, “Madeireiro foragido bloqueia estrada para
cobrar pedágio”
202. O Estado de S. Paulo, 17 July, 1999203. A copy of the video has been received by Greenpeace204. The letter is dated of September 18, 2003, and signed by the president of the
Union and the three settlers
205. The name comes from the fact that the road starts at the Transamazon Highway75 km from Altamira
206. All three logging roads invade the area of Verde para Sempre from the south,
until they reach the  the Transamazon Highway.  “Travessão 75” stars circaMedicilândia, as well as the ‘Travessão 85”  meanwhile  “Travessão  da 20” startsin Brasil Novo
207 . “Relatório da missão na área da gleba Surubim/ Medicilândia”, September 19,
2003
208. “Relatório da missão na área da gleba Surubim/ Medicilândia”, September 19,
2003
209. Madenorte Group started as an exporting company in 1973 (Norte Madeiras
Importação and Exportação Limitada). In 1976 they established a sawmill inBreves. Ten years later they diversified by creating a plywood factory namedMadenorte Laminados e Compensados, in the same town, to produce 40,000m3/year of plywood and veneer. By that time, they had already established theirown customhouse in their port in Breves. Madenorte has 1,300 employees andcreated a Foundation (Fundação J. Severino) “to give assistance to Madernortestaff”. The Foundation participated of the creation of an entity “to promotecitizenship in Breves. ”Concib - Conselho de Cidadania de Breves (BrevesCitizenship Council)
210. According to Mr. Severino Filho, in a public meeting on 3 September 2002, the
holding company is not the owner of Marajó Island Business Ltda., although theholding company manages Marajó. However, on September 11th, the websitewww.madenorte.com.br showed on its first page a huge logo of the companyMarajó, with the following inscription: “Marajó Island Business Ltda., of the groupMadenorte…”. Junta Comercial do Pará lists Luzinaldo Tomasso da Cunha andEnami Management Inc. as Marajo’s associates.
211. Scientific Certification Systems. 2002; Madenorte S.A. 2002212. Madenorte advertisement appreared on the page page 12 of O Liberal, 28
August 2003
213. Madenorte FMP No. 02018.007643/03214. The forest area to be managed is 130,000 hectares215. Madenorte S/A. Projeto Xingu e audiência pública sobre certificação realizada.
3 September 2002. Belém, PA.
216. Areas larger than 2,500 ha must be approved by the Brazilian Congress217 . CPF is the Brazilian tax number218. Greenpeace has copies of all 31 declarations219. A similar decision was taken by IBAMA in the case of another company –
Curuatinga. Ibama’s Legal Division decision is No. 027/2003
220. Forest engineer Antonio Teófilo Gomes Dias221. R$1,110,133.20222. “Controle da prestação de contas da Madenorte SA Laminados e
Compensados”, IBAMA
223. Leroy & Silvestre 2003224. “O Lugar da Amazônia no Desenvolvimento do Brasil”, Program  of
Government,  “Lula President”- 2002
225. “O Lugar da Amazônia no Desenvolvimento do Brasil”, Program  of
Government,  “Lula President”- 2002
226. In “Anuário Estatístico do Trabalhador”, Departamento Intersindical de Estudos
Econômicos e Sociais”. São Paulo, 2001
227 . Lula’s coalition published 16 thematic papers:
www.lula.org/obrasil/documentos.asp
228. The coalition was led by PT – the Workers Party founded by Lula229. PPA 2004-2007 – Ministério do Planejamento, Orçamento e Gestão.231. Brazil’s electric installed capacity in 2003 is 84,654 MW231□. “Blairo frustra ministra e defende madeireiros”, Gazeta de Cuiabá, 27 July
2002, www.gazetadigital.com.br.
53

Greenpeace International
Ottho Heldringstraat 51066 AZ AmsterdamThe Netherlands
www.greenpeace.org
November 2003