# Archivo original: the-last-intact-forest-landsca.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:30 -03 2025

INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES
of NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIAAlexey Yu. Yaroshenko, Peter V. Potapov, Svetlana A. Turubanova
GREENPEACE RUSSIA AND GLOBAL FOREST WATCH
With the support of the Biodiversity Conservation Center,
the Socio-Ecological Union International and
the Kola Branch of the Biodiversity Conservation CenterThe LAST
Mapping of intact forest landscapes in northern
European Russia using high-resolution satelliteimages  methods and results

The Last I ntact Forest Landscapes of Northern European Russia
 Alexey Yu. Yar oshenko, Peter V . Potapov, Svetlana A. T urubanova - Moscow: Greenpeace Russia, 2001. - 75 pages.
Scientific advisor: Professor Olga V . Smirnova, Doctor of Biological Sciences.
Editor of English version:  Lars Laestadius
Reviewers:
Per Angelstam , Associate Professor , Grimso Wildlife Research Station, Forest Faculty, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Sweden.
Alexander S. Isaev , Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Center for Problems of Ecology and Productivity of Forests, Russia.
Eric S. Kasischke , Associate Professor , Department of Geography, University of Maryland, USA.
Olga N. Krankina , Oregon State University, USA.
Vyacheslav V. Nikonov , Institute for Problems of Industrial Ecology of the North, Kola Scientific Center , Russia.
Herman H. Shugart , Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Department of Environmental Sciences, University of Virginia, USA.
Vladimir V. Snakin , Member of the Russian Academy of Natural Sciences, Institute for Fundamental Problems of Biology, Russia.
Mikhail N. Zhurba , Svetogorsk - International Paper , Russia.
' Greenpeace Russia, 2001This work is the first attempt at identifying boreal forest areas of minimal human disturbance (intact) using high-
resolution satellite imagery that allows most forms of disturbance in the natural ecosystems to be directly identified.
The work was done at the GIS laboratory of Greenpeace Russia using, in part, materials prepared by the Biodiversity
Conservation Center and the Socio-Ecological Union International.
The following people contributed to the work: Dmitry E. Aksenov, Dmitry V . Dobrynin, Maxim Yu. Dubinin, Alexey V .
Egorov, Yelena S. Esipova, Mikhail L. Karpachevskiy, Susan S. King, Lars Laestadius, Katie MacCarthy, Alexey S.
Morozov, Vladimir G. Potansky, Andrey Zh. Purekhovsky, Vladimir E. Skvortsov, and the participants in field work. The
authors wish to thank them all for their invaluable support.
The work of Greenpeace was supported by the John D. and Catherine T . MacArthur Foundation and the Turner Foundation.
The work of Global Forest Watch was supported by the home furnishing company IKEA and the World Resources Institute.
ISBN 5-94442-002-2

INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES
of NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIAAlexey Yu. Yaroshenko, Peter V. Potapov, Svetlana A. Turubanova
GREENPEACE RUSSIA AND GLOBAL FOREST WATCH
With the support of the Biodiversity Conservation Center,
the Socio-Ecological Union International and
the Kola Branch of the Biodiversity Conservation CenterThe LAST
Mapping of intact forest landscapes in northern European Russia using high-resolution satellite images
Methods and Results


TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. MAIN CONCLUSIONS ...................................................................................................................... 3
2. SUMMARY ............................................................................................................................... ....... 4
3. INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................................. 6
4. GENERAL FOREST CHARACTERISTICS OF THE REGION ................................................................ 8
5. THE NATURAL DYNAMICS OF TAIGA FORESTS ............................................................................. 12
Gap Dynamics ................................................................................................................... ........... 12
Fire Dynamics .................................................................................................................. ............. 14
Secondary Forests .............................................................................................................. .......... 17
4. ANTHROPOGENIC INFLUENCES ON FORESTS ............................................................................. 19
The Industrial Development of the T aiga as a Wood Resource ........................................................... 20
5. IDENTIFICATION AND MAPPING OF INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES ............................................ 28
The Natural Value of Large Boreal Forest Landscapes ...................................................................... 28
Background Human Influence ..................................................................................................... ... 29
Materials and Sources of Information ........................................................................................... .. 30
Satellite Images Used .......................................................................................................... .......... 32
Field Data Collection in Key Areas ............................................................................................. ...... 38
Methodology for the Identification of Intact Forest Landscapes ......................................................... 40
Limitations and Deficiencies of the Map of Intact Forest Landscapes ................................................. 49
6. TIMBER RESOURCES OF REMAINING INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES ......................................... 50
Logging Intensity in the Vicinity of Remaining Intact Forest Landscapes ............................................. 51
Forest Productivity in Remaining Intact Forest Landscapes ............................................................... 54
Timber Stock in Remaining Intact Forest Landscapes ....................................................................... 55
7. CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................................... 56
8. APPENDIX A: LITERATURE CITED ................................................................................................. 57
9. APPENDIX B: MAPS OF INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES ............................................................... 61
2THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA

MAIN CONCLUSIONS
1. Forest landscapes that are still intact (i.e. essentially undisturbed by human
development with an area of at least 50,000 hectares) make up about 14 percent (31.7
million hectares) of the total forest area of European Russia (including the UralMountains).  The vast majority of these areas are located in the most remote areas of
the far North.  No intact forest landscapes remain in central and southern European
Russia.
2. The vast majority of these forests (87 percent) have a production potential of less
than 1m3 per hectare per year .
3. Remaining intact forests are poorly stocked. More than half (56 percent) has a
standing inventory of less than 100 m3 per hectare, and almost nowhere is the inventory
greater than 150 m3 per hectare.
4. The areas in the vicinity of the intact forests play a mostly insignificant role in the
wood supply of the region. Less than 5 percent of the volume logged in the Karelia and
Komi Republics, Arkhangelsk and Perm Regions comes from such frontier areas.  Only
in the Arkhangelsk Region is the intensity of logging greater in frontier forests than in
more developed parts - an indication of forest depletion in the latter areas.
5. The poor stocking and slow rate of re-growth make these forests unsuitable for
sustainable wood production. The necessary investments in road building and
reforestation are unlikely to be offset by revenues, especially given the long distance
to the market. Historical precedent in similar areas shows that subsequent investmentsin reforestation and silviculture often are insufficient.
6. In the perspective of northern European Russia as a whole, removing intact forest
landscapes from timber production would only factor as a small reduction in the
potential wood supply.  The reduction may be significant, however , for some loggingenterprises located near the intact forest landscapes.
7. Conservation of large intact landscapes is a robust and cost-effective way to
conserve biological diversity. The remoteness and large size of these areas provide the
best guarantee of continued intactness. Far fewer personnel are needed to protect andmanage forests within intact landscapes than are required in developed forest regions.

MoscowHelsinki
Stockholm
Tallinn
Riga
WarsawMinskVilniusMurmansk
St. Petersburg
VologdaArkhangelsk
Syktyvkar
PermPetrozavodsk
Novgorod Kirov
Pskov
Kostroma
4THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
SUMMARY
Many people think of the Russian taiga as an
unlimited expanse of undisturbed nature. The main
purpose of this study was to find out to which extent
this notion is true-to answer such questions as
How should undisturbed nature be defined?
How can undisturbed natural landscapes be
identified?
Where are the remaining intact natural landscapes?
What is the economic importance of these areas?
What is the level of threat?
European Russia, including the Ural mountains, was
systematically studied in order to map remaining large
intact natural forest landscapes. Large was defined as
no smaller than 50,000 hectares in size and at least 10
kilometers in width. One might think of this minimumarea as the size of a square with a side of 22
kilometers (although no natural areas are shaped in
this way).
There are three reasons for the focus on large areas.
First, only sufficiently large areas are capable ofconserving populations of large animals in their
natural, undisturbed state, and of letting natural
ecological processes such as fire, wind throw, etc taketheir course. Second, large undisturbed areas are
important as a reference that helps in the
understanding of already disturbed areas (the vastmajority of forest landscapes). Third, large intact areas
are often comparatively cheap to conserve, as they
tend to rely on remoteness and low productivity astheir main sources of protection.
Forest landscapes were mapped. The reason for
mapping landscapes instead of individual ecosystems
is that the boreal forest is a natural mosaic of
integrated ecosystems, such as forests, wetlands,
rivers, lakes, and tree-less areas. Separating theseecosystems would not only be difficult but also
artificial.
The goal was to find forest landscapes with a
minimum of human disturbance. Two things must be
realized: that the boundary of human influence often is
diffuse, and that areas which are strictly free from

human disturbance no longer remain. In this study, as
area was considered to be in an intact natural state if
showing no signs of permanent settlements orcommunications, of industrial forest harvesting during
the last 60 years, or mining, land clearing, and other
essential human impacts. Traces of low-intensityhuman disturbance were accepted in the intact areas
as "background disturbance". This includes hunting
and early high-grading for timber far away frominfrastructure.
One of the biggest problems when delineating intact
landscapes is the treatment of forest fires. Fire is a
natural component of the boreal ecosystem but not all
fires occur for natural reasons. Separating fire scars bycause is usually impossible. In this work fire was
treated mainly as an element in the natural dynamics
of the boreal ecosystem. An exception was made forfire scars and young regenerated forests on old fire
scars that are located directly adjacent to
infrastructure. Such areas were considered disturbed,due to the dual likelihood that the fire was caused by
humans and that the infrastructure will be a cause of
future human disturbance.
A three-step procedure was used in the search for
remaining intact forest landscapes. To begin with,
general geographic maps were used to eliminate
obviously disturbed areas (cities, big roads, etc.) andto identify roadless areas large enough to meet the
size requirement. In the second phase, two-season
medium resolution satellite images from the Russiasatellite Resurs (the MSU-SK scanner with a ground
resolution of 150 meters per pixel) were used to
identify tundra areas and areas with obvious clearcuts,agricultural fields, etc. In the third and last phase,
high-resolution Landsat and analogous satellite
images (ground resolution typically 30 meters perpixel) were used to identify additional disturbances
and to draw the final boundaries of remaining intact
landscapes. This approach was used because Landsatimages could not be acquired for the entire area of
study for budgetary reasons and for lack of availability
in some areas.
Field expeditions were carried out in order to assess
the actual level of disturbance on the ground in
difficult areas, and to verify and improve the
interpretation of the satellite images. A total of 67areas were inspected. Many of the field expeditions
included the people who were directly engaged in
interpretation of the satellite images.
5THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
The result shows that only 14 percent (32 million
hectares) of the forest area in European Russia remain
in large blocks of intact nature. All of these areas are in
the remote far north with the exception of a few large
peat bogs. In the rest of European Russia, and verylikely in Europe as a whole, large intact natural forest
landscapes no longer exist.
Remaining intact landscapes tend to be remote,
unproductive and poorly stocked in comparison to
what is usually considered minimum levels for
sustainable forestry. According to the official forest
map of the Russian Federation, 87 percent of theintact area has an average production of less than 1m
3
of stemwood per hectare and year . More than half ofthe area has less than 100m
3 per hectare in mature
forest and almost nowhere is the inventory greater
than 150 m3 per hectare. It is interesting to note that
the Swedish Forestry Act puts all land with aproductivity less than 1m
3 of stemwood per hectare
and year off limits to forestry.
To level of threat to the remaining intact forest
landscapes was assessed by studying the intensity of
logging around their borders during the peak loggingseason of 1999-2000. Pairs of satellite images were
used for this study, which showed that more than 95
percent of the wood in the Karelia and Komi Republicsand in the Perm Oblast came from already disturbed
areas, and about 90 percent in Archangelsk region.
Only in the Arkhangelsk Region was the loggingintensity greater near the intact areas than in the more
developed parts - an indication of forest depletion in
the latter areas.
The forestry significance of the remaining intact forest
landscapes is low. Withdrawing these areas from
timber production would only factor as a small
reduction in the potential wood supply, seen in the
perspective of northern European Russia as a whole.For some local logging enterprises, however , the
reduction may be significant.
Conservation of large intact natural forest landscapes
is an important and necessary component of a general
conservation strategy, but it is not by itself sufficient.
Many ecosystems have already been disturbed to the
point where only small fragments, or nothing at all,remains. Mapping of these ecosystem residuals was
outside the scope of this study but is an important task
for the future.

6INTRODUCTION
Fig. 1. Typical Baltic Shield landscape. Karelia Republic. Photo: V. Kantor.The boreal region of European Russia used to be
regarded as a virtually unlimited storehouse of forest
riches, developed or used only to a small extent andlargely still "wild." It is still commonly thought that northernEuropean Russia is dominated by old-growth forests andwilderness landscapes. However , even a preliminaryassessment shows that the remaining undeveloped parts
of the taiga are relatively small and rapidly diminishing
(McCloskey, Spalding, 1989; Bryant et al., 1997 ).
Protecting those sections of the taiga landscape that arestill intact is therefore a priority issue for the comingdecades. A more detailed assessment begun at the end ofthe 1990’s by non-governmental environmental
organizations ( Aksenov et al., 1999 ) confirmed that most
of the boreal area of Russia has been subjected to severefragmentation or fundamental transformation as the resultof human development.
This work is the first attempt to identify
remaining intact boreal forest of northern
European Russia using high-resolutionsatellite imagery that allows most forms of
human disturbance in natural ecosystems to
be directly identified.Taiga - vast, uninterrupted forests, unpassable ancient remoteness, an
absence of human dwellings over a great expanse
V.I. Dal. Dictionary of the Living Russian Language (1903)
The taiga, in the broad sense of the word, consists of an
entire complex of very diverse natural ecosystems located
in regions dominated by boreal forests. Bogs, lakes,
rivers, flood meadows, mountain tundra, rocky outcrops,rich tree stands and other various types of vegetation
together form an unified natural complex known as the
taiga. In such boreal forest landscapes, individualcomponents are closely connected to each other in a
The taiga in the widest sense is more than the
boreal forest; it is the entire conglomeration ofdifferent natural ecosystems in the boreal forest
region.
variety of ways. A delineation of intact taiga that limits
itself to the forest, without considering other pieces of thelarger landscape, is artificial and, in the opinion of the
authors, incorrect. The heavily bog-dominated landscapes
of Russia’s northernmost boreal region, in which forestland is sometimes no more than 20-30 percent of the total
area, are no less a part of the taiga than the uninterrupted
forests on the well-drained water divides to the south.Equally important components are the complexes ofmountains, lakes, bogs, and forests of the Baltic Shield.
To separate these areas from the forest when identifying
intact areas would be totally artificial.

7THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
In the context of this work we use the term intact forest
landscape to mean entire taiga landscapes, only marginally
disturbed by human activities, and without regard to the
share of for est in these landscapes. By disturbance we
mean the direct destruction or fundamental transformation
of any particular ecosystem including the fragmentation of
natural areas by infrastructure, which disturbs the
connections between a particular ecosystem and the othercomponents of the taiga landscape. Thus, by intact forest
landscape we understand a seamless whole of natural
ecosystems, undivided by elements of infrastructure, inwhich there are no visible signs of significant human activity.
This work is an attempt to identify and delineate intact areas
of at least 50,000 hectares with a width no less than 10kilometers.
Before pr oceeding we should mention a fundamental fact:
forests that are absolutely wild and completely unaffected
by human development activities no longer exist anywhere
in the world. All present day forests display some degree of
influence of human civilization, if only from transboundaryair pollution or hunting.  Ancient forms of human economic
activity and land uses such as hunting, clearing of meadows
in the vicinity of small rivers, and shifting cultivation, existedand were fairly widely spread over the boreal region of
European Russia since the end of the last glaciation.
Because these disturbances have a longer history than thecurrent landscapes, we view these activities, as well as the
fires directly associated with them, not as anthropogenic
disturbances but rather as anthropogenic factors that haveformed the ecosystems. On the other hand, modern
development activities  are of such form and intensity as to
create major disturbances in centuries-old equilibrium andFig. 2. Typical taiga mountain landscape. Perm Region. Photo: P. Potapov.
destruction of the natural taiga landscape. In this work, allhuman background disturbances that were considered
insignificant with regard to the designation of intactness
were explicitly listed. The list includes old forms ofdevelopment activities that have shaped the taiga during
the course of millennia, as well as some current or recent
disturbances that we perceived as fairly weak.
The mission of this work was to search the
boreal part of European Russia for remaininglarge areas undisturbed by human development
activities.  Areas, which in essence retain their
natural characteristics.
The authors used the same approach thr oughout the
researched ar ea, trying at each step to be very clear in
formulating principles and criteria used. The investigation
reveals that r emaining intact for est landscapes cover only a
small part of northern European Russia (16.3 percent of the
investigated region, and 13.8 percent of the entire forest
zone). All these areas could, and probably should, become
part of the protected areas network of the north, given their
capacity to serve as reference areas while independently
sustaining their ecological integrity. In this work, the authorshave not attempted to suggest any concrete, formal
protection scheme for any or all of the delineated areas.
This is a task for the future. For the present, the mostreasonable, in the mind of the authors, would be to reserve
these areas by excluding them from any industrial
development or construction of infrastructure untilcomprehensive decisions on their value and future destiny
can be made in a complete and competent manner .


8GENERAL FOREST CHARACTERISTICS OF THE REGION
Russia’s taiga as a whole is a complex mosaic of different
ecosystems. Forests do not always dominate the
landscape. Many areas are primarily bogs, sparse forest,
mountain tundra, and other non-forest ecosystems. Thedominance of conifers in the older forests is absolute.
Conifer forests - mostly Scots Pine and Norway Spruce
and to a much lesser extent Larch and Siberian Stone Pine- account for no less than 77 percent of the total forest
area ( Lesnoi Fond ..., 1999 ). However , these official data
overestimates the share of conifers. For example, beforethe 1995 Forest Inventory Instruction was issued, all
forests with a share of conifers greater than 0.4 by volume
were classified as coniferous, even if dominated bydeciduous trees. The same was true for all coniferous
forest plantations, even when overgrown by fast-growing
deciduous species ( Instruktsiya po ., 1986 ). Forests
dominated by birch and aspen account for 23 percent of
the total area, according to the official forest inventory.topography from strong northern winds. Bogs, which
cover extensive areas on water divides and river terracesin the vicinity of the northern tree line form a vast treelessexpanse together with tundra. Higher elevationecosystems of the subpolar and northern Ural Mountainsare also part of this large zone. Whether or not these areas
should be included in the boreal forest or tundra
landscapes is a question with no clear answer . In ourresearch, all non-forest ecosystems, which make up theforest-less expanse together with zonal tundra, have beenexcluded from the analysis of intact forest areas.
The southern edge of the taiga was formed by natural
and anthropogenic elements in an intricate interaction.Human activities have played a decisive role here for
many centuries, including shaping the very boundaries
of the vegetation zones. The transition from typical
southern boreal ecosystems to mixed conifer/deciduous
Fig. 3. Forest - tundra transition zone. Tumen Region, Ural Mountains. Photo: V. Korotkov.
These are mostly rela-
tively young secondary
forests on logging sites,sometimes also on bur-
ned areas. A small
amount of birch forestcan also be found in a
narrow band along the
northern boundary ofthe forest. Forests in
which broadleaved
hardwoods dominate(oak, elm, ash, maple,
linden) cover only a very
small area - less than0.01 percent of the
territory, mostly in the
southwest regions ofPskov and Novgorod.
Broadleaved hard-
woods typically grow asminor components in
forests where other tree
species dominate.
The northern edge of the taiga is an exceedingly diffuse
transition zone toward the tundra, and drawing a sharp
delineation would be a very arbitrary exercise.  Forest
cover gradually thins and breaks up, from a more or lessclosed northern boreal forest to areas with only sparse
forest, essentially nothing more than small pockets of
trees or even solitary trees, surrounded by tundra. Narrowbands of closed forest stretch out into the tundra along
the valleys of rivers and creeks. Small stands also occur in
places that are especially warm or sheltered by the localand deciduous forests was diffuse and gradual.  All areas
investigated in this work are located above the southern
boundary of the boreal as drawn by many authorities.Only the very southwestern corner (parts of the Pskov
and Novgorod regions) is sometimes considered to
belong to the zone of mixed coniferous and deciduous
forests. In any case, large (greater than 50,000 hectares)areas free of infrastructure or signs of intensiveeconomic activity for the last 50-60 years, remain onlywithin the boreal zone.

9THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Spruce, Fir
Pine
Siberian Stone Pine
Larch
Birch, AspenDominant tree
species
Fig. 4. Dominant tree species of Northwest Russia (State Forestry Committee of the USSR, 1990).The examined territory can be divided into the following main parts, based on natural
forest vegetation characteristics:
The Baltic shield (1)  is dominated by pine forests. These
stands grow on outcrops of crystalline rock or sandy glacialsediments which were formed during the latter stages of thelast glacial retreat. There is also an abundance of bogs andlakes which in the north form a complex mosaic withinmountainous areas. The landscape dynamics of the Balticshield is strongly influenced by forest fires. These fires arefrequent but usually small-scale and rather weak groundfires due mainly to the pronounced fragmentation of thetopography. The area of the Baltic shield is clearly defined onforest maps by the dominance of pine forest (see Figure 4).
The western slopes of the Ural Mountains (2)  are
characterized by substantial amounts of precipitation, manydays with cloudy and foggy weather , and high levels ofwintertime snow accumulation. This area is dominated bySpruce-Fir and Spruce-Fir-Siberian Stone Pine forests,historically only marginally affected by fire and in many casesnot showing any signs of fire influence at all. On forest mapsthis territory is clearly visible as a uniform spruce-dominatedforest, although the southern part is now dominated bybirch-aspen and mixed coniferous-birch-aspen forestsfollowing clear-cutting.
The eastern slopes of the Ural Mountains (3)  are
characterized by significantly less precipitation and usually amore broken topography in comparison with the western
slopes. The eastern slopes also differ significantly in forestcomposition and fire characteristics, and are dominated byfire-influenced coniferous forests in a way similar to theBaltic shield (mainly pine forests, but often with aconsiderable fraction of Siberian Stone Pine and larch).
The valleys of large rivers and the wide fluvioglacial
depressions (4)  support dry pine forests and very frequent
fires, much like the Baltic crystalline shield. The highfrequency of fires is connected partly with the dominance ofsandy sediment in the soil, but also linked with historicdisturbance as the large river valleys and forested lowlandswere the first parts of the taiga to be colonized by people.
The morainic plains (5)  account for the major portion of
the studied territory. In the past, these areas had a relativelylow human population density, and the least developedtransportation infrastructure. In the northern part of the taigamost of these watersheds are characterized by extensiveamounts of bogs, sometimes to the extent that open bogsand low-productive bog forests dominate them. It is in theseleast accessible and least productive areas that we find mostof the remaining intact forests.
Timan ridge (6)  interrupts these relatively uniform plains
with more diverse vegetation.
23
1
41
2
555
444
4
45
556

10THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Fig. 6. Ruins of 19th century hunting cabin.
           Arkhangelsk Region. Photo: A. Yaroshenko.Fig. 7. Second growth deciduous forest (red), and lichen
(Cladonia) type pine forest on burned areas (blue) in theproximity of villages and hunting cabins. Komi Republic,Udora District, Vashka River valley. Satellite image (Landsat). Villages (greater than 100 inhabitants)
 Villages (up to 100 inhabitants)
 Hunting cabins
The taiga of European Russia is commonly considered to
have pronounced zonal characteristics. Nevertheless,
there are no well-defined boundaries between subtundra,
northern, middle, and southern taiga. Variances within
zones - depending on geology, macrorelief and quater-
nary deposits - are often much greater than differences
between zones. Furthermore, existing evidence concer-
ning the distribution of tree species in European Russia
during different stages of the Holocene shows that the
current relatively pronounced division of the forest
composition into zones is a recent phenomenon -
probably to a significant degree the effect of a zonal
distribution of human economic activity. Today, the natural
structure of the forest cover of European Russia is overlaid
by a spatial structure that reflects the pattern of forest
management and harvesting. The differences between
stands of secondary forest that can be traced back to
specific forms and techniques of logging are often greater
than the differences between the zones of the taiga.A significant part of the taiga has been subject to the
indirect influence of humans during the entire history oftheir development. Fires have occurred much morefrequently than they would if lightning had been the onlycause. Lands have been periodically cleared foragriculture. Hunting and fishing have affected the popu-
lation density of many species. And the list continues.
Fig. 5. Hunting cabin. Perm Region.
           Photo: A. Morozov.Practically all taiga territory of European Russia
has at some point been affected by human
economic activity, either directly or indirectly.Such disturbances include burning and shifting
cultivation, hunting, harvesting and expansion of
meadows along rivers, tree cutting, and airpollution. The areas chosen as references for
intact natural taiga are not absolutely "wild" or
"virgin," but rather those areas where human
disturbance has been and remains minimal.


11THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Fig. 8. Abandoned agricultural lands (red)
along Kamennoe Lake. Karelia Republic,Kostomuksha Nature Reserve. Satelliteimage (Landsat).
Fig. 10. Abandoned village. Komi Republic. Photo: P. Potapov.Fig. 9. Hay fields along the Vol River. Komi Republic.
Photo: P. Potapov.
Many taiga territories are still used, or were used until
recently, as professional hunting grounds. These areas
contain a dense network of hunting cabins in various
states of disrepair (see Figures 5, 6, and 7).  Even insidethe most wild spaces one can find the remnants of
abandoned settlements (see Figure 8). Typical
components of the taiga landscape are meadowsalongside small rivers and creeks, used for hay
production, but now mostly abandoned as an effect ofcollectivization and the forced discontinuation of
"non-perspective" villages (see Figures 9 and 10).Much of the mountainous northern taiga was used
until fairly recently as the main fodder base for
reindeer herding.  During the last two centuriespractically the entire territory was subjected to the
influence of industrial logging, although this was
dispersed over large areas and oriented towards theextraction of high-value trees through selective
cutting ( Denisov, 1911; Bogouslovskiy, 1912;
Kublitskiy-Piottykh, Nazarov, 1913; Faas, 1922 ).
The few places that escaped such logging include a
handful of areas within the Pechora basin as well as
some of the wettest parts of the greatest waterdivides of the North. Thus, the taiga, even in parts
that are least disturbed by human economic activity, is a
complex conglomerate of natural and human influences -
intact, but showing clear indications of having beensubject to traditional human influences on nature.
Modern economic activities, especially industrial logging,
the development of transportation infrastructure, and
mining have very little in common with traditional low-
intensive forms of human
influence on the taiga.The equilibrium between
natural processes and
sustainable human use,having evolved over the
course of millennia, is
destroyed. The result isthat the taiga as a unified
nature complex simply
disappears.


12THE NATURAL DYNAMICS OF TAIGA FORESTS
"Dynamics of random disturbances" is a phrase that
denotes a whole set of natural mechanisms that allowforests to maintain themselves over long periods of time.
The essence of the concept of random disturbances is as
follows: a natural forest, having developed without anycatastrophic human disturbances during many tree
generations, is a complex mosaic of small (in relation to
the size of the area as a whole) patches, which developwithout synchronization. The tree stand on any of these
small patches will sooner or later die, for a variety of
reasons of a more or less random nature, thus yieldingspace to a new generation of trees. The reasons for the
death of a forest patch under natural conditions may vary
considerably and include fires, pest outbreaks, disease,extreme weather conditions, or ageing. Different causesare connected with different sizes of the affected part of
the stand, from the size of an individual tree up tohundreds or thousands of hectares.  Each large block of
natural taiga consists of hundreds or thousands of such
parts, each of which is developing according to its ownprogression depending on the type of disturbance and the
time when it took place. This cyclic flow allows a taiga
block as a whole to be in a condition close to equilibriumand maintain itself for an unlimited amount of time.
Russia’s intact taiga has two main types of random distur-
bances dynamics which are of particular importance:dynamics associated with the development of a tree
population without any catastrophic disturbances (gap or
tree-fall dynamics) and dynamics associated with theeffect of fires (pyrogenic or fire dynamics).
GAP DYNAMICS
Gap dynamics is a basic natural mechanism for self-
maintenance of taiga forests, developed over the course
of many tree generations in the absence of catastrophicexternal influences, and most characteristic of dark
coniferous forests (spruce and spruce-fir forests,
sometimes with Siberian Stone Pine mixed in and usuallywith a component of birch). Gap dynamics is associated
with the death of individual old trees, causing openings to
appear in the canopy, letting in light and giving smallertrees the possibility to grow and assume a place in the
stand (see Figure 11). At equilibrium, old trees die more or
less evenly spread over the forest and over time. A standwill develop in which trees of all ages are present and the
Fig. 11. Canopy gap in dark (spruce and fir dominated) coniferous forest.
Perm Region, Basegi Nature Reserve. Photo: A. Morozov.age distribution of woody
species will be that of a
sustainable population. Theyounger trees will be the most
numerous, while older trees will
be gradually less numerous withincreasing age (see Figure 12).
Forests with equilibrium gap
dynamics are very robust overtime. In the taiga of European
Russia such forests are typically
rather open with an abundanceof gaps in the crown layer (see
Figure 13). Forests with
equilibrium gap dynamics arevery rare and it is much more
common to find forests in which
gap dynamics have begun toappear but not yet reachedequilibrium.  This happens as stands with a more uniform
structure due to some past disturbance, usually fire, start
to collapse.  Such stands are dominated by one or another
tree generation and even in density so that gaps thatappear are rather large as clusters of trees of similar age
die and fall at the same time.
Gap dynamics is associated with the death of
individual old trees or tree groups, causingopenings (gaps) to appear in the canopy, lettingin light and giving smaller trees the possibility to
grow and assume a place in the stand.


13THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
10
030
20
Fig. 13. Canopy density distribution, based on systematic circular 5-meter radius sample plots, and corresponding typical
forest structure in two different forests on the same site type:A - an intact spruce-fir forest with gap dynamics in balance
B - a secondary birch-spruce forest on a 64-year old clearcut.
Perm Region, Basegi Nature Reserve, western slope of the Ural Mountains.The intact spruce-fir forest is dominated by sections with low and medium density canopy. The rather even-aged secondaryforest, on the other hand, has a higher and more uniform density.
0-10
11-2021-3031-4041-50
51-60
61-7071-8081-90
91-100
10
030
20
0-10
11-2021-3031-4041-50
51-60
61-7071-8081-90
91-100Area, % Area, %Canopy density, %
Canopy density, %
0
 < 40
41-80
81-120
121-160161-200201-240241-280
281-320
321-360361-400510152025303540
Age classes, year
Fig. 12. Distribution of spruce trees (not including seedlings)
by number (green line) and volume (blue line) over age classin an intact Myrtillus-type spruce forest. Komi Republic (S.A.Dyrenkov, 1966).
À
BForests with clearly developed gap dynamics make up
only a small part of the total forest area of the European
North of Russia.  This is also true for the intact forest areas
examined in this work.  Gap dynamics are most common
in forests on the moist western slopes of Urals, where theylocally dominate the structure of the taiga landscape.
Here, one can find the greatest areas of forests with gap
dynamics at an absolute equilibrium, having developedwithout catastrophic disturbances for at least a few
hundred years. Such forests are less typical of the plainsof European Russian taiga where they usually appear as
pockets in a much larger forest with evident signs of some
relatively recent catastrophic disturbance such as fire.These pockets are generally small in size (from tens of
hectares up to a few hundred or thousands of hectares).
In most cases on the flatlands, gap dynamics areassociated with the moistest areas, such as the
floodplains of rivers, along creeks and where ground water
comes close to the surface. However , pockets also existon well-drained slopes and elevations where for centuries
they have avoided the effects of fire.
Forests with gap dynamics have a large accumulation of
dead wood on the ground, and of dead organic matter in
the soil. They also have a special soil profile, formed as aresult of the continuous falling of old trees along with their
root systems. This gives them a higher soil water retention
capacity and a lower amount of surface run-off during thespring thaw and heavy rains and, as a consequence, a less
variable microclimate in terms of moisture and
temperature under the canopy during the wholevegetation period ( Zubareva, 1967 ). The special
ecological conditions under the canopy - high degree of
light, moisture, variety of substrates - provide forestecosystems with a diverse plant community as well as
dominance in ground vegetation of some tall ferns andNumber of stems, %. Timber volume, %45

14THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
grasses ( Dryopteris austriaca Schinz
et Thell., Diplazium sibiricum (Turcz.Ex Kunze) Kurata, Aconitum
septentrionale Koelle, Delphinium
elatum L., and others). The layer of tall
grasses and ferns, sometimes
reaching a height of 1.5 - 2 meters,
either hinders or makes it impossiblefor young plant specimens to develop
on the forest floor or on small-
diameter fallen trees. Large-diameterfallen trees therefore play a key role
for tree regeneration (see Figures 14
0
> 55
51-5546-5041-4536-40
31-35
26-3021-2516-20
< 16246810Abundance of spruce regeneration, number
of individual plants per meter of dead wood.
Diameter of dead wood, cm.
Fig. 15. Relationship between diameter of dead wood andamount of spruce regeneration (higher than 10 centimeters)growing on it under a canopy of an intact spruce-fir forest.Perm Region, Basegi Nature Reserve.
and 15), and their disappearance as a result of selective
cutting of the largest trees may considerably disturb the
natural regenerative dynamics of these forests.
The particular characteristics of gap dynamics are
regulated by various processes in the forest ecosystem
and also by some external factors. Wood decomposing
fungi, for example, by lowering the mechanical strength oftrees and eventually causing old trees to fall down or be
broken by wind or snow, sometimes while still fully alive,
are usually the main regulators of the tree life span in suchforests. By determining tree longevity, wood decomposing
fungi have a strong indirect influence on the pace of tree
generation change and the size of individual canopy gaps,and also contribute to the occurrence of large areas of
wind-fall. Extreme weather conditions may encourage
mass infestations of tree-eating insects, decimatingsizable areas and thus producing particularly large gaps.Fig. 14. Regeneration of spruce on a dead fallen tree.
Arkhangelsk Region. Photo: V. Potansky.
FIRE DYNAMICS
Fire dynamics is the main mechanism for rejuvenation of
the taiga forests in the examined areas. Despite the
existence and even firm documentation of individual cases
in which forest fires have occurred due to lightning, thisforest rejuvenation mechanism must not be regarded as
entirely natural. The overwhelming majority of fires in taiga
forests of European Russia are related to humaneconomic activity, as evidenced by many historic and
contemporary studies. In fact, not even in 1999, a year of
extremely dry conditions and many fires, did any firesoccur within the remaining intact (unpopulated, and very
rarely visited by people) forest areas that was detectable
in high-resolution satellite images. At the same time, thenumber of forest fires exceeded practically all previously
recorded levels in areas with dense population and a
dense transportation network.Forest fires have always accompanied the economic
activities of people, and people have lived in the taiga
Fire or pyrogenic dynamics are associated with the
periodic partial or total burning of a forest as aresult either of natural causes or human activitiesand the establishment of a new tree generation on
the cleared area.
almost from the very time it was formed. The main cause
of fire was shifting (slush-and-burn) cultivation, existing in
Northern European Russia up until the end of the 1930’s,
in which the farmer would move to a new spot every few
years and clear it by means of fire (see Figure 16). Given
the fact that people have been setting fires for the entire

15THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Fig. 16. Slash-and-burn agriculture had significant
influence on the dynamics of taiga forest. This influence isnot limited to areas of current cultivation, but extends overlarge areas affected by previous cultivation and occasionalescaped fires. At any particular time, the affected areacould exceed the current cultivated area tens or evenhundreds of times. Significant parts of the southern andmiddle taiga were affected by slash and burn cultivation.With a low population density, influence was concentratedmainly around the most suitable areas, while remote forestswere affected to a lesser degree or escaped cultivationaltogether.Forests unaffected
by slash-and-burn cultivationor restored
Forestsoccasionallyaffected byescaped fire
Burned areas
currently undercultivationSecondary forestsgrowing on areaseither abandonedafter cultivation oroccasionallyburned
Forests, affected by slash-and-burn cultivationperiod during which the taiga forests were formed, it is
reasonable to regard fires associated with low intensityhuman management as an ancient semi-natural
mechanism for shifting tree generations in taiga forests
(this excludes such frequent or catastrophic fires that areassociated with the modern development of the taiga and
upset the fire structure that has shaped these landscapes
for centuries).
There is a big difference between forests that have been
subject to frequent fires over a long period of time, and
forests that have only experienced occasional firesseparated by centuries of "fire-free" natural dynamics.
Exposure to periodic fires for centuries or millennia favors
so called "light" (fire-dependent) coniferous taiga forestsin which pine (everywhere) and larch (in the north-east)
species dominate.  The light coniferous taiga is most
typical for the Baltic Shield encompassing KareliaRepublic, Murmansk and western Leningrad Regions, and
also on sandy sediments of the lowlands and along large
rivers. For pine and larch, fresh fire scars and forestsaffected by ground fires provide optimal conditions for
establishment and development of new tree generations.
Mature pines and larches are capable of surviving evensevere ground fires (see Figure 17 and 19).
Seeds of pine and larch are rather heavy, however , and
don’t spread very far with the wind - usually a hundred
meters at the most.  When fires occur only veryoccasionally and new fire scars are several kilometers or
more apart from older ones, other pioneer species such
as birch and aspen, which have seeds capable of travellingfurther or which naturally are part of the forest even
Fig. 17. Example of canopy structures in landscapes formed under the influence of forest fires
A. Fire refuge (area having escaped fires during a period longer than one tree generation). Such areas are usually found in
moist locations along rivers and lakes but may also be found on well-drained sites.
B. Areas having escaped fire long enough for a layer of spruce undergrowth to appear under the pine canopy. Spruce trees
are beginning to replace old pines in the canopy.
C. Uneven-aged pine forest formed by repeated ground fires. Each fire allows a new tree generation to appear, while at the
same increasing mortality among the old trees.
D. Area affected by crown fire which has destroyed almost the entire original stand. Crown fires promote the development of
dense undergrowth of pine which eventually develops into an even-aged stand.À                                                     B                                                                          C                                                               D

16THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Fig. 18. Re-growth on a water divide which seldom burns. In the absence of seed trees of
pine and larch, pure or almost pure stands of birch, sometimes with aspen, will develop.
without any fire, will dominate the post-fire succession.
Abundant growth of birch and aspen on fire scars iscommon on the wide water dividers, where fires used to
occur more seldom and most sources of pine and larch
seeds (if they were present at all) have been cut downduring the last century and a half (see Figure 18).
Taiga forests that are more or less periodically exposed to
fires have the following characteristics:
1. A mosaic of parts that have been subject to different
frequencies, intensities, and types of fire (ground fires,
which burn only the organic layer of the ground and fallen
branches, and crown fires, which burn the entire standeither superficially or totally). The effect of the fire
determines the structure and dynamics of the forest,
including age structure, the intensity of tree death, theamount of fallen trees and organic debris on the ground,
and the composition and structure of the lower layers of
the forest. The type and frequency of fire determineswhether even-aged forests with homogeneous structure
or multi-aged forests consisting of several different tree
generations will be formed (see Figures 17 and 19). Theseforests are complex mosaics of parts that have burned
with different frequency, which also contain fire refuges
(i.e. pockets in the forest which, for some reason oranother , have escaped fires for centuries and therefore
display a gap structure of the stand).
2. A broken age structure for the dominating tree species.
At the most fire prone sites, stands of pine or larch
develop containing several clearly distinguishable treegenerations, each of which was established after a ground
fire. On sites that have been without fire for a long time, a
secondary layer of spruce will develop. This will typicallyconsist of groups of trees established over a rather brief
period of time, usually 60-80 years. Even at sites that have
escaped fires for a very long time (200-250 years andmore), where spruce is often the dominating species in
the stand, the age structure of the spruce is not
continuous in the way that a sustainable population wouldbe.  Such spruce stands are only partially mixed ages.
The deciduous species in these forests (birch, aspen,
goat willow) in most cases grow in stands with an unevenage distribution, typically with a few clearly distinguishable
tree generations.
Fig. 19. Frequent fires promote uneven-aged pine forests. Karelia
Republic, Kostomuksha Nature Reserve. Photo: V. Kantor.
3. A presence of downed trees of different diameters,
unevenly distributed over the area as well as through
stages of decomposition. Pine or larch typically account
for most of the large-diameter fallen trees. Only on sites
that have escaped fire long enough to establish gapdynamics is it possible to find downed spruce.
4. An absence of a thick organic layer , except for on wet
sites, and a rather small amount of organic debris on the
forest floor , except for those sites that are part of a fire
refuge. The soil profile is more flat and less developedthan in the typical forests with gap dynamics. This is
connected with the fact that many trees die and gradually
decompose "on the stump" instead of falling along withtheir root systems. Overall, these forests have a much
smaller capacity for retaining moisture than forests with
clearly developed gap dynamics.

17THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
5. The process of old trees dying is very different within
various parts of the forest, and is regulated by severalfactors in concert: with the effect of fires (includingsuperficial ground fires, which cause trees that are weakor more harmed by fire to dry out), the death of old andweak trees from pests and diseases, and the effect ofextreme weather conditions (drought, which is especiallysignificant on sites with a thin layer of organic matter).
Modern forest management leads to significant changes
in forests with strong fire influences. Fires that developaround clearcuts and roads fundamentally alter structuresthat have been established over centuries in the taigalandscape; fire frequency is increased, fire refugesdisappear , and the forest mosaic is simplified. Anequilibrium that has evolved over centuries is disturbed ina catastrophic way and it is not always possible to predict
how biological and landscape diversity will be affected.The large fire scars that have occurred during a brief
period in areas of intensive development in the Northern
European Russia are not fully analogous with wildfires,which have occurred over millennia as a result of
dispersed human activity and lightning. It is also clear that
any attempt at dividing fires into "natural" and "unnatural"is artificial, because it is rarely possible to tell the origin of
a fire from the character of a fire scar . A discussion and
description of formal criteria for separating "natural" fires,those not regarded as affecting the natural dynamics of a
taiga forest ecosystem, from "unnatural" fires that are
seen as a human disturbance of natural dynamics, isprovided in the section Identification and mapping of
intact forest landscapes .
SECONDARY FORESTS
The overwhelming majority of taiga forests in European
Russia have been severely altered in terms of structural
and dynamic organization and are therefore classified as
secondary forests. However , determining the exact shareof secondary forest is difficult, especially in the absence of
firm criteria for classification of primary and secondary
stands.  There is no consensus on the stages ofrestoration after a disturbance in which a forest should be
classified as secondary, or to what extent a forest that has
been disturbed by selective cutting should be calledsecondary.  There are some fairly universal agreements -
the first forest generation on a clearcut, on abandoned
agricultural land, or on a quarry are all regarded assecondary.  Even if a very narrow interpretation of
secondary is used, it is clear that secondary forests form
the general background condition in the taiga, with theexception only of the northernmost part of the territory.
While primary stands of indigenous old-growth can be
found selectively scattered, a sea of secondary forestsurrounds them.
In Karelia, two-thirds of the forested area was harvested
during the second half of the twentieth century ( Gromtsev,
2000 ), with the situation in other regions more or less the
same. Already at the latitude of the Leningrad, Vologda,
and Kirov Regions, spontaneously reforested agriculturallands, abandoned during the period of collectivization and
later , represent a significant share of the forest, and
further south it may represent as much as 20-30 percentof the total forest area. Taking all of this together , a
conservative estimate finds secondary forest makes up
three-quarters of the forested land in the taiga ofEuropean Russia. With inclusion of even-aged spruce
forests, formed as a consequence of selective cutting of
pine (see Figure 26) or even-aged stands on gigantic firescars, the share of secondary forest becomes even larger .Secondary forests are very diverse, not only because of
site differences but also due to variations in their history of
human intervention. Still, it is possible to identify a few
typical characteristics that distinguish them from intacttaiga.
First and foremost, severe anthropogenic disturbances,
leading to the death of the stand either in substantial parts
or in its entirety, create stands with a significantlysimplified spatial structure.  The least architecturally
complex forests are formed on the most severely
disturbed parts (abandoned agricultural lands orclearcuts), with a very even canopy of secondary growth
trees, most often birch and gray alder (Figure 21,a). Any
older forest ecosystem fragments that might havesurvived the disturbance (such as pockets of
undergrowth, residual small-diameter trees after
clearcutting, stands or trees that happen to survive fire)
Fig. 20. Young birch forest on the site of a 30-year old
clearcut. Arkhangelsk Region. Photo: A. Yaroshenko.

18THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
add some complexity to the structure and composition of
the new forest (Figure 21, b).
The evenness in structure and age is often carried over
into the first re-growth layer , appearing under the canopy
of pioneer deciduous species (see Figure 21, c). Intensiveselective cutting in which all large-dimension trees are
removed and mainly only undergrowth is retained also
lead to the creation of simplified stands (Figure 21, d).  Inintact forests the main elements of spatial diversity of the
stand and other forest layers at a particular site are
connected with natural spontaneous disturbances; insecondary forests they are most often generated by
diversity of technical interventions such as skid lines,
landings and roads ( Pautov, 1992; Yaroshenko et al.,
1998 ).
The majority of inarguably secondary forests are
characterized by a considerable mixture of pioneerdeciduous tree species (birch, aspen, Gray Alder , Goat
Willow), the seeds of which are easily carried over largedistances by the wind and the seed production of mature
trees is very large. Forests with an absolute domination of
pioneer deciduous species are especially typical of thelarge (landscape size) clearcuts of the 1950’s through
1980’s. Then, the living conditions (microclimate, ground
cover , etc.) of the trees were radically changed, while atthe same time practically all sources of coniferous seeds
were removed.The simplified and homogeneous stand structure in
secondary forests is associated with significant changes
in other forest layers. Many microhabitats disappear
under the forest canopy, such as fallen trees and features
of micro-topography, formed when trees fall over along
with their root systems. Also, the mosaic of gaps and
illumination under the canopy is simplified. The result is a
drastic reduction in the diversity of ecological conditions
under the canopy, impoverishing the local flora and
causing the gradual disappearance of individual species.
It has been established that the disappearance of at least
some species is connected not so much with the dramatic
changes in ecological conditions that occur during the
first years after a radical disturbance as with the
simplification of the habitat diversity that follow the
establishment of a closed secondary stand ( Yaroshenko,
et al., 1998 ). The restoration of the original structure of
grasses and mosses is delayed in a similar fashion in
comparison with the re-establishment of the original
structure of the tree layer . Many forests in which the
original stand structure has been restored following
radical anthropogenic disturbances may still hold some
characteristics typical of secondary forests such as the
layer of grasses and mosses. We conclude that an assess-
ment limited to the tree layer does not allow a full
measurement of the degree of anthropogenic disturbance
in a forest ecosystem or the degree to which its natural
structural and dynamic organization has been restored.
Fig. 21. Secondary forest structures. See body text above.À
B
C
D

19ANTHROPOGENIC  INFLUENCES
ON  FORESTS
Human influence on the northern forests of Russia
developed in two key stages, divided by the  advent  of
intensive industrial growth.  In time, the boundary between
the two is fluid, shifting between regions that are
populated and close to big markets to those more remote.In some pockets, development began in the 17th and 18thcenturies in connection with industrial production of salt,charcoal and other goods. However , most of the area sawlittle growth until the middle of the 19th century, when
wood exports from the northern ports to Europe fueled a
rapid expansion.
Despite the influence of pre-industrial human
activity on the structure and dynamics of the
taiga landscape, it is, for the purposes of this
work, treated as a historical factor in forming the
taiga rather than as anthropogenic disturbance
Each period has brought its own peculiarities of human
influence on Russia’s natural landscape. It would be wrongto say that the influence of humans before industrial scale
exploitation was small enough to be negligible.  From the
very start, human settlements have been, at the very least,a considerable additional source of forest fire, therebycontributing in no minor way to the formation of taigaecosystems. Later , slash and burn agriculture, harvestingof grass on the flood beds of creeks, logging, hunting and
fishing for local needs, and other practices of natural
economy played an important role.Many forms of pre-industrial resource management
continued to be practiced during the better part of the
second, industrial growth stage. Slash and burnagriculture existed up until the 1930’s, ending mainly as a
result of collectivization and liquidation of single-family
farms. A system of hunting cabins still exists and is evenmaintained in some areas, although the density of cabins
and the frequency of their use has declined.  And while
production of hay on small flooded fields along smallrivers and creeks continues sporadically, the majority of
such fields have been gradually abandoned since the
beginning of the 20th century. These traces of pre-industrial utilization including overgrown grain and hay
plots, remnants of old hunting cabins, and sometimes
even small villages, can be found in the middle of what istoday wild and absolutely unpopulated territory.
Despite pre-industrial human activity’s influence on the
structure and dynamics of the taiga landscape, it is, for
the purposes of this work, treated as a historical factor in
forming the taiga rather than as anthropogenicdisturbance (see the section Background human
influence ). Therefore, infrastructure from this period
(villages, transportation corridors, production centers)have been excluded from designation of intact areas.
Russia’s natural ecosystems have been manipulated to a
much greater degree during the second phase of human
utilization, associated with intensive industrial
development of boreal forest resources. A more detailedaccount of this phase and its main stages is given below.
Fig. 22. Log drive.
("Forest to the newbuilding" -Sovietskoe Foto,1959, No. 11.Photo: Yu. Barminand V. Savostyanov)

20THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE TAIGA AS A WOOD RESOURCE
Industrial development of the taiga’s forest resources has
always been extensive. This general direction has followed
the continued exploitation of old-growth areas rather than
the development of intensive reforestation management
within areas already developed and closer to markets.Forestry in Russia has developed an unsustainable ethos
more similar to that of mining than to classical forestry,
which is directed towards the utilization of renewableresources.best trees. A rapid increase in management intensity took
place during the period from the 1880’s to 1913. A rathersharp decline then followed due to the First World War , theSocialist Revolution, and the subsequent Civil War (exportfell drastically during this period while internal marketsmostly demanded low-quality fuel-wood that was suppliedfrom forests in regions with high populations andcomparatively good transportation infrastructure). Thehighest logging intensity was reached in 1912-1913. Thevolumes then removed from the European Russian taigawas at the same level as today - more than 40 millioncubic meters of wood per year . The average loggingintensity in government-owned forests in European Russia(the overwhelming majority of which were located in thetaiga zone) was about 0.5 cubic meters per hectare, peryear ( Godzishevskiy, 1924 ) - roughly one third of the total
potential increment in the entire North. Large areas in thePechora valley remained more or less untouched duringthis time, while the forests in the vicinity of the Baltic andWhite seas were intensively logged at a level much higherthan the regional average. The harvest was concentratedon pine forests, as pine wood and products enjoyed thehighest demand in export markets. Already during thebeginning of the 20th century a significant deficit ofaccessible large-diameter high-quality pine forests wasfelt in the basins of the Baltic and White seas.  Harvestingoperations were forced to move up to the very sources ofrivers suitable for log driving as well as onto the majorwater divides - the least accessible areas fortransportation. Continuously decreasing tree diameters inselective cutting at the timber frontier forced loggers toreturn for a second and even third time to areas they had
already passed through. As the supply of large trees
High grading in various forms has historically
been the main form of logging in the taiga, with
little or no consideration of long-term
consequences. Convenience of location andprevalence of desired species have governed
the choice of logging site, on which only the
most commercially attractive species and tree
individuals have been cut.
Fig. 23. Traditionally large houses in northern European
Russia demanded considerable amounts of wood for
construction and heating. Photo: M. Shlychkov.The forests of the North have long been regarded as a
massive, inexhaustible deposit of wood, the partial
destruction of which could easily be compensated by the
exploitation of another part. The time period foreseen forexploitation of any particular natural forest area is short in
relation to the time required for renewal of the forest in
that same area, given the level of silvicultural practice.
The industrial development of the taiga as a forest
resource has been characterized by "skimming", also
known as "high grading", the exploitation of the most
valuable, best located resource, without seriousconsideration of long-term consequences. Consideration
of location and quality have been used for allocation of
logging tracts, while selective cuts focus on the best treesin terms of product yield.
Forestry in the taiga shows gradual "logging creep" from
the most accessible areas close to consumption points or
transport infrastructure to more and more remote areas.
Three different time periods can be distinguished within
the process of logging creep connected with a gradualincrease in logging intensity and a decrease in the quality
constraints on the extracted wood. Each period involved
logging of increasingly lower quality stands, includingstands that had been passed up by previous logging
efforts. As a result the creep away from accessible forest
was sometimes repeated over the same area.
1. The high-grading period  involved the harvesting of
only the best individual trees from a product-yield point ofview. In Northern European Russia this phase lasted fromthe beginning of industrial forest exploitation through theend of the 1920’s and was characterized by an absolutedominance of high-grading and individual cutting of the

21THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
diminished, the forest industry’s demand for the largest
logs also went down.
Harvesting by local populations of firewood and building
timbers made an additional contribution to the intensity offorest utilization during this period.  These harvestingvolumes were seldom accounted for in official forest
statistics because they were usually removed from
agrarian forests in the vicinity of villages - areas not underthe control of the forest authorities. This contributionappears to have been rather significant, given the coldclimate of Northern Russia and the traditionally large sizesof dwellings and other buildings. In 1923-24, the annual
consumption of firewood in the Vologda Region was
approximately 9.7 cubic meters per person in rural areas(Bykov, 1925 ). This translates to some 42 million cubic
meters in total for the Vologda region (current size of theVologda Region is several times less than in 1923). Basedon these numbers, the total consumption of firewood in
northern Russian territories can be estimated at 100
million cubic meters or more of wood per year , 2.5 timesthe annual harvest of industrial wood. Althought thisnumber seems to be exaggerated, it is evident that thecontribution of the local population to the intensity offorest use was significant, and in combination with
commercial cutting, over-harvesting was taking place in
large areas of Russia’s European North.
Characteristic of this high-grading period is the absolute
dominance of river floating for secondary transportation ofwood. Even the very smallest of rivers were often used -routes where logs could pass only if carried by spring
floodwaters. Primary transportation was completed by
horse. A distance from the logging site to the river landing
between interventions, for even-aged management the
stand age at final felling). Over-cutting of the annual area
was formally not tolerated. Nevertheless, partly due topoor data and partly because of the continuous reduction
in rotation time (associated, among other things, with a
decrease in minimum diameter for saleable wood) the"even use" cut remained a rather blunt regulation
instrument, without correspondence with the real
productivity of the forest.
An overall low degree of extraction due to high-grading in
combination with the use of horses for in-woods
transportation down to river landings, account for the factthat this logging had a comparatively minor influence on
the structure of the forest ecosystem.
The main factor of human disturbance during this period
was not so much the logging itself as the fires that were
caused by careless loggers. In fact, in many of the
remotest areas from current settlements and transport-ation routes, the majority of forest fires (by area) can be
dated to the end of the 19th and beginning the 20th
centuries while traces of more recent fires either are totallyabsent or are estimated in much smaller numbers.
of up to 15 km was considered acceptable, while a
distance less than 8 km was thought convenient. In otherwords, almost the entire basin of the White Sea, Baltic Sea
and Volga River was accessible for logging and extraction
of high-grade logs. Traces of low intensity selectivelogging from this period were visible almost throughoutthe entire area of these basins, including on the sitesfurthest removed from transportation infrastructure andpoints of wood consumption.
State forests of Northern European Russia were managed
exclusively according to the concept of "even use" annual
allowed cut. The usage was determined for each forest
district by dividing its area by the number of years in aforest rotation (for uneven-aged management the periodFig. 24. The depletion of easily accessible forests in
inhabited regions forced logging up onto the big waterdivides, far away from rivers suitable for driving logs. Stumpof a large Siberian Stone Pine 10 km from river. PermRegion. Photo: P. Potapov.For this project, all logging that took place
during the high-grading period is regarded as
background disturbance, having occurredvirtually everywhere and being a historical factor
in shaping the taiga landscape.

22THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
The weak effect of these early cuttings on the forest
structure, in combination with the considerable timethat has passed since the high-grading period ended
in this part of Europe, make it difficult to identify their
traces.  In many cases, especially in the southern andmiddle taiga and in spruce-fir forests, special
investigations (analysis of the growth pattern of the
undergrowth, digging up bumps on the forest floor insearch of stumps, analysis of down trees and logs by
degree of decomposition, etc.) are needed to uncover
signs of the high-grading felling of the period.  Slowdecomposition in the North makes stumps and logging
debris discernable from the ground.  In any case,
identification of traces of forest utilization from thisperiod requires detailed observations on key plots.  For
our research purposes, all cuttings from this period are
treated as background disturbance as they can befound more or less everywhere across the entire
studied area and are a historical factor that has
shaped the development of even the most undisturbedparts of the taiga.
2. The period of landscape-size clearcuts and
expansion of transportation access  begun after
Russia’s Civil War , and continued through the
restoration of forest management and rapid industrial
development, came to an end with World War II. Duringthis time, timber logged and processed in northern
European Russia became the backbone of Russian
export, accounting for about 30 percent of the totalvalue of exported goods during the 1930’s. A
successive retreat from the notion of sustainable
forestry and a transition to an economic norm ofexploitation was justified by a push to meet industrialpossible to achieve an annual cut area 5-6 times
greater than the annual area of sustainable utilization.And while some calculations have subsequently been
withdrawn, several of them still remain in force (such
as the so-called 1st and 2nd age-based annual areas,allowing the justification of annual allowed cut
exceeding even utilization sometimes by 2-2.5 times).
Along with harvest regulation tools providing a"scientific basis" for a drastic increase in the levels of
forest utilization, over-cutting the annual allotmentbecame common practice.
This phase of forest utilization culminated during the
second half of the 1930’s (Figure 25). Towards 1940,the average logging intensity in the boreal forest ofnorthern European Russia reached approximately 2.5-2.7 cubic meters per hectare - almost twice thepotential annual growth in these areas. Keeping inmind that the losses of wood in these operations weresignificant and cut allotments were often ignored, it isreasonable to assume that the real logging intensitywas even greater , perhaps as much as 3 times thestand growth rate. As always, forest utilization in easilyaccessible areas in the south and west wasconsiderably more intensive than in remote areas ofthe northeast and the Pechora River basin. Theintensity of logging in remote areas decreasedsignificantly during the Second World War , most cuttingtaking place in densely populated central areas of thecountry, in forests that had been more or lessconserved during peacetime.
The primary logging practices during this period were
clearcutting and cuts with residual low-value trees
Fig. 25. Intensity of logging by forest districts in 1934 (Atlas Mira, 1935).needs. Thus, the chief of the "People’s
Commissariat" (ministry) for the forestindustry, S.S. Lobov, clarified the new
direction: "The necessity of a decisive and
conclusive uncovering of the opportunisticand, in essence, harmful theories and
practices of the kulaks (rich peasants) and
capitalists, based on the principle ofsustainable forest use, which until recently
have been reflected in the science of
silviculture and forest management. Thebasic principle of forest utilization during
the second five-year plan must be clearcuts
of unrestricted size" (quoted from: Two
Hundred Years of the Forest Department,
1998 ).
Typical of the clear-cutting period is the
introduction of a great number of different
formulae to calculate the annual allowable
area of cut, providing a "scientific basis" formaximizing the volume of harvest during a
short time. Many of these formulae made itIntensity of logging
(per hectare of
forest land)
Areas that did not belong to
the USSR in 19340 - 0,5 m3/ha
0,6 - 1 m3/ha
1,1 - 1,5 m3/ha
1,6 - 2 m3/ha
more than 2 m3/ha


23THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Fig. 26. Development of a spruce stand from undergrowth
after intensive selective cutting.
A. Original stand.
B. Intensive selective cutting with removal of all pines except
cull trees, a common practice in the late 19th to early 20thcenturies in northern European Russia. Logging was usuallydone during the winter, as the work force was busy inagriculture during the summer. Horse logging on snow coverallowed most of the undergrowth to remain unharmed.
C. 10-15 years after logging. Some trees from the old stand
have died off on the stump along with parts of theundergrowth. Most of the undergrowth remains and beginsto grow rapidly in height. Undergrowth of deciduous species(birch, aspen, willow) appears in spots where the field layerand the undergrowth have been harmed.
D. 40-60 years after logging. Remaining spruce undergrowth
is beginning to form a closed stand. Some of the remainingold pines are beginning to dry out as an effect of  diseasesand insects, or from logging damage. Surviving deciduoustrees from the old stand are also beginning to die off.
E. 80-120 years after logging. A closed spruce forest has
developed from the surviving undergrowth. A few pines anddeciduous trees survive from the old selectively cut stand(usually with clearly visible defects: rot after fire damage,crooked stems, double tops).
Many "primary" forests of northern European Russia share a
similar history. In particular, most of the old spruce forests ofthe White Sea watershed owe their existence to a selectiveremoval of pine in the past which left old trees andundergrowth of spruce untouched for lack of commercialvalue.known as "conditional clearcuts", usually forming
enormous landscape-size clusters. Horse loggingdominated until the 1940’s, and a considerable
amount of coniferous undergrowth and saplings were
retained, as well as deciduous trees due to lack ofdemand.  As a result, many of these landscape-sizeclearcuts with residual trees are now already covered
with mature or over-mature conifer-dominated stands -often not very productive, however , as they developed
from residual small-diameter and wounded trees
(Figure 26). Despite the total dominance ofclearcutting, high-grading and selective cutting was
À
B
C
D
E

24THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
still used in remote areas. Traces of
selective cutting are not as evenlyspread as from the earlier high-grading period. Still, they can befound in many regions far fromtransportation routes and settle-ments. They were particularlywidespread over the water dividesdraining into the rivers NorthernDvina, Pinega, Vashka, and Mezen,and almost everywhere in the BalticSea and Volga basins.  Pine was themost desirable tree in selectivelogging, but larch is also activelyused. These cuttings had in places asignificant effect on the speciescomposition of coniferous forests(Figure 26). Many spruce forests,especially in the basin of the WhiteSea, owe their species’ dominanceto the systematic removal of pine.
River drive remained the main kind of
long-distance transportation for mostof this second period. Towards the
end of the 1930’s, transportation
along roads by machines and horses attained greater
use.
Resin tapping of pine was actively developed in
northern European Russia.  Earlier , resin tapping had a
non-industrial character , serving mostly local needs
and to a smaller extent export. In 1926, resin tappingstarted to be developed at an industrial scale, and by
1930, a network of specialized state enterprises for
resin tapping was created (the so-called khimleskhozy ,
or chemical forest enterprises). In 1938, the
application of chemical stimulants is introduced. The
vast majority of forests were logged after the tappingof resin had ceased.
For the purposes of this work, the concentrated
clearcuts of this period must be considered humandisturbance of the natural boreal landscape. The
scattered high-grading and selective cutting that took
place in remote forests, however , was not substantiallydifferent from the practices of the previous period and
was therefore as background anthropogenic
disturbance, not affecting the ecological intactness ofthe landscape.
3. The period of developing mechanized state logging
enterprises  holds an industrial essence similar to the
previous period. However , growing demand for small-
diameter and low-quality timber for pulp and mining
industries, along with the significant depletion of theforest during the previous decades, led to an increaseFig. 27. Clearcuts in spruce and fir forest in the Middle Ural foothills. Satellite
image (Landsat).1. Landscape size clearcut clusters - each clearcut up to 200 ha (up to 1993).
2. Clusters of clearcuts of 50 hectares each (from 1994).
in cutting intensity. Clearcutting continued to
dominate, and the amount of residual trees decreasedsignificantly. Stands that developed out of the residualundergrowth and small wood left by conditionalclearcuts of the previous period became available forharvesting. High-grading and intensive selectivelogging of remote forest lessened and soondisappeared.
The practice of landscape-size clearcuts continued
until 1994, when new regulations were issued,establishing a maximum size of 50 hectares forclearcuts in industrial forests (group III forests). Insome sense the landscape-size cutting practices stillcontinue as the required minimum time lag betweenadjoining clearcuts is short (2-8 years depending onconditions, in rare cases more) and corners ofclearcuts may adjoin at all times. These rules make itpossible to clearcut an almost unlimited area in a shortperiod (see Figure 27).
Tree removals grew rapidly, reaching a maximum of 90
million cubic meters in the late 1960’s and early1970’s. ( Lesopolzovanije v ..., 1996 ). The logging
intensity during this period reached a level of 1.25-1.35 cubic meter per hectare, approximately 10percent more than the level of potential growth.
As before, there were great variations in intensity
between different regions.  During 1966 in Karelia thelogging intensity was 2.4 cubic meters per hectare,121
2

25THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
almost double the level of potential tree growth. In the
Murmansk, Vologda and Arkhangelsk Regions,however , the logging intensity was only a few
percentage units higher than the growth rate, and the
Komi Republic was only 0.8 percent of the growth. Thereal logging intensity ratio was greater than the
numbers indicate, because large areas of Group I
forest were excluded from industrial logging (thinningwas allowed in these forests, but was rare at that time)
as well as protected areas. For Group II and III forests
the logging intensity exceeded growth for all regions ofNorthern European Russia. These areas had been
subject to massive logging during previous periods,
while reforestation efforts were lagging significantlybehind. Logging therefore led to a critical depletion of
the forest, making a further increase in removals
impossible. The early 1970’s saw the beginning of agradual decrease in removals in northern European
Russia as well as a process of closing down state
logging enterprises. Individual enterprises reducedoperations through the following stages:
Lespromkhoz  (large state logging enterprise
with a large volume of harvest)
Lesouchastok (a subdivision of a lespromkhoz
with a moderate volume of harvest)
Lesopunkt (a small subdivision of a
lespromkhoz , employing one or few logging
teams, with a small volume of harvest)
Abandoned logging village
Typical of the previous period was a continuous
transition from the most intensively developed areas
(which were gradually being cut through) to the least
intensively developed (with dispersed sporadic
cuttings). The current period, on the other hand,witnessed an occurrence of a solid front of clearcuts in
the boreal landscape, from the center of the
lespromkhoz towards more and more remote forests
within its territory.  By the end of the 1980’s, with the
requirement of having a time lag between adjoining
clearcuts in practice, strategy shifted to logging in twopasses: first a "chessboard" cut, then, after the
required lag time, a "residual" cut of remaining forest.
To provide some protection to the forests, zoning
restrictions on logging were reintroduced in 1943 with
the designation of all forest land into three categories
with different management restrictions. Protection
forests of various kinds were designated Group I statuswhich allows only salvage logging. In 1943, many of
the most important forests from an ecological
perspective were placed in this category along withseverely depleted forests along major rivers, railroads
and roads, and around population centers. Thus, the
introduction and gradual increase in size of the Group Izone was, for practical forestry, a very important forest
protection initiative. The restrictions pertaining to the
Group I management zone have since been graduallyeased, however , and about half of the forests in this
zone are now managed more or less for wood
production.
Fig. 28. Conventionalv tractor skidding typically produces significant ground disturbance at the logging site,
destroying undergrowth and small trees.A. Skidding damage on pine caused by selective "salvage" cutting. Murmansk Region. Photo: A Yaroshenko.
B. Ground disturbance caused by tractor skidding. Arkhangelsk Region. Photo: V. Potansky.
A B

26THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Fig. 30. Average intensity of logging for different regions
during 1963-1982, annual averages.
Fig. 29. Tapping of pine resin. Karelia Republic.Photo: A. Yaroshenko.large part to damage from mechanized skidding.  In
addition, strict rules required clearcuts be cleaned oflogging debris. Later , with little follow-up tending, the
majority of regeneration was made up of pioneer
species, mostly aspen and birch. The introduction ofthinnings has proceeded slowly with very little
industrial significance into the 1990’s. In truth, logging
continues to be based on primary forest, in addition tocutting natural regrowth on the sites of earlier logging.
Silviculture and logging do not form a closed cycle as
harvesting is based on forest of natural origin.
After the Second World War , active efforts were
initiated to drain bog forests of northern European
Russia.  Draining had taken place since the end of the18th century, and until the 1950’s, mostly in densely
populated regions of central and western Russia.  All in
all, some 5 million hectares of bogs and wet forestswere drained, about half located within the territory of
study.  In our analysis, drained areas were considered
to be sufficiently disturbed to be excluded from theintact landscapes.
Resin tapping in pine forests continued to be actively
developed through the end of the 20th century (Figure
29). A zone of mandatory resin tapping was
introduced, where final felling could not take placeuntil the resin tapping had been concluded.
Specialized state enterprises for resin tapping were
active in all regions with significant amounts of pine.The full range of forests were being used for resin
tapping, from road-side stands to the remote
locations, where some of the tapped stands survive toThe formulas for calculating annual allowable cut that
had made possible almost limitless logging have
gradually been rescinded. The annual allowable cut
nevertheless significantly exceeded growth well into
the 1980’s in most of the territory of study; and in someplaces this is still the case. Some of the harvest
regulation formulae simply do not provide for
sustainable uninterrupted wood production. Whilemany foresters consider these formulae to be
scientifically based norms for forest utilization, the
classics of Russian forest science raised seriousobjections to the underlying calculation principles. In
general, many forms of forest utilization that seemed
primitive and thoughtless to Russian foresters duringthe first third of 20th century have brought into
practice during subsequent periods of forest utilization
and eventually become accepted as a norm.
The role of river drive for long-distance transportation
of wood gradually decreased, although it remained the
most important form of transportation into the late
1970’s. Nowadays, the importance of river drive islimited.
Rapid mechanization of the work process replaced
horses with winches and tractors for skidding (winches
have since fallen out of use). Tractor skidding in
particular , brought considerably more ground
disturbance at the logging sites, destroyingsignificantly more undergrowth and small trees in the
process (Figure 28). Intensive die-back of residual
trees and undergrowth were not observed at sites of"conditional" clearcuts and selective logging, due in
Average intensity of logging
(per hectare of forest land
excluding pre-tundra
forests)0 - 0,5 m3/ha
0,6 - 1 m3/ha
1,1 - 1,5 m3/ha
1,6 - 2 m3/ha
more than 2 m3/ha

27THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
this day. Resin tapping is somewhat similar
to a severe ground fire in its effect on tree
vitality. Part of the living tissue of the stem
is destroyed, causing the more woundedtrees to die while the less wounded
eventually restore their vitality. As part of
this work, a study made in the Kalevalaforest of Karelia compared the condition of
stands in which tapping ceased at least
five years ago with stands that wereuntapped (but affected by at least one
ground fire during the last 30 years). There
was no noticeable difference in treedistribution in terms of condition and rate of
mortality.
The 1990’s forest development boasts
important characteristics. Most significant
is the drastic decrease in removals - a drop
of two to four times that of the previousdecade (Figure 31).  Reasons for this
reduction range from the critical depletion
of forest resources due to over-exploitationto the breakdown of technical integration
of industries along the wood chain, and the
reduction in government support toeconomically inefficient enterprises.
Similar to war times the logging effort
shifted noticeably towards more denselypopulated and accessible areas during the
end of the period. The construction of new
roads slowed down considerably.
Overall, this period saw an increase in so-
called "revenue cuttings" (an unofficial
term for silvicultural cuttings). These are
intermediate cuttings for the purpose ofproviding the state forest service agencies
with additional funds by selling wood. The
occurrence of these cuttings is connectedwith the decision in 1993 to separate the
state silvicultural agencies from the state
forest industry system. Unfortunately, thisdivision was carried out in the usual
political manner: the silvicultural agencies
received a great deal of responsibilitiesFig. 31. Annual intensity of logging in different regions, 1999.
0 - 0,5 m3/ha
0,6 - 1 m3/ha
1,1 - 1,5 m3/haAnnual intensity of logging
(per hectare of forest land
excluding pre-tundra forests)
According to our own estimates, no less than 90-99percent (depending on the region) of the thinnings
during this period can be characterized as high-
grading causing a drastic reduction in the quality andstability of the residual stand (see Figure 28). These
activities took place in the most densely populated
regions, especially in forests that had been set asidefrom industrial utilization (belonging to Group I). In
more remote areas this practice has not been widely
spread, with some local exceptions.(from the delineation of logging sites to reforestation
and silvicultural cutting) without a sufficient budgetallocation to fulfill the tasks. As compensation, the
leskhozes (local silvicultural state agencies) were
given the right to sell wood from all sorts of loggingexcept final felling and use the revenue for their own
needs. Many leskhozes responded by turning
themselves into unofficial commercial loggingenterprises. This led to a drastic increase in the
quantity of intermediate cuttings, but in most cases
also to a similarly drastic decrease in their quality.
Fig. 32. Leaving behind groups of confers during final felling will result in
mixed forests of conifers, birch, aspen and willow. Arkhangelsk Region.Photo: A. Yaroshenko.

IDENTIFICATION  AND  MAPPING
OF  INTACT  FOREST  LANDSCAPES
THE NATURAL VALUE OF LARGE BOREAL FOREST LANDSCAPES
It’s impossible to pinpoint the smallest area required
for indefinite preservation of all natural components of
a forest landscape. Different size habitats are neededto support a diversity of bio-components. These areasalso depend on a vast variety of local conditions withbest guesses approximating needed space (Figure 33).What can be said for certain is that the greater thearea, the greater the number of organisms and naturalproperties that can be preserved.  Also of note is theknowledge gap regarding spatial relationships amongthe components of boreal ecosystems. The same istrue for the mechanisms that govern the survival ofparticularly sensitive plant and animal species.Protecting large areas is therefore a matter ofreasonable precaution as it promotes the conservationof all species, both those well studied and those as yetunknown.
Conservation of large taiga territories itself requires
significantly lower expenses than protection of
numerous small fragments located within areas
transformed by industrial activities. Experience gainedby Russian forestry institutions and protected areasmanagers indicates a need of at least 10-20employees per 10,000 hectares of conserved area
within a fragmented and highly populated territory witha developed road network in order to ensure sufficient
Fig. 33. Block size needed to sustain some important conservation functions.Researchers recognize the special value of large
natural areas for preserving all strata of biological
diversity ( McCloskey, Spalding, 1989, Bryant et al.,
1997, Noss, 1990 etc. ). For many cases of
conservation, reserve size is vital to success. These
cases include stable populations of large animals that
are especially sensitive to human impact or habitatchanges, lakes and wetlands as objects of reference,
and the natural dynamics of forest ecosystems
associated with large-scale disturbances such as fireor wind damage. It is also a fact that the central parts
of large reserves are better protected from "edge
effects," influenced by disturbance of neighboringareas. Edge effects can take different forms. Typical
examples include biological contamination (such as
"immigrant" plants intruding from adjoining roads orlogging sites with associated risks of changes in
ecosystem structure and dynamics), hydrological
changes caused by the draining or waterlogging ofneighboring areas, and collapsing forest walls of
neighboring logging sites. Also important is that people
rarely visit the central parts of large intact areas,making them less likely to be affected by poaching or
anthropogenic fires. This assumption is supported by
the total absence of blazes during the fire year of 1999- the most destructive in recent record - within all
intact forest landscapes identified as part of this study.
28

29THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
protection and maintenance. Protection of large intact
boreal landscapes, on the other hand, without any
internal road network, requires no more than 7-10
employees for areas of dozens or even hundreds of
thousands of hectares.Small-scale (the falling down or  death of individual
trees) and large-scale (fire, insect infestations,extreme weather conditions) random disturbances;
Self-maintaining populations of plant and animal
species especially sensitive to human disturbance;
Intact catchment basins around rivers, bogs and
streams;
Spatial patterns of ecosystems and habitats;
Rare or extremely  sensitive ecosystems, that
disappear in fragmented landscapes as a result ofpermanent human influence.
These dimensions sufficiently buffer most edge effects
such as the collapse of the forest edge of loggingsites, outbreaks of pest insects in logging debris,
changes in water regime due to draining or
waterlogging of neighboring clearcuts, and the effectsof intensive hunting and fishing.
BACKGROUND HUMAN INFLUENCE
The idea that the some of Earth’s forests or other
natural ecosystems exist free of the impacts of humanactivities, is a significant simplification of reality. As a
matter of fact, each forest is affected by human
activities - even if the impacts cannot be directlymeasured. Typical examples of such wide spreadhuman impacts are global atmospheric pollution,
changes in population size of game animals (includingThe Russian Forestry Standard ( OST 56-108-98
"Forestry. Terms and Definitions" ) defines virgin forest
as a "natural forest that has not undergone perceptible
human impact, changing over a period of manygenerations of tree species due only to natural
processes".  Such an approach apparently brings
about a certain degree of subjectivism at detecting
virgin forests according to the above definition.
Fig. 34. Many spruce forests, especially in the White Sea basin, owe their existence to
selective logging for pine during the late 19th century - early 20th century. The pictureshows a spruce forest on a site where pine canopy was cut during the beginning of the 20thcentury. Photo: A. Yaroshenko.those that are important
ecosystem-forming com-
ponents of forest land-scapes) or changes in
forest fire frequency
resulting from changesin human population
density and life style in
forest regions. Thus, anycriteria determining
areas "undisturbed" by
human economic acti-vity in forests implies the
presence of some back-
ground level of humanimpact, which is regar-
ded as insignificant
within the measuredscale.Protecting large intact boreal landscapes is
significantly less expensive than protecting
many small fragments within an otherwise
heavily transformed landscape. At the same
time the environmental benefit is greater .
In this study, large intact areas were defined as
landscapes greater than or equal to 50,000 hectares,
internally undivided by infrastructure, and with aminimum linear dimension no smaller than 10kilometers. Such spaces are capable of maintainingmost natural values and functions of a self-sustainingboreal landscape, including the following:

30THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
In this study, certain influences and disturbances were considered background effects, of no
significance to the identification of intact landscapes. These background disturbances include the
following:
Ancient forms of human activity, occurring during the period prior to the industrial
"development" of natural resources of the northern European Russia:
shifting slash-and-burn agriculture, widely spread in the southern and middle taiga right up till the
1930s;
fires, except for present day fires, adjacent to industrial and transportation infrastructure (see also  the
section "Methodology for the identification of intact forest landscapes");
hunting (including the construction of seasonally inhabited hunters’ cabins), fishing, mushroom and
berry gathering, scattered recreation (without permanent infrastructure);
grazing of more or less domesticated animals (reindeer , cows, goats);
cutting down single trees for the purpose of local construction needs or for firewood;
clearing haylands in flood plains of rivers, haying.
Scattered forestry activities of the past:
industrial selective cuttings of 18th - 19th centuries and the beginning of 20th century (until the late
1930s), as well as side-effects of those cuttings (increased frequency of fire near logging areas);
tapping trees for resin collection.
Global and regional changes in the Earth’s ecosystem (global and regional air pollution, climate
change, ubiquitous changes in the population size of certain animal species, acclimatization and
spread of exotic species, as well as unknown or underestimated global and regional changes).Detection of "perceptible" signs of human impact
depends on the methods employed, degree ofexploration intensity, and professional skills of the
staff.  Remote sensing will detect different levels of
impact than ground exploration.  For example, aforest area in the valley of Vuokijoki River in middle
Karelia was described by several explorers as a
"virgin" Myrtillus -type spruce forest (fig. 34).
However , another exploration unearthed micro-
swellings within a 20x100 meter trial plot. Theexcavation revealed 27 large pine stumps (some with
signs of sawing), and partially decomposed treecrowns - presumably from an early 20th century
cutting.  Visual estimation of the forest resulted in the
assumption that the forest is virgin, but detailedexploration revealed signs of selective logging within
the last 100 years. In general, implicit determination
of background anthropogenic impacts that are foundinsignificant results in incomparable findings in
different regions and irreplicable results.
MATERIALS AND SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Various information sources were used to detect intact
forest landscapes. Consecutive processing of thesematerials in order to increase detail and accuracymade it possible to arrive at more and more precise
boundaries of the these landscapes.  The study used
four major information sources:
 General topographic maps
General topographic maps were used for mapping
basic elements of infrastructure, such as towns andvillages, industrial facilities, and permanent
transportation infrastructure (see the section
Methodology for the identification of intact forestlandscapes ). The basic goals of this mapping were:
to exclude the most industrially disturbed and
fragmented areas from further analysis;
to divide the taiga zone of northern European Russia
into discrete areas, separated from each other by
elements of industrial infrastructure.
The maps were also used for georeferencing of middle
resolution satellite imagery ( see below ).
An obvious weakness of general maps is the low
accuracy in the representation of certain objects.Inaccurate mapping displaced roads 2-5 km, whilesome pipelines were off by as much as 10 km. General

31THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
maps were therefore only used for mapping some very
basic elements of infrastructure and later - borders of
woodless bogs and highlands within intact forestareas.
The study made use of general geographic maps in
scales ranging from 1:1,000,000 (northern regions) to
1:200,000 (southern regions), produced by the Federal
Service of Geodesy and Cartography of Russia, 1993 -
1996 editions.
Thematic maps
The second main source of information was thematic
maps. The study used the " Map of Vegetation in the
European Part of the USSR " (1974) and the map
"Forests of the USSR " (1990), as well as local and
regional forest maps highlighting dominant species.
These materials were used to aid the interpretation of
the satellite imagery.
Middle resolution satellite images
The third major source of information was middle
resolution images (approx. 150 meters per pixel) from
the  MSU-SK scanner on the Russian satellite Resurs-
O-3. These images were used to exclude considerableareas, obviously affected by human economic
activities (agricultural fields, large clearcuts, young
second-growth forest), from further analysis, thusreducing the need for  the significantly more expensiveand thus less accessible high resolution imagery.
High resolution satellite images
The fourth major source of information was high-
resolution satellite images. The study used Landsat
¯ÒÌ+, Resurs-O MSU-E, and SPOT HRV images with aspatial resolution of 15-35 meters per pixel. High
resolution imagery made it possible to detect
disturbance from smaller scale human activities, andwas also used for fine-tuning the boundaries of intact
forest landscapes.
Maps and middle resolution satellite images don’t
have enough detail to allow all significant forms of
human disturbance to be detected. High resolution
imagery  (primarily Landsat ¯ÒÌ+) has sufficient detail,but access to complete coverage was blocked by
financial constraints and the absence of summer-time
cloudless images for all relevant areas.
Available maps (general geographic maps,
topographic maps, and thematic maps) have certain
weaknesses when used to detect disturbances in thenatural landscape:
There is a lack of general geographic and
topographic maps that are both current andsufficiently detailed and precise. These maps do notby themselves allow current sources of disturbance,such as logging roads and strip roads, to be reliablydetected.
Forest maps are updated infrequently (every 10
years or even more seldom) and are of inconsistentquality. Reliable maps do not exist for certain legal
categories of forest, such as forests belonging to
agricultural enterprises, remotely located reserveforests, etc.  Regional level maps are often either
missing or not accessible. The underlying forest
inventory is in many cases not sufficiently precise.For these reasons it is not possible to produce a
sufficiently detailed and current forest condition
map of northern European Russia by relyingexclusively on forest management  maps and data,
or the federal state of the forest accounts.
The area of northern European Russia is divided
among many different administrative agencies.
There is no unified system for data collection amongthese agencies. Data is collected and processed
with varying degrees of precision and efficiency,
even within individual regions. The result is a lack ofunified cartographic information on the status and
utilization of lands belonging to different agencies.
Some maps suffer from insufficient objectivity (i.e.
are distorted on purpose). Certain facilities that are
indicated on the map, particularly roads, may in
reality be either abandoned, destroyed or havenever existed in the first place.
Medium resolution imagery (Resurs MSU-SK) does not
provide sufficient detail to detect many significant
features, such as linear disturbance (roads andtransportation corridors in the forest), small clearcuts,
agricultural fields and secondary forests appearing in
their place, small quarries, etc.  This is particularlypronounced in mountainous and hilly terrain, where
ecosystems often appear naturally in small fragments
and the intricate pattern of shadows adds to thedifficulty. Nevertheless, the previous study on intact
forest areas in northern European Russia ( Aksenov et
al., 2000 ) showed that it is possible to identify intact
areas rather precisely using medium resolution
imagery, despite certain unavoidable mistakes in their
delineation.Available maps and middle resolution satellite
images don’t have enough detail to allow allsignificant forms of human disturbance to be
detected. High resolution imagery has
sufficient detail, but access to completecoverage was blocked by financial constraints
and the absence of summer-time cloudless
images for all relevant areas

32THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
SATELLITE IMAGES USED
Two main types of satellite imagery were used in this
study:
medium resolution images, taken by Russian
satellite Resurs-0-3 (the MSU-SK scanner).
high resolution images, taken by the American
satellite Landsat-7 (the ETM+ scanner). In addition,
some high resolution images from the Russiansatellite Resurs-0 (the MSU-E scanner) and the
French satellite SPOT (HRV scanner) were also
used.
This section describes the different types of images
used and how they were interpreted.
Resurs MSU-SK satellite images
MSU-SK satellite images have a spatial resolution of
140x170 meters per pixel and a view range of
approximately 600 kilometers. Such images may beused in drafting thematic maps with a scale of up to
1:1,500,000 ( Kravtsova, 1995 ). The MSU-SK images
used in this study had undergone primary geographicadjustment and been transformed into a uniform
resolution of 150x150 meters by the space engineering
firm Scanex in Moscow. The MSU-SK scanner has fourspectral channels: channels 1-3 in the visible
spectrum range, and channel 4 in the near infrared
range. This allows a large number of natural and man-made objects  to be detected (Fig. 35, 36).
This scanner has some drawbacks: there are no
algorithms for atmospheric adjustment or for
adjustment of illumination and terrain-causeddistortions. This made it more difficult to interpret the
species composition in forest stands and made it
impossible to use some standard indices and
algorithms (e.g. the vegetation index). Another seriousdrawback is the absence of an algorithm for precise
geographic adjustment of the images. Aligning the
MSU-SK images with various cartographic materialsrequired that the images be  georectified to a uniform
topographic basis. This produced an inaccuracy
between 200 and 500 meters that was consideredacceptable at the early stages of the work. Several of
the images had only two channels and reduced spatial
resolution (due to some peculiarities of the satellite’stransmission device). Such images were used only as
a last resort,  in the absence of cloudless 4-channel
images, and their application was therefore limited to ahandful of small areas.
The MSU-SK images were used for two main
purposes: to identify large-scale disturbances in forest
cover due to human economic activity (large clear-cuts and agricultural areas, fire scares adjacent to
infrastructure), and to map the northern border of the
forest. Winter and summer images were both used.
Winter images were used to separate forested and
unforested areas, to determine stand density, and to
identify freshly cut areas (by comparing wintertime
images from different years). The lightest areas in thewinter images represented woodless areas; the
darkest areas represented closed coniferous forests as
well as deciduous forests with closed canopy ofconiferous undergrowth. The small differences among
different channels in the winter images made it
possible to rely solely on channel 4, which was themost informative. Images from February to April gave
the best results, as the height of the sun above the
horizon  was sufficient to provide minimum terrainshading.
Summer images were used to determine the
composition and character of the vegetation, as well
as the presence of open water surfaces and exposedminerals. Color synthesis of spectral channels aided
interpretation.  Red was used to represent the fourth
channel, green the second channel, and blue the firstchannel (or the second one in the case of two-channel
images), making it possible to distinguish differences
in brightness in the visible (first and second spectralchannels) and near infrared (fourth channel) spectral
bands. To simplify the interpretation process and
enhance the contrast between heterogeneouscontours, we processed brightness histograms. The
morphological and texture characteristics of objects
were taken into account in visual interpretation.Summer images provided clear differences between
water bodies (minimum brightness values in all
Fig. 35. The relative spectral reflectance from natural
objects in a summer image from the scanner MSU-SK :
1. Hay field. 2. Sphagnum bog 3. Birch, aspen and willow on aclearcut. 4. Recent clearcut. 5. Closed spruce and fir forest.6. Open water surface.
100
50
0Relative spectral reflectance, %
Spectral channels of the scanner MSU-SK123 41
2
3
4
5
6

33THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
5
2112
3
5
5
41
15
45
5
24
66
6Syktyvkar4
KotlasVytchegda RiverSevernaya
Dvina River45Mezen River
Vashka River
Pinega River
Fig. 36. Natural objects classified in a satellite image from Resurs MSU-SK (printed in reduced scale): 1. Coniferous forest
without visible traces of human disturbance. 2. Open and forested bogs. 3. Sparse forest on low mountains (the tree crownsare covered with snow). 4. Secondary deciduous, mixed and pine forests. 5. Clearcuts, either recent or not covered by aclosed regeneration of trees. 6. Agricultural land. 7. Clouds. Arkhangelsk Region and Komi Republic (the river basin of theSevernaya Dvina and Mezen). 6 June 1997.77
channels), forests (generally low brightness values
with significant differentiation in the infrared channel),
swamps, and open grass communities includinglowland sedge moors, meadows, and agricultural lands
(generally high brightness values with differentiation in
the visible and infrared channels - see Figure 36).
Summer images allow classification by species
composition. Coniferous and deciduous forests are
clearly distinguishable by spectral characteristics."Light coniferous forests" (fire-dependent, mainly pine)
and "dark coniferous forests" (spruce and fir
dominated) were distinguished using image
interpretation in combination with forest maps.Deciduous species such as birch and aspen could not
be  distingushed from each other , however .
Species composition is a good indicator of human
disturbance as original coniferous forests are replaced
by secondary deciduous forests after clearcutting and

34THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
other large-scale forms of disturbance (Fig. 36). Only
summer images taken after the full development of theleaves of birch and aspen over the entire territory were
used. Using early summer images could have produced
an overestimation of coniferous forest, as deciduousstands with coniferous undergrowth might incorrectly
be classified as coniferous if the leaves of the upper
storey have not yet developed.
Landsat ETM+ satellite images
Landsat ETM+ satellite images with a spatial
resolution of 30 meters per pixel (spectral channels 1-
5 and 7) and 15 meters per pixel (eighth panchromatic
channel) and a view range of 183x170 kilometers were
used to identify minor , fresh and disperseddisturbances not distinguishable in MSU-SK images,
321
23
56
4
8
Fig. 37. Example of natural objects that can be identified in a summer image from Landsat ETM+ (northern foothills of the Ural
mountains): 1. Spruce and fir forest without signs of disturbance. 2. Wet pine forests. 3. Bogs and forested bogs. 4.Secondary deciduous forest on burned areas located beyond the boundary of current infrastructure.5. Secondary deciduous forest on burned areas, located in the vicinity of current infrastructure. 6. Burned areas in Cladoniatype pine forests. 7. Secondary deciduous forest and grass vegetation on old clearcuts. 8. Relatively recent clearcuts, mostlycovered with grass and regrowth of deciduous species. 9. Railroad. 10. Logging roads with prepared surface. 11. Largesettlement (the city of Pechora and surrounding industrial buildings). 12. Small settlements. Komi Republic, middle part of thePechora basin. 26 June 2000.1
133
53
67
67
83
11
1012
9and for mapping the borders of intact forest
landscapes with greater precision. The high spatial
resolution of the images and the low amount ofgeoreferencing inaccuracy (not exceeding 250
meters) allowed the final map to be drafted at a scale
of 1:500,000. The ETM+ scanner determines thebrightness of reflected light in six spectral channels, of
which the channels of the visible spectrum range (1-
3), as well as the near (4, 5) and medium (7) infraredranges were used in the analysis.  Again, summer
images were used to classify species composition.
The following color synthesis was used for summerimages: 4 (red) -2 (green) -1 (blue) or 5-2-1,
respectively. However , due to incomplete or unclear
coverage of some regions, wintertime images,
visualized through the panchromatic channel, were
used for the analysis of Northern Urals. In the analysis
1010
87
7

35THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
of autumn (October) images, only infrared channels
were used (instead of the channels of the visible
spectrum range).
Summer images visualized in color synthesis 4-2-1
were used to  distinguish natural objects in much the
same way as with MSU-SK images. The imagesprovide clear differences between several categories
of objects: objects with low brightness in the reflected
light, such as deep clean water bodies, water-filledswamps, hardwood forests and bog-moss and green-
moss pine forests; objects with high brightness in the
red and near infrared range, such as deciduous birch-aspen forests in logged and burned areas, willow
groves and riverside meadows, and agricultural lands;
and objects with generally high brightness, such asCladonia-type pine forests, Sphagnum  bogs, open
grounds in freshly cut areas, roads, settlements and
mines. Dry surfaces of exposed mineral ground andfire-sites covered with ground lichens have a
conspicuous light blue hue in the given color synthesis
(Fig. 37, 38, 39). The high resolution of the imagesallowed us to use the morphological (chiefly different
types of edges) and texture attributes of the objects
more fully to identify dispersed and discretedisturbances such as selective and shelterwood
fellings, and dried swamp areas. Landsat images
allowed a large number of linear anthropogenic
1
22
Fig. 39. Bogs (1), surrounded by secondary deciduous
forest on clearcuts (2). Summer image from Landsat ETM+.Novgorod Region, Polisto-Lovatskiy bog. 6 June 1999.
6
5
32
11
2
35
74Fig. 38. Example of naturalobjects that can be identified in asummer image from LandsatETM+ (western Karelia):
1. Coniferous forest without signs
of disturbance.
2. Bogs and forested bogs.3. Lake.4. Pine forest affected by recent
ground fires.
5. Grass vegetation and regrowth
of deciduous species onclearcuts.
6. Recent clearcuts, clearly
visible due to exposed mineralsoil.
7. Logging roads.
8. Agricultural lands (hay fields
and overgrown pastures aroundabandoned farm).
The boundary of intact landscape
is shown in red.
Karelia Republic, Muezerskiy
District. 28 June 2000.66
8

36THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
5
11
51
2
36
334
44
6Fig. 40. Example of natural
objects that can be identifiedin a winter image from LandsatETM+ (panchromatic band).
1. Coniferous forest without
signs of disturbance.
2. Highland open landscapes.3. Clearcuts not covered by
secondary forest.
4. Recent clearcuts.5. Secondary deciduous
forest.
6. Secondary deciduous
forest with coniferousundergrowth, pine forest onold clearcuts.
The boundary of intact
landscape is shown in red.
Perm Region, Krasno-
visherskiy District. 18 April2000.
objects to be detected, such as high-voltage power
lines, motor roads, railways and pipelines.
Winter and early spring Landsat images were less
informative and did not always allow an unambiguousdifferentiation between coniferous and deciduous
forests, especially in cases with a dense undergrowth
of spruce. Contours based on such images wasadjusted using medium-resolution summer images.
Scenes shot after the complete development of the
leafes in the canopies of birch and aspen stands madeit possible to avoid  underestimating of the amount of
deciduous forest.  The major criterion for interpretation
of winter images was the presence of an open snowcarpet, which clearly demarcated freshly cut areas,
burned-out tracts, swamps, frozen water bodies,
agricultural lands and various types of linearanthropogenic objects (fig. 40). Winter images were
used successfully to revise the edges of intact forest
landscapes to exclude fresh disturbances, but couldnot be used as the sole source of information for
drafting specific map segments.
For areas not covered by Landsat satellite images,
other high-resolution satellite images were used:
SPOT (1996) and MSU-E (1997-99). Both types of
images were visualized through standard colorsynthesis 3-2-1, 3 being the near infrared channel,
and the processing similar to that of Landsat images
(fig. 41). When using old (1996-97) images, thecontours obtained were verified repeatedly using
recent medium-resolution images (MSU-SK).INTERPRETATION
Expert visual interpretation was the major method of
interpreting satellite images.  Interpretation was
carried out in an ArcView GIS environment with the
simultaneous use of satellite images, results ofcartographic analysis, thematic hydrographic layers,
the road network, communities, and other
anthropogenic objects, drafted on the basis of generalgeographic maps (fig. 42). The chosen GIS allowed for
a rapid switch among various layers of data, changing
the color synthesis of interpreted satellite images andusing brightness histograms. ArcView was also used to
assess the area of the territory, to identify swamps and
woodless highlands, and to prepare the final maps for
Fig. 41. Drained parts (2) of a bog (1). Winter image from
Resurs MSU-E. Vologda Region, the Mokh bog. 2 Feb. 1997.2
122 2

37THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
publication.  The initial space image processing and
the georeferencing of scanned maps were made usingERDAS Imagine GIS.
The purpose of the interpretation was to identify areas
affected by rather strong and relatively recent
anthropogenic disturbances  (e.g. construction and
ploughing work, the building of pipelines and power
lines, logging, consequences of anthropogenic fires).
Different sets of identification criteria were used for
the three different types of land concerned: forest
ecosystems, wetland ecosystems, and unforested
highlands.
1. Forest ecosystems  occupy the largest portion of the
studied area and are characterized by the
predominance of coniferous forests with relatively
small deciduous outcroppings in the upper canopy.
The main kinds of  disturbance in forests remote from
permanent human infrastructure are logging and fire
(recently disturbed areas covered by grass, at times
with exposed mineral soil), changes in the species
composition (from coniferous to deciduous or mixed
coniferous-deciduous), and  intensive selective cuts,
sometimes associated with changes in ground cover .
Areas of this kind were identified based on
characteristics in color (relative spectral brightness in
the channels used), morphology (size and shape of
contours, peculiarities of borders and transition zones)
and texture (internal) associated with relatively
homogeneous, visually distinguishable landscape
contours. Color attributes were used to characterize
species composition (coniferous/deciduous ratio) and
ground vegetation (only in intensively thinned stands).
Morphological attributes were used in many cases: to
detect logged areas which regenerated without
notable change in species composition,  to distinguishbetween felled and burned areas, and to identify new
roads and pipelines and other anthropogenic objectsnot indicated on general geographic maps. Texture
characteristics were used in medium-resolution
images to identify secondary mixed forests and inhigh-resolution images to detect selectively cut areas
and ground fires.
Regrettably, analysis of satellite images cannot
determine the age of a stand. Significant errors may
therefore occur in the interpretation of disturbances  in
areas dominated by open forests formed by fire.Cartographic or field materials were therefore used to
support the interpretation in these rather rare cases. A
number of clearly identifiable disturbances were finallyadmitted into the category of intact landscape as
background disturbance, such as abandoned
meadows and fire scares not adjacent to moderninfrastructure.
2. Major disturbances of wetland ecosystems  include
the occurrence of transit roads, peat mining, ditching
and peat fires near infrastructure.  Areas adjacent to
sites of oil and gas extraction and associated pipelines
were considered disturbed and thus excluded fromconsideration.
3. Two kinds of anthropogenic disturbance are
common in the unforested highlands :  fragmentation
by transportation infrastructure, and sites of mining.Disturbed tracts were identified by color and
morphological criteria, as well as on the basis of expert
data. Significant inaccuracies may occur in thedelineation of river valleys disturbed by gold mining.
Grazing - mainly by reindeer - was considered
background disturbance for the purposes of this studyand was admitted into the intact category.
Fig. 42. Satellite image from Landsat ETM+ (left) and a map prepared on the basis of this image (right, intact forest shown in
green). Bogs located within the intact forest (shown in yellow) have been added using information from a topographical map.

38THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Intact forest
landscapes
Ground
verificationsites
Fig. 43. Location of key areas surveyed by field expeditions 1997-2001.FIELD DATA COLLECTION IN KEY AREAS
A significant amount of field work was carried out in
order to  guide and verify the mapping. Fieldwork was
located to edges of areas tentatively classified asintact based on medium resolution imagery, and also
to areas for which sufficient information for a
dependable classification was missing. Areas adjacentto intact areas were also described from the ground in
order to detect any mistakes in their classification. A
number of field expeditions were also made especiallyto disturbed areas for the same purpose.
Teams organized by Greenpeace Russia, Pushchino
State University, the Biodiversity Conservation Centerand the Socio-Ecological Union International carried
out field inventories between 1997 and 2000.  All
teams applied a uniform methodology for datacollection. Potentially intact areas located in the
vicinity of sources of disturbance such as
infrastructure, settlements and sourcing of wood wereexamined more intensively.  Potentially intact
landscapes along the northern forest boundary in
areas with scarce or no population were examined withless intensity, due to the lower probability of
disturbance. A total of 67 key areas were examined
(fig. 43).Within each key area or tract, an area of no less than
10,000 hectares was examined (with the exception ofkey areas located  within disturbed forest landscapes).
For each key area, a description was prepared of the
general state of human disturbance  as well as thecurrent character and condition of the landscape.
Additionally, a number of sample plots within each key
area were described in more detail. These sampleplots were located in different ecosystems,
representing different degrees of anthropogenic
influence (Fig. 44).  No less than 30 sample plots weredescribed for each key area. The location of each
sample plot was placed on a satellite image and used
as a reference for interpretation.  (For disturbed areasthis was done only in case an erroneous classification
of undisturbed area as disturbed was discovered.)
Certain key areas were made subject to more detailed
analysis with the purpose of identifying signs of past
activity  and reconstruction of the history of use in
certain parts. In particular , data were collected thatwould permit a reconstruction of the history of logging
during the preceding 100-120 years, based on growth
analysis of the current forest stand, the distribution of
deadwood in terms of decomposition stages and


39THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Votch
Fig. 44. Observations made on sample plots.Verkhnaya Votch
Sotchemuv
Dema
VozhdinErvel
Vol
VolRivers
RoadsSettlements:
Existing
AbandonedSample plotsSpruce-fir forestMixed spruce-birch-aspen forest
with pine and fir
Mixed aspen-birch-spruce forest
Mature pine forest
Young pine forestDeciduous reforestation on
clearcuts
Bogs
Fields and pastures
Fig. 45. Many ground verification sites were mapped in detail
using satellite images, field trips, and detailed descriptions ofkey plots. This map shows forest types and the location of keyplots in the upper part of river Vol (Komi Republic).Scale 1:250.000
species composition, the quantity and degree of
decomposition of  stumps and logging residue (Fig.
45). Traces of other forms of economic activity werealso identified and studied, such as agricultural
clearings, resin tapping, fires emanating from logging
sites dating back to the 19th and first half of the 20thcenturies and from former settlements, etc. Their
proliferation within potentially intact landscapes was
also assessed.  Similar studies were made in severalsmaller tracts of forest that had not been subject to
modern economic activity. This information was used
to determine the list of human disturbances that wereto be recognized as background effects, of no
significance to the identification of intact landscapes
for the purposes of this study  (see chapterBackground human influence ).


40THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
METHODOLOGY FOR THE IDENTIFICATION OF INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES
A stratified approach was used in the identification of
intact forest landscapes. The area under
consideration was successively reduced in three steps
or phases, while the amount and quality of informationfor the remaining area was increased. The purpose of
the first two phases was to exclude obviously
disturbed areas from further consideration usingoverview information. Phase one relied on available
maps and some medium-resolution satellite images
while phase two used two-season medium-resolutionsatellite images. This approach was chosen due to
financial constraints -  the budget did not allow the
purchase of high resolution imagery for the entire areaof study. Excluding a significant portion of northern
European Russia from the analysis based on less
costly information decreased the cost of the worksignificantly without reducing the detail or accuracy of
result.
Whenever unclear cases were encountered (e.g.
insufficient information to classify a road as belonging
to a particular category, or to establish the presence orabsence of logging in a particular tract), their
resolution was postponed until the subsequent, moredetailed phase. The methodology for each phase is
described below. Additional explanations with regard
to methodologies are given in the sectionsBackground human influence  and Materials and
sources of information .
Phase 1.
In the first phase, major roads, railroads, etc. were
used to divide the landscape into big fragments, usinggeneral maps and medium resolution satellite images.
The goal was to identify fragments greater than 50,000
hectares in size, the inside of which are free frommajor elements of infrastructure and potentially may
contain intact parts. M edium resolution satellite
images were used to exclude tundra areas.
General geographic regional maps in scales between
1:200,000 and 1:1,000,000, published between 1993and 1996, were used. These maps provided
information about communities, industrial facilities,
* This type of infrastructure was regarded as a significant disturbance factor only if it fully divides (cuts through) an other wise
undisturbed area, bordered by other types of infrastructure.
** In all cases, the buffer zones around these types of cities overlapped with buffer zones associated with other types of
infrastructure or with small landscape fragments bounded by such buffer zones.Table 1. Types of infrastructure considered in the first (overview) phase of work, and
corresponding buffer zones used along or around them (meters)


41THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
road networks and pipelines. While incomplete and
inaccurate, these maps were still sufficiently good forthe purposes of this phase, and their deficiencies were
compensated for by the use of more detailed
information at later stages.
This first analysis phase did not take into account
temporary winter roads and tractor (cross-country)
roads, or roads along the national border which are not
public. We considered navigable those segments ofrivers, lakes and artificial water reservoirs which were
indicated as such on maps with the scale of
1:1,000,000.The following tasks were carried out during the
first phase:
1. Digital mapping of infrastructure (as indicated in
table 1) over the entire territory under study as well as
an adjacent zone with a width of of at least 100
kilometers.
2. Drafting of buffer zones along the different elements
of infrastructure (table 1). The buffer zones were
established for different types of infrastructure by
estimating their respective minimal penetration of
disturbancies into the landscape. In case no estimate
Fig. 46. Types of infrastructure used in the first phase of the work (road
network, navigable waterways and lakes, and settlements).Severoonezhsk
PudozhShalskyPyalmaPovenets
Onega LakeVodlozero LakeKozhozero
LakeRiver OnegaBelomorsko-Baltiysky canal
Cities and settlements:
From 2 to 10 thousand inhabitants
Less than 2 thousand inhabitants
Roads:
Regional roads
Other public roads and land
management roads
Winter roadsRailroads:
Double track railroads
Single track and narrow-gauge railroads
Areas undivided and not directly affected
by permanently functioning roads and
settlements.Kargopol
Voloshka


42THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Fig. 47. The result of the first phase of the analysis: a map of large areas (greater than 50,000 hectares) in the forest zone of
northern European Russia (exluding the tundra zone) undivided and not directly affected by permanently functioning roadsand settlements.
was available a buffer zone of 500 meters was
established.
3. Mapping parcels outside the buffer zones and
excluding from further consideration those that do not
meet the predetermined size (50,000 hectares) and
width (10 kilometers) criteria.
4. Elimination of tundra and adjacent woodless
wetland and highland areas from the forest landscape
of study.  Narrow strips of forest (less than 2 kilometers
wide) were not considered to be  part of the forestzone.
The result of the first phase was a draft map of large
forest landscapes in European Russia located beyond
major elements of infrastructure. This area (the
remaining area of study) was no longer a single whole
landscape but rather a multitude of separate roadlessareas (Fig. 46, 47). Forty-four percent of the initial
area was eliminated at this stage.
Phase 2
In the second phase of the work, medium resolution
satellite images were used to exclude large areas
clearly disturbed by forestry, agriculture, etc.The goal of this phase was to eliminate areas where
disturbances could be positively identified in medium
resolution images.
At this stage, summer and winter medium-resolution
satellite images were used (Resurs MSU-SK) .
The second phase involved the following tasks:
1. Exclusion of areas disturbed by intensive forest
harvesting, as positively identified in medium-resolution satellite images. Recently cut areas and oldcut-overs were eliminated. Also eliminated were tractsof forest and other natural ecosystems with a width ofless than 2 kilometers, if located either among newand old cut-overs or among cut-overs that occur incombination with  infrastructure.
2. Exclusion of fire scars and young and middle-age
stands on growing old anthropogenic fire scars. Sincean unambiguous distinction between "anthropogenic"and "natural" fire scars cannot be made, a formaldecision rule was adopted. Fire scars  and forests ofearly successional stages adjacent to  infrastructure orother forms of anthropogenic disturbance wereclassified as anthropogenic. Blocks of other foresttypes and non-forest natural ecosystems were also

43THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Table 2. Interpretation characteristics of areas affected by different types of human influence, as observable in satellite ima ges of
medium resolution (paired summer and winter images).
excluded, if less than 2 kilometers wide and located
within areas of "anthropogenic" fire scars and forests
in early stages of post-fire rehabilitation.
3. Exclusion of areas which do not meet the minimum
requirements for area and width. Large undisturbed
areas connected with each other by a similarly
undisturbed isthmus were considered separate if the
width of the isthmus at any point was less than 2kilometers.
The result of this phase was that heavily disturbed
areas were excluded from further consideration. A
total of seventy-nine percent of the initially considered
territory was thus eliminated after two phases. Alltracts that could not be positively classified as

44THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Fig. 48. The result of the second phase of the work: a map of potentially intact forest landscapes.
Fig. 49. Boundary of
potentially intact forestlandscape (shown in red).Areas with clear evidence ofanthropogenic disturbancehave been eliminated, whileareas far away from sources ofpermanent human disturbancehave been retained. Mediumresolution satellite image(Resurs MSU-SK). Visible inthe image:1. Coniferous forest.2. Bogs.3. Secondary deciduousforest.4. Agricultural lands.5. Lake.
2 12
3
1 31
12
3
55
disturbed in this phase (due to inadequate resolution or
lack of ground data) were retained for further analysisin the next phase. The result of the  first two phaseswas a preliminary map of intact forest landscapes of
northern European Russia (Fig. 48).4
45

45THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Phase 3
In the third phase, high resolution satellite images
were used to exclude additional areas of intensive
economic activity and to establish the final boundariesof the intact forest landscapes.
The goal of this phase was to finalize the map by
excluding such disturbed areas as could be positively
identified in high-resolution images and by fine-tuningthe draft boundaries of intact areas.For this last phase, high-resolution (15-35 meters)
summer and winter images were used.
The third phase included the following tasks:
1. Exclusion of areas that could be positively identified
as disturbed on the basis of high-resolution satellite
images, such as logged areas, developed mineral
deposits, quarries, areas disturbed by intensive
geological exploration, drained swamps, agricultural
lands, and areas with buildings. As in the previous
Fig. 50. Establishing the final boundary of an intact forest landscape (shown in red), using high resolution satellite images
(1 - Landsat, 2 - Resurs MSU-E).12

46THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
phase, undisturbed areas less than 2 kilometers wide
were eliminated if located among disturbed areas.
2. Identification and exclusion of remaining anthropo-
genic fire scars and young and middle-aged forest
stands. To separate  "natural" and "anthropogenic" fire
scars, the rule employed in the second phase wasused.
3. Revise the location of roads, pipelines and other
elements of infrastructure, as well as the borders of
intact forest landscapes.4. Map elements of infrastructure that were not
previously identified and draft pertinent buffer zones.Not all elements of infrastructure were considered
significant disturbance. Presence of any of the
following types of infrastructure did not cause an areato be classified as disturbed:
tractor roads and temporary winter roads currently
out of use;
industrial roads (including special-purpose roads,
which are not public), which do not connect
sources of disturbance with each other .
Fig. 51. Part of an intact forest area in a high-resolution satellite image (Landsat). Shown by numbers: 1. Coniferous forest.
2. Bogs. 3. Lakes. 4. Recent clearcuts. 5. Secondary deciduous forest. 6. Agricultural lands (hay fields).21
1
2
355
133
445
54
64

47THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Table 3. Interpretation characteristics of different types of area disturbed by human influence, as
observable in high resolution satellite images (mostly summer images).


48THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Fig. 54. The result of the third and final phase of the analysis: a map of large intact forest landscapes
(greater than 50,000 hectares) of northern European Russia.5. Exclude remaining areas which do not fit the
minimum criteria for area and width. As in the previousphase, undisturbed areas connected by similarlyundisturbed isthmuses were considered separate if the
1
24
3
1
Fig. 53. Area of intact forest landscapes (4) and the areas
eliminated as either disturbed or tundra during the threephases of the project (1-3, respectively).Fig. 52. Area of intact forest landscapes, the boundaries of
which were determined from satellite images of highresolution (1. Landsat ETM+, 2. SPOT HRV, 3. Resurs MSU-E)and medium resolution (4.Resurs MSU-SK).42
High-resolution images: Medium-resolution images:
Landsat, ETM+ Resurs, MSU-E                 SPOT, HRV Resurs, MSU-SK3
The sources of satellite imagery used to determine the final boundaries is indicated by different colors:width of the isthmus at any point was less than 2
kilometers.
This phase produced the final version of the map
(Fig. 54).

49THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
While we believe this study is a useful step towards
identifying the last wilderness land of Europe, it mustbe pointed out that the resulting map has a number oflimitations. These are due to  insufficient information,to the low quality of the images for some areas, and toinaccuracies inherent in the methods employed. Thelimitations and deficiencies of the map are furtherdescribed below.
1. There is a certain degree of subjectivity in
boundaries across transition zones. Two cases are ofparticular importance.
1a. The transition from forest across forest-tundra to
tundra (and also to alpine ecosystems adjacent to thelatter) is extremely gradual. In some cases it stretchesfor several dozen kilometers, without any conspicuousthreshold. In such cases the demarcation between"forest" and "non-forest" is arbitrary and the decisionon where to place the boundary may depend on thequality and season of the image used as well as theformal decision criterion employed. The northernboundaries of intact forest landscapes are allvulnerable to this kind of subjectivity.
1b. The transition from intact to disturbed forest
landscape may also be gradual. In most cases this isnot the case - the boundary clearly suggests itself, dueto the absolute predominance (in the least populatedareas) of logging in primary forest over the last sixdecades. However , in some forests (especially thosesubject to the most intensive logging during the first
half of the 20th century), there is a clearly developedgradual transition from greater to lesser disturbance. Inthese cases, the border of intact areas was mapped onthe basis of change in predominant tree species.
2. Some of the satellite images were of inadequate
quality and resolution in relation to the analysis forwhich they were used:
2a. The northern boundaries of intact forest
landscapes (fig. 54) were drawn often from medium-resolution images (Resurs, 150 meters per pixel). Asthese areas are virtually uninhabited and show nosigns  of industrial development, the resultinginaccuracy may be considered relatively unimportant.In the scale of the maps printed in this atlas(1:1,500,000) it is not significant.
2b. For some parts of the territory, pairs of medium-
resolution 2000 images and high-resolution 1997-1999
images were used  (no high-resolution images wereavailable for the year 2000). When such image pairswere used, minor shifts in boundaries occurringbetween 1997 and 2000 may have been overlookedand thus may not be reflected on the map. Only asmall fraction of the boundaries were mapped on this
basis (fig. 52, 54), and the vast majority of these areas
of concern with a very slow rate of  exploitation of new
natural areas (such as wetlands in the southern and
middle zones of the taiga, surrounded by areas logged
in the preceding decades, and the most remote
wooded and waterlogged areas of the northern taiga).
The possible  inaccuracies can be considered
negligible given the scope of this research. However ,
when detailed maps (1:200,000 or greater) are drafted
for the purpose of economic decision-making for
specific areas, such inaccuracies should be corrected
where possible.
2c. For part of the territory, for lack of other images,
Landsat ETM+ high-resolution images were used that
were known to contain distortions by atmospheric
conditions, specifically mists or scattered cloud cover .
This is true for the eastern part of the Kola Peninsula,
and the eastern slope of the Urals within the Khanty-
Mansi Autonomous District. The inaccuracies in which
the boundaries of intactness have been mapped may
be greater for these areas than the average for the
map as a whole.
3. The use of identical criteria of disturbance for the
entire region under study  - from the southern taiga to
pre-tundra taiga. On the one hand, the use of
standardized criteria made it possible to  strictly
formalize the identification of intact forest landscapes
and assess the degree of degradation of the natural
taiga cover in various regions of the taiga zone. On the
other , due to the same identical criteria, the analysis of
the southern taiga regions did not allow some
interesting areas to be shown on the map, such as
some large uninhabited and unfragmented areas with a
rather low degree of human disturbance (e.g. subject
to unsystematic logging in the 1950’s and 1960’s but
not affected by economic activities since). In addition,
valuable intact areas of less than 50,000 hectares
were not identified in this project. Areas whose value
depend on other characteristics than intactness were
also not identified.  Thus, when regional systems of
protected areas are designed, it is necessary to rely on
other sources in addition to  this one in order to fully
assess the conservation value of individual areas. The
results of this analysis are best used as input to the
process of planning the protection of intact natural
landscapes,   particularly  in the northernmost regions
of European Russia including the Karelia and Komi
Republics, the Murmansk and Arkhangelsk Regions,
and the northern part of Perm Region.
4. Uncertainty in the knowledge base guiding the
choice of minimum viable area. The authors selected
50,000 ha relying heavily on expert opinion. This issueneeds to be addressed further in future work.LIMITATIONS AND DEFICIENCIES OF THE MAP OF INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES

50TIMBER RESOURCES
OF REMAINING INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES
Forest
Bogs
Tree-less
mountainareasMain land
categories:
Fig. 55. The main land categories of intact forest landscapes.
Despite the seemingly immense area of intact forest
landscapes in northern European Russia, totaling 31.7
million hectares, timber resources are relatively smalland hard to access.  A significant proportion of timberstands has already been excluded from exploitation bybeing designated as Group I forests (in the category of"pre-tundra  forests"). Even those tracts which in
theory are available for industrial exploitation are infact difficult to access economically due to significantswampiness, low stocking and poor timber quality.
The 52 percent of intact forest landscapes that are
pre-tundra forests are already exempt from industrial
use by designation as first-group forests (in theabsence of formal protection status they are often
considered simply as wastelands).  About 20 percent of
the intact area is made up of treeless wetlands andwater bodies (Fig. 55, 56), including the10.2 percent
of the intact area that does not formally belong to the
pre-tundra  forests. Alpine treeless areas (primarily in
the zone of pre-tundra forests) occupy another 2.6percent of the intact area.  Only 41 percent of the
intact forest landscapes are proper forests, located
south of the pre-tundra  forests.  These forests are
difficult to access, which provides the most likely
reason why they have survived as intact areas.  The
high level of swamping and natural fragmentation haskept development out (Fig. 55).  The low average
stocking (Fig. 59) and low potential increment (Fig. 58)
make cost-effective sustainable forestry an unlikelyprospect.  Commercial interest is also kept down by
the low timber quality:  stem decay is common, the
northern climate keeps the trees small and thefrequency of cull trees significant. The low degree of
commercial attractiveness is supported by the
assessment of current logging intensity in the vicinityof intact forest landscapes (table 4).  The logging
intensity is even lower than in the largely depleted,
long ago accessed and logged forests of borealEuropean Russia. Only a few intact forest landscapes,
mainly the southernmost ones, are of notable
significance to modern forestry.

51THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
LOGGING INTENSITY IN THE VICINITY OF REMAINING INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES
The level of threat to remaining intact forest
landscapes depends largely on the extent to whichthey are needed to supply wood to the forest industry.A study was therefore made of the logging intensity in
the vicinity of these landscapes.
Recent logging activities within a 2-kilometer wide
buffer zone around each individual intact area were
studied (for those areas for which the necessary pair ofsatellite images were available). Logging sites that
were active from around mid-1999 till mid-2000 were
identified. The result was adjusted to reflect the lengthof the inter-image period, as this was different for
different intact areas.  The studied areas are shown in
Fig. 57.
The study was carried out for the Republics of Komi
and Karelia, and for the Arkhangelsk and Perm
Regions. Murmansk Region could not be studied dueto the relatively low quality of available Landsat ETM+
images and the type of logging activity there: small
clear cuts, unsystematic selective salvage cuts, andsilvicultural cuts with diffuse borders. The Nenetsky
Autonomous Region was also excluded from the study
due to the absence of industrial felling there.Remaining regions were excluded because the
unsystematic types of logging that are common there
were difficult to delineate given the resolution ofavailable satellite images. Besides, in these southern-
most regions intact forest landscapes are made up
mostly of wetlands which have been logged up untilthe very edge of the peat deposits. In these cases the
intensity of logging near the borders is not a relevant
measure of significance to the forest industry.
The width of the buffer zone was determined so as to
reflect  conditions of transportation access similar to
those at the edges of intact areas. Another factordetermining the width of the buffer zone was the need
to significantly exceed the greatest linear size of an
individual logging site. Inaccuracies in the threatassessment due to technical logging constraints (e.g.
logging temporarily not taking place in an area due to
the need for a time lag between adjacent logging sites)could thereby be avoided.
Logging intensity was assessed according to the
following procedure:
1. A buffer zone of 2 kilometers was drafted along the
outer edges  of an intact forest landscape.
2. A pair of satellite images were selected for each
buffer segment: a Landsat ETM+ image taken
approximately in July 2000 and a Resurs MSU-SK
image taken approximately in July 1999.
3. Logging sites conducted during this period were
identified for each segment of the buffer zone. Theedges and the area of a specific plot were determined
from Landsat ETM+ images, whereas Resurs MSU-SK
images were used to establish precisely which plotshad been logged during the interimage period. For
active sites already partially cut at the time the ResursThe results ( see below ) suggest that even full
protection of intact forest landscapes will not cause
any critical detriment to Russian forest industry
(although it may certainly have a considerable effect
on individual logging companies). The share of timberlogged in the vicinity of the remaining intact forest
landscapes may be estimated (in the period following
the 1998 crisis) at not more than 10 percent of thetotal volume logged  in the regions of Northern
European Russia. Only in the Arkhangelsk Region may
the share be greater than 10 percent.
Thus, a hypothetical exclusion of these areas from
exploitation is unlikely to cause any major
consequences for the forest industry at the level ofnorthern European Russia as a whole. At the same
time, the continued exploitation of these forests as it is
currently practiced may deprive Russian timberproducers of access to environmentally concerned
markets in Western Europe. The value of such a loss
would be considerably higher than the loss incurred byexcluding the intact forest landscapes from further
commercial exploitation.
51 432
Fig. 56. Area relationship among the main land categories
within the remaining intact forest landscapes: 1. Closedforest. 2. Tree-less mountain areas. 3. Bodies of water.4. Tree-less bogs. 5. Forested bogs.
For these reasons, preserving the intact forest
landscapes appears to be important also for the
environmental integrity of these areas and the longterm marketability of the Russian timber exports.

52THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Table 4. Intensity of logging within the 2-kilometer zone immediately outside the areas of intact forest landscape
in the Karelia and Komi Republics, Arkhangelsk and Perm Regions.image was made, the edges and area of the logging
site were determined so as to exclude the areasalready cut. The maximum total inaccuracy in
determining the size of these logging sites, given the
used resolution of images (Landsat ETM+), was – 11.5percent.
4. Logging sites were classified with regard to the type
of cut and reliability of the identification. Many logging
sites could be positively identified as clearcuts (i.e.
the Landsat ETM+ images contained structural andtextural characteristics specific to clear cuts); such
sites made up 79.1 percent of the total area cut.  A
small number of selectively cut areas of various typeswere also identified, including the first stages of
shelterwood cuts. The average intensity of cut for sites
of selective and partial cuts  was estimated at 50percent. The area of in-woods landings and processing
sites is included in this estimate.  In a few specific
cases, logging sites classified as doubtful were alsoincluded. These were areas which may have been
either clearcuts or wind-throws. A correction factor of
0.5 was applied to these areas (i.e. they were includedin the category of selectively cut areas).  The maximum
error possible in the area of estimation, taking into
account errors caused by the resolution of the imagesand the assumption made,  was – 10.4 percent.  The
maximum total error in the estimate of the logged area
does not exceed 23 percent. This error estimate takesinto account the resolution of the images used and all
assumptions made. An error of 23 percent or less can
be considered acceptable for the purposes of thisstudy.
5. The estimate of logged area was adjusted to reflect
a period of one year . The logged area of each segment
of a buffer zone was divided with the time period
between the images used to assess it, expressed inyears. Seasonal differences in logging intensity could
not be taken into account due to absence ofinformation. The possible error should be insignificant,
however , as the period between images was close to
one year in all cases (10-14 months).
6. Logging intensity was calculated in cubic meters
per hectare and year for the entire buffer zone.  The
area estimate was multiplied with regionally specificestimates of the average stock of exploitable mature
and overmature stands. The resulting estimate of
annually logged volume is probably somewhat toohigh. The areas remaining as intact landscapes tend to
have a lower stocking than the regional average due to
a high proportion of bogs, low productivity, and alocation in the north of the area to  which the regional
average applies. This applies specificially to  the Komi
Republic and the Arkhangelsk and Perm Regions).
7. The proportion of the total wood supply in each
region that comes from the buffer zones around intact
forest landscapes was calculated.
The results are shown in Table 4.
It must be noted that the results represent a time of
high  profitability of logging and of the forest industry in
general, due to the devaluation of the ruble in 1998.
The intensity of roadbuilding and logging in remoteareas grew rapidly in comparison to the mid-1990’s.
After the end of this period (approximately since
August 2000) the intensity of roadbuilding and logginghas gone down in many areas. The result of this study
therefore represents  a situation of maximum logging
pressure in the remote regions of northern EuropeanRussia, and thus also in the vicinity of intact forest
landscapes. It is likely that the role of these areas in
the regional wood supply will decrease significantly inthe near future.


53THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Fig. 57. Buffer zones, 2 km wide, around intact forest landscapes. Areas shown in red were analyzed for evidence of recent logg ing,
whereas areas shown in blue were not analyzed for lack of data (Komi and Karelia Republics, Arkhangelsk and Perm Regions only).
The result shows the rate of logging in the vicinity of
intact forest landscapes to be rather small in all the
four studied regions, varying within the limits of 1.3
percent of the total harvest in the Komi Republic and
9.8 percent in the Arkhangelsk Region. The low
intensity in the Komi and Karelia Republics and in
Perm Region is due to the general remoteness of the
remaining intact areas. The very reason they have
survived as intact is the low profitability of logging and
other utilization.  The low volume of logging in the
buffer zones of Karelia is due in part to the moratorium,
in force since 1997 and supported by some Russian
and foreign companies, on purchasing old-growth
timber there. In Arkhangelsk Region too the intact
forest landscapes that have  remained are in very
remote areas. However , the extreme depletion of the
forest resource base in other parts of the region is
forcing industry to go after even the most remote and
economically inaccessible areas. A fact of essential
importance is that the intensity of logging in three of
the four regions is greater in the already developed
parts than in the near intact parts. Thus, the forests
around the remaining intact forest landscapes, due to
their inaccessibility, are of less interest to the forest
industry than the forests in other parts of these
regions.The results suggests the conclusion that the intact
forest landscapes still remaining in the Karelia andKomi Republics and in the Perm Region are of smallimportance to the regional supply of wood and,consequently, that a exclusion of these areas fromthe exploitable land base would not cause anysignificant decrease in the annual logging volume,at least not in the near future. For the Komi andKarelia Republics and the Perm Region, such adecrease would be no greater than a small percentof the annually logged volume. Only in theArkhangelsk Region might a withdrawal of theremaining intact areas from the exploitablelandbase cause a more significant decrease(around 10 percent  of the volume logged, or slightlymore). In no case can the decreases be regarded ascritical. The variation in the volume logged duringthe last decade is many times greater than thesereductions. Thus, a withdrawal of the remainingintact forest landscapes in northern EuropeanRussia from the exploitable landbase would notcause  any significant economic damage and may
even be justified from an economic point of view.

54THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
less then 0,5
0,6 - 1,0
1,1 - 2,0
2,0 - 3,0Mean site
productivity, m3/ha
Fig. 58. Mean annual increment for coniferous species in remaining intact forest
FOREST PRODUCTIVITY IN REMAINING INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES
One of the factors determining the attractiveness and
suitability of an forest area for sustainable use is its
productivity. The  productivity of the remaining intact
forest landscapes was therefore assessed.
The  productivity assessment relied on official data
from the forest administration in Russia, based on
forest inventory data. Unfortunately, the latest
available official data at the regional level were
published nearly thirty years ago ( Forest Atlas of the
USSR, 1973 ). However , forest productivity (potential
forest increment) changes very slowly over time,
especially in such areas where no forest management
is taking place. The latest official data were therefore
used.preserved mainly in the areas with the least site
productivity for tree growth. Thus, 87 percent of the
remaining intact areas have an average increment for
coniferous trees of less than 1 m3 per hectare per year
(including the 18 percent of the area which has an
average annual increment of less than 0.5 m3 per
hectare). The experience of some foreign countries
indicate that sustainable forestry in such areas cannot
be justified. The Forestry Act of Sweden , for example,
stipulates that:  "... Land shall be considered suitable
for wood production if, on the basis of accepted
principles of assessment, it can provide an average
yield of at least one cubic meter of stem wood per
hectare per annum"  (Article 2 ). Thus, a major part of
the remaining intact forest landscapes are unsuitable
for production forestry.  Any profitable forestry in these
areas is likely to be based on the "cut-and-run"
principle, i.e. the mining approach to forestry which  is
long  established in northern European Russia. Even
such shortsighted use may prove unprofitable,
however , due to low stocking levels ( see next section )
and the fragmentation of the forest by bogs in many
areas.A comparison of the map of remaining intact forest
landscapes with the map of potential coniferous forest
increment shows that  intact ecosystems have beenThe remaining  intact forest landscapes are
made up of the least productive forests of
European Russia. This is the very reason they
remain intact.

55THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
 less then 100
101 - 150
151 - 200Total inventory of
stemwood, m3/ha
Fig. 59. Total standing volume of stemwood in remaining intact forest landscapes.
TIMBER STOCK IN REMAINING INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES
Another factor that determines the attractiveness of
an area for exploitation is the amount of forest there,
i.e. the level of stocking. The latest available regional
estimates of stocking are more than 30 years old
(Forest Atlas of the USSR, 1973 ). No logging has taken
place in the intact areas, however , and the forests are
mostly of the kind which is in approximate equilibrium
over time. Any changes should therefore be small.
The map of remaining  intact forest landscapes was
compared with the official map of stocking levels. The
result shows that a significant part (56 percent) of the
intact areas have an average standing  inventory of
less than a hundred cubic meters per hectare.
Exploitation of forests with such low levels of stocking
can rarely be justified economically, especially if
extensive road building is required.Forests with an inventory greater than a hundred cubic
meters per hectare make up the other 44 percent ofthe remaining intact forest landscapes. Three quartersof this area are in low-productivity forests in whichsubstantial timber reserves have accumulated overseveral hundred years, due to the long lifespan of the
major species. Only 11 percent of the intact forest
landscapes are forests in which reasonably highstocking levels (more than 100 m
3 per hectare)
combined with a reasonably high level of productivity(more than 1 m
3 per hectare per year) to justify
sustainable forestry operations.  A significant part of
these areas contain technical obstacles to
exploitation, due to their location in areas which areeither heavily boggy or mountainous.Only 13 percent of the remaining intact forest
landscapes are in areas with a potential coniferousincrement greater than 1 m
3 per hectare per year .
More than 75 percent of these forests are locatedeither in boggy areas or inaccessible forests  of thewestern slopes of the Ural mountains. Thus, the
remaining  intact forest landscapes are made up ofthe least productive forests of European Russia. Thisis the very reason they remain intact.

56CONCLUSION
Northern European Russia still contains a number of
large areas of intact natural boreal forest (or taiga)
landscapes. These landscapes retain natural valuesthat have been lost or diminished in developed areas.
Among them are populations of large animals that are
particularly sensitive to human influence, undisturbedwatersheds around small and medium-size rivers,
swamps and lakes, migration paths of many species,
and balanced patterns of random disturbances. Thevery size of these areas is key to the preservation of
many of these values, as only a sufficiently large
territory can insulate the intact natural ecosystemsfrom disturbing "edge effects" from surrounding areas.
Most of the forest landscape has been fragmented by
infrastructure, and the once intact forest within these
fragments has been replaced by secondary forest.
These changes are not yet well understood by science.Preserving the ecological integrity of the last
remaining large intact natural surroundings is not only
a measure of reasonable caution but also aninvestment that will allow future scientists to observe
and learn more about the nature of boreal ecosystems.
Withdrawing remaining intact areas from the
production base would lead to some economic loss.
This loss appears to be small, however . Most of these
areas are remote and their exploitation is fraught withtechnical obstacles  this is indeed the reason why
they remain intact. The threat to these areas is caused
not by their inherent commercial attractiveness, butrather by depletion of the more attractive forest
resources in other parts of northern European Russia.
There is a risk that these areas will become subject to"cut-and-run" forest practices, as the return on
investment in active reforestation and silviculture in
these remote and low-productivity areas will be lowand distant indeed.
Conservation of large intact natural forest landscapes
is an important and necessary component of a general
conservation strategy, but it is not by itself sufficient.
Many ecosystems have already been disturbed to thepoint where only small fragments, or nothing at all,
remains.  Mapping of these ecosystem residuals was
outside the scope of this study, but is an important taskfor the future.
Efforts have been made to preserve some of the most
valuable of the remaining intact natural landscapes,
and proposals for several new national parks exist:
Kutsa and Hibiny (Murmansk Region), Kalevalsky(Karelia Republic) and Onezhskoye Pomorye
(Arkhangelsk Region). Unfortunately, all of them
appear to be frozen in the administration of theregional governments. Meanwhile, logging continues
in the vicinity of some of the most valuable areas:
between the Severnaya Dvina and the Pinega rivers,
between the Pinega and the Vashka rivers, and in theclose vicinity of the national parks Vodlozersky,
Paanajarvi and others. Geological surveying and
mining activities have increased sharply in the Timan,the Ural mountains, and the Pre-Ural Region.
The devaluation of the ruble following the 1998
financial crisis has made it very profitable to extract
raw materials for export.  The rate of exploitation has
grown steeply, reaching its highest levels in a decade.Remaining intact forests face a real threat of
destruction and protective measures are urgently
needed if these areas are to remain intact. All levels ofgovernment need to get rapidly involved in this
discussion, along with local forestry agencies,
industrial enterprises and the citizens of Russia. In theend, only a collective effort, supported by society as a
whole, can sustain the existence of the last surviving
fraction of natural taiga in European Russia. Thealternative would be sad indeed: the loss of the last
large wilderness areas of Europe.
Fig. 60. Intact forests of Nothern Urals. Perm Region.
Photo by P. Potapov

57Aleshinsky N.A. Podsotchka lesa. [Tapping the forest for resin]. Moscow: Lesnaya
promyshlennost, 1974. 180 pp. In Russian
Alexeev S.V ., Molchanov A.A. Sploshnye rubki na Severe. [Clearcuts in the North of
Russia.] Vologda. 1938. 133 pp. In Russian.
Alexeev S.V., Molchanov A.A. Vyborotchnye rubki v lesah Severa. [Selective cuttings
at the North of Russia.] Moscow: Akademiya Nauk publishing house, 1954. 148 pp. In
Russian.
Angelstam P ., Rosenberg P ., Rulcker C. Natural forest fire dynamics can guide
conservation and silviculture in boreal forests //SkogForsk. results, 1994, „2, pp.
1-20.
Angelstam P .K. Maintaining and restoring biodiversity in European boreal forests by
developing natural disturbance regimes //Journal of Vegetation Science, 1998, vol.
9, pp. 593-602.
Aksenov D., Karpatchevsky M., Lloyd S., Yaroshenko A. The last of the last. The old-
growth forests of boreal Europe. TRN, 1999, 67pp.
Arnold F .K. Instruktsiya dlya ustroystva lesov vedomstva Ministerstva
Gosudarstvennyh Imushtchestv. [Instruction for inventory for the forests of the
Ministry of Government Property] //Lesnoi zhurnal, 1884. „11. pp. 603-621. In
Russian.
Arnold F .K. Sposoby prodazhi lesa. [Marketing of forest products] //Lesnoi zhurnal,
1884. „ 7-8. In Russian.
Atlas Komi SSSR. [Atlas of the Komi Republic] Moscow, GUGK, 1964. 112 pp. In
Russian.
Avdeev A.N. V lesah Novgorodtchiny. Kratkiy ocherk istorii razvitiya lesnykh
otnosheniy i nauki o lese na Novgorodskoy zemle. [In the forests of Novgorod. Brief
history of forestry and forest science in the Novgorod region.] Staraya Russa 1998.
176 pp. In Russian.
Baranov N.I. Uslovno-sploshnye rubki kak sredstvo polucheniya potrebnoy drevesiny.
[Selective removal clearcuts as a tool for producing marketable timber] Leningrad,
1957. 3 pp. In Russian.
Barthod C. Criteria and indicators for sustainable temperate forest management -
1992 to 1996 //Unasylva, 49, 1998, pp. 53-56.
Belov S.V . T eoreticheskie osnovy spektrozonalnoy aerofotosemki rastitelnosti [A
theoretical basis for multi-band aerial imaging of vegetation] //Printsipy i metody
geobotanitcheskogo kartografirovaniya. M-L, 1962, pp. 237-243. In Russian.
Bengtsson J., Nilsson S., Franc A., Menozzi P . Biodiversity, disturbances,
ecosystem function and management of European forests //Forest ecology and
management, 132, 2000, pp. 39-50
Berg B. Litter decomposition and organic matter turnover in northern forest soils //
Forest ecology and management, 133, 2000, pp. 13-22
Bitrikh A. Ocherk lesov Ust-Sysolskogo uezda. [The forests of the Ust-Sysola
district] //Lesnoy zhurnal. 1908. „ 4-5. pp. 441-464. In Russian.
Boguslavskiy O.B. Lesnoe khozyaistvo v ustroennykh dachakh kazennykh Uralskikh
gornykh zavodov. [Forest management in the regulated forests of the Ural iron
factories] //Lesnoy zhurnal. 1912. „ 6-7. pp. 792-807. „ 10. pp. 1249-1283. In
Russian.
Bokov V .E. Derevoobrabatyvayushchaya promyshlennost v Permskoy gubernii. [Timber
processing in the Perm region]. Perm, 1899. 354 pp. In Russian.
Bondartseva M.A. Ekologo-biologicheskie zakonomernosti funktsionirovaniya
ksilotrofnykh bazidiomitsetov v lesnykh ekosistemakh. [Eco-biological functional
conditions of xsylotrophic basidiomycetes in forest ecosystems] //Gribnye
soobshchestva lesnykh ekosistem. Petrozavodsk, 2000, pp. 9-25.
Borodin I.P . Okhrana pamyatnikov prirody. [Protection of nature reserves]. //Lesnoy
zhurnal. 1911. „ 1-2. pp. 69-93. In Russian.
Bulatov V .N. Russkiy Sever . Kn. 1. Zavolochie. [The Russian North. Book 1 -
Zavolochie]. Arkhangelsk, 1997. 352 pp. In Russian.
Bulatov V .N. Russkiy Sever . Kn. 2. Vstrech solntsa. [The Russian North. Book 2 -
Towards the Sun]. Arkhangelsk, 1998. 352 pp. In Russian.
Bulatov V .N. Russkiy Sever . Kn. 3. Pomore. [The Russian North. Book 3 - Pomorie].
Arkhangelsk, 1999. 336 pp. In Russian.
Bykov P .N. Sovremennoe sostoyanie lesnogo khozyaistva [The current state of the
forestry industry] //Trudy Gosplana SSSR, kn. 6, „. 2. Lesnye bogatstva SSSR. M.,
1925, pp. 44-79. In Russian.APPENDIX  A
LITERATURE CITED
Chernov N.N. Kratkaya istoriya lesokulturnogo dela na Urale. [A brief history ofartificial reforestation in the Urals]. Ekaterinburg, 1995. In Russian.
Convention on biological diversity. T ext and annexes. ICAO, Canada, 2000. 34 pp.
Danilik V .N., Makarenko G.P ., Murzaeva M.K., T erinov N.I., Tolkach O.V . Osnovy
sokhraneniya sredy pri ispolzovanii i vosproizvodstve lesov Urala. [Environmental
protection in the context of forest utilization and reforestation in the Ural Mountains]
//Ekologicheskie osnovy ratsionalnogo ispolzovaniya i vosproizvodstva lesov Urala:
informatsionnye materialy. Sverdlovsk, 1986. pp. 17-19. In Russian.
Daulis E.P ., Zhirin V .M., Sukhikh V .I., Elmen R.I. Distantsionnoe zondirovanie v lesnom
khozyaistve. [Remote sensing in forestry]. M, 1989, 223 s. In Russian.
Denisov V .I. Lesa Rossii, ikh ekspluatatsiya i lesnaya torgovlya. [Russian forests,
forest industry and timber trade]. SPb., 1911. 167 pp. In Russian.
Dinamika lesov, nakhodyashchikhsya v vedenii lesnykh organov, po osnovnym
lesoobrazuyushchim porodam za 1966-1988 gg. (bez lesov, peredannykh v
dolgosrochnoe polzovanie). [The dynamics of forest resources by main species
groups during 1966-1988]. Moscow, 1989. 160 pp. In Russian.
Dolukhanov P .M. Paleolandshafty i drevnee zaselenie territorii severo-zapada
Evropeiskoy chasti SSSR. [Paleolandscapes and ancient colonisation in
Northwestern European Russia]. //Paleogeografiya ozernykh i morskikh basseinov
severo-zapada SSSR v pleistotsene. Leningrad, 1989. pp. 80-91. In Russian.
Dvukhsotletie lesnogo departamenta. [Two hundred years of the Forest Department].
Moscow, 1998. 243 pp. In Russian.
Dyrenkov S.A. Struktura i dinamika taezhnykh elnikov. [Structure and dynamics of
taiga spruce forests]. Leningrad, 1984. 174 pp. In Russian.
Dyrenkov S.A., Avdeev A.N. Proshloe i nastoyashchee shirokolistvennykh lesov
Novgorodskoy oblasti [Past and present of the hardwood forests of the Novgorod
region]. //Bulleten Moskovskogo obshchestva ispytatelei prirody. Otd. biol. 1989. T .
94.„ 4. pp. 89-101. In Russian.
Dyrenkov S.A., Chertov O.G., Kobak E.O., Shergold O.E., Kanisev G.N. Struktura i
dinamika nenarushennykh drevostoev sredne- i yuzhnotaezhnykh elnikov Permskoy
oblasti. [Structure and dynamics of intact spruce stands of the Perm region]. //Lesa
Urala i khozyaistvo v nikh. Sbornik trudov Uralskoy LOS VNIILM. „ 5. 1970. pp. 71 -
74. In Russian.
Dyrenkov S.A., Shergold O.E., Kanisev G.N., Voronova O.I., Zhebryakov V .N.
Opredelitel i shchema tipov lesa dlya taezhnoy zony Permskoy oblasti. Prakticheskie
rekomendatsii. [Forest types in the taiga part of the Perm region]. Leningrad, 1977.
51 pp. In Russian.
Egorov, forester . O budushchnosti lesov Arkhangelskoy gubernii v svyazi s
sushchestvuyushchimi priemami lesnogo khozyaistva. [On the future of the forests of
the Arkhangelsk region in the light of current forestry practices]. //Lesnoy zhurnal,
„ 6-7, 1915. In Russian.
Elshin S.V . Prostranstvennaya neodnorodnost ekologicheskikh usloviy na vyrubkakh
elnikov yuzhnoy taigi. [Spatial heterogeneity of ecological conditions in southern
taiga spruce forests]. //Ekologicheskie osnovy ratsionalnogo ispolzovaniya i
vosproizvodstva lesov Urala: informatsionnye materialy. Sverdlovsk, 1986. pp. 64-66.
In Russian.
Ezhegodnik Statisticheskogo upravleniya Avtonomnoy KSSR (year 1928). [Annual
report of the committee of statistics for the Karelian Republic], „3, 1928.
Petrozavodsk, 1929.
Faas V .V . Kratkiy obzor lesov Rossii i ee lesnoy torgovli i promyshlennosti. [Breef
overview of Russian forests, timber trade and industry]. 1913. 18 pp. In Russian.
Faas V .V . Lesa Severnogo raiona i ikh ekspluatatsiya. [The forests of the North and
their exploitation]. M-Petrograd, 1922. 380 pp. In Russian.
Faas V .V . Russkaya eksportnaya lesnaya torgovlya i rol v nei lesov severa Evropeiskoy
Rossii. [The foreign timber trade of Russia and the role of the forests of northernEuropean Russia]. Petrograd, 1917. 67 pp. In Russian.
Franklin J.F ., Cromack K., Denison W., McKee A., Maser C., Sedell J., Swanson F .,
Yuday G. Ecological characteristics of old-growth douglas-fir forests. USDA forest
service, Pacific Northwest research station, General technical report PNW-118,
1981, 49 pp.
Fridman J., Walheim M. Amount, structure and dynamics of dead wood on managed
forestland in Sweden //Forest ecology and management, 131, 2000, pp. 23-36
Furyaev V .V . Rol pozharov v protsesse lesoobrazovaniya. [The role of fires in the
process of forest succession]. Novosibirsk, 1996. 251 pp. In Russian.

58THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Gaines W., Harrod R.J., Lehmkuhl J.F . Monitoring biodiversity: quantification and
interpretation. USDA forest service, Pacific Northwest research station, Generaltechnical report PNW-GTR-443, 1999, 28 pp.
Galasjev V .A. (ed.). Lesa i lesnaya promyshlennost Komi ASSR. [The forests and
forest industry of the Komi Republic]. M-L, 1961. 359 pp. In Russian.
Gardiner B.A., Quine C.P . Management of forests to reduce the risk of abiotic damage
- a review with particular reference to the effects of strong winds //Forest ecology
and management, 135, 2000, pp. 261-277
Glushkov N.N., Dolbilin I.P ., Venterev V .I., Tishalev F .S. Lesa Urala. [The forests of
Ural]. Sverdlovsk, 1948. 227 pp. In Russian.
Godzishevskiy E.A. Russkiy les na mirovom rynke. [The Russian forest at the world
market]. M., 1924. 57 pp. In Russian.
Golutvin V .S. Rezultaty aeroseva eli na garyakh i vyrubkakh zapadnogo sklona
Srednego Urala. [Airplane dispersal of spruce seeds over burned and clearcut areas
in the Western Ural Mountains]. //Trudy instituta biologii UFAN. „ 16. 1960. pp. 159-
162. In Russian.
Gorchakovskiy P .L. T emnokhvoynaya taiga Srednego Urala i prilegayushchei chasti
Severnogo Urala. [Spruce and fir forests of Middle Ural and adyacent parts of
Northern Ural]. //Materialy po klassifikatsii rastitelnosti Urala. Sverdlovsk, 1959.
pp. 18-22. In Russian.
Gribova S.A. (ed.). Karta vosstanovlennoy rastitelnosti tsentralnoy i vostochnoy
Evropy. [Map of potential vegetation in Central and Eastern Europe. (M 1:2500000)]
SPb, 1989. In Russian.
Gromtsev A.N. Antropogennye suktsessii lesnykh biogeotsenozov v srednetaezhnykh
landshaftakh Karelii. [Human-induced forest successions in the middle taiga
landscapes of Karelia]. //Lesovedenie. 1990. „5. pp. 3-12. In Russian.
Gromtsev A.N. Landshaftnaya ekologiya taezhnykh lesov: teoreticheskie i prikladnye
aspekty. [Landscape ecology of taiga forests: theory and practice]. Petrozavodsk,
2000. 144 s. In Russian.
Gromtsev A.N. Retrospektivniy analiz antropogennoy dinamiki lesov landshaftov
yuzhnoy Karelii za 1840-1980 gg. [Retrospective analysis of human-induced
dynamics in the forests of Southern Karelia during 1840-1980]. //Lesnoy zhurnal.
1988. „4. pp. 125-127. In Russian.
Gutorovich I.I. Kratkoe opisanie tipov nasazhdeniy, vstrechaemykh v Vyatskoy i
Permskoy guberniyakh v severnykh ikh chastyakh. [Brief description of forest types
in the northern parts of the Viatka and Perm regions]. //Lesnoy zhurnal. 1912. „ 4-
5. pp. 502-512. In Russian.
Gutorovich I.I. Zametki severnogo lesnichego. [Observations by a forester of the
North]. //Lesnoy zhurnal. 1897. „ 2. pp. 216-228; „ 5. pp. 789-799. In Russian.
Ilchukov S.V . Formirovanie proizvodnykh elovo-listvennykh nasazhdeniy na vyrubkakh.
[Formation of mixed coniferous-deciduous stands at clearcuts]. //Trudy Komi
nauchnogo centra UrO RAN. „ 133. 1994. pp. 97-108. In Russian.
Ilchukov S.V ., Pautov Yu.A. Izmenchivost mikroklimaticheskikh kharakteristik na
kontsentrirovannoy vyrubke. [Diversity in the microclimatic conditions of large
clearcuts]. //Trudy Komi nauchnogo centra UrO RAN. „ 133. 1994. pp. 108-118. In
Russian.
Instruktsiya po provedeniyu lesoustroystva v edinom gosudarstvennom lesnom
fonde SSSR. 1. Organizatsiya lesoustroystva i polevye raboty. [Forest inventory
instruction for the unified forest fund of the USSR. Part 1. Organization of inventory
and field work]. Moscow, 1986. 133 pp.
Instruktsiya po provedeniyu lesoustroystva v lesnom fonde Rossii. 1. [Forest
inventory instruction for the forest fund of Russia. Part 1]. Moscow, 1995. 175 pp.
Instruktsiya po ustroystvu gosudarstvennogo lesnogo fonda SSSR. 1. Polevye
raboty. [Forest inventory instruction for the forest fund of the USSR. Part 1. Field
work]. Moscow, 1964. 128 pp.
Isachenko T .I., Lavrenko E.M. (editors). Karta rastitelnosti Evropeiskoy chasti SSSR.
[Vegetation map for the European part of USSR (M 1:2500000)]. M, 1979. In Russian.
Isaev A.S. Monitoring bioraznoobraziya lesov Rossii [Biodiversity monitoring in the
forests of Russia]. //Ustoychivoe razvitie borealnykh lesov. M, 1997, pp. 62-65. In
Russian.
Isaev A.S., Sukhikh V .N. Aerokosmicheskiy monitoring lesnykh resursov [Remote
sensing of forest resources]. //Lesovedenie. 1986. „6. pp. 11-21. In Russian.
Joudra P . Zametki lesnichego ob Olonetskoy gubernii [Notes by a forester on the
Olonets region]. //Selskoe khozyaistvo i lesovodstvo, 1867, „„ 7 i 9. In Russian.
Kabanov V .V . O sostoyanii lesnykh resursov i perspektivakh lesopolzovaniya v KASSR.
[Condition and future utilization of forest resources in the Karelia republic]. //
Kompleksnoe ispolzovanie i vosproizvodstvo lesnykh resursov KASSR. Petrozavodsk,
1985. pp. 132-140. In Russian.
Karaziya S.P . Vliyanie sploshnykh rubok na vodno-fizicheskie svoystva pochv v
razlichnykh lesorastitelnykh usloviyakh [The effect of clearcuts on soil properties at
different forest sites]. //Ekologicheskie predposylki i posledstviyalesokhozyaistvennoy deyatelnosti. SPb., 1992. pp. 50-56. In Russian.
Kazimirov N.I. Elniki Karelii. [The spruce forests of Karelia]. Leningrad, 1971. 170
pp. In Russian.
Kellomaki P . Forests of the boreal region: gaps in knowledge and research needs //
Forest ecology and management, 132, 2000, pp. 63-71.
Kireev D.M. Ekologo-geograficheskie terminy v lesovedenii. [Ecological and
geographical terms in forest science]. Novosibirsk, 1984. 182 pp. In Russian.
Kitaev M. Lesa krainego Severa [Forests of the Far North]. //Lesnoy zhurnal. 1894.
„1. pp. 106-116. In Russian.
Knizhnikov Yu.F ., Kravtsova V .I. Aerokosmicheskie issledovaniya dinamiki
geograficheskikh yavleniy. [Remote sensing of change in geographic phenomena]. M,
MGU, 1991. 206 pp. In Russian.
Kolesnikov B.P . Geneticheskiy etap v lesnoy tipologii i ego zadachi. [The genetic
stage in forest typology and its tasks]. //Lesovedenie. 1974. „2. pp. 3-20. In
Russian.
Kolesnikov B.P . Lesnaya rastitelnost yugo-vostochnoy chasti basseina Vychegdy.
[Forest vegetation in the southeastern part of the Vychegda basin]. In Russian. L.,
1985. 215 pp.
Kolontaev V .S. Lesnoy kodeks RSFSR s obyasneniyami i tolkovaniyami. [The Forest
Code of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic with explanations]. M.,
1924. In Russian.
Kratkiy ocherk lesov Pechorskogo kraya. [Brief description of the Pechora forests].
SPb, 1912. 33 pp. In Russian.
Kravchinskiy D.M. Lesovozrashchenie. Osnovaniya lesokhozyaistvennogo
rastenievodstva. [Silviculture. Fundamentals of forest breeding]. SPb, 1883. 281 s. In
Russian.
Kravchinskiy D.M. Lisinskaya kazennaya lesnaya dacha. [The Lisinsky state forest]. /
/Lesnoy zhurnal. 1912. „ 6-7. pp. 691-709. In Russian.
Kravchinskiy D.M. Postepennye uluchshitelnye rubki v lesakh severnoy i srednei
Rossii. [Shelterwood cuts in the forests of Central and Northern Russia]. SPb, 1904.
16 pp. In Russian.
Kravtsova V .I. Kosmicheskie metody kartografirovaniya. [Satellite-based mapping
methods]. M, 1995. 280 s. In Russian.
Krinov E.L. Spektralnaya otrazhatelnaya sposobnost prirodnykh obrazovaniy.
[Reflectance properties of natural objects]. M-L, 1947. 241 pp. In Russian.
Kublitskiy-Piottukh A.F ., Nazarov D.D. Kazennoe lesnoe khozyaistvo v Arkhangelskoy i
Vologodskoy guberniyakh. [State forestry in the Arkhangelsk and Vologda regions].
SPb, 1912. 191 pp. In Russian.
Kuksa I.V . Issledovaniya dinamiki rasprostraneniya lesov po kosmicheskim snimkam
i starym kartam. [Survey of the dynamics of forest distribution based on space
images and old maps]. Avtoreferat diss. ... k.g.n. M, 1993, 24 pp. In Russian.
Kuzmichev E.P . Struktura, sostav i biotsenoticheskaya rol gribov-dendrotrofov v
lesnykh soobshchestvakh i urboekosistemakh. [Structure, composition and
ecological role of dendrotrophical fungi in forest communities and urban
ecosystems]. Avtoreferat diss. ... d.b.n. M, 1994. In Russian.
Kuznetsov N.A. Instruktsiya 1809 g. dlya ustroystva lesov. [The forest inventory
instruction of 1809]. //Lesnoy zhurnal. 1910. „ 4-5. pp. 445-449. In Russian.
Kuznetsov N.A. Zadvinskie elniki. [The spruce forests beyond River Dvina]. //Lesnoy
zhurnal. 1912. „ 10. pp. 1165-1204. In Russian.
Larin V .B. Smena drevesnykh porod na Severe. [Succession of forest tree species in
northern Russia]. Syktyvkar , 1987. 16 pp. In Russian.
Larin V .B., Pautov YU.A. Sozdanie kultur sosny i eli na severo-vostoke evropeiskoy
chasti SSSR. [Creation of spruce and pine plantations in the North-East of European
USSR]. Syktyvkar , 1984. 22 pp. In Russian.
Lassig R., Motchalov S.A. Frequency and characteristics of severe storms in the
Urals and their influence on the developement, structure and management of the
boreal forests //Forest ecology and management, 135, 2000, pp. 179-194
Lashchenkova A.N., Nepomirueva N.I. Redkie rastitelnye soobshchestva Srednego
Timana, nuzhdayushchiesya v okhrane. [Rare plant associations of Middle Timan in
need of protection]. //Trudy Komi filiala AN SSSR, vyp. 56. Syktyvkar , 1982, pp. 28-
36. In Russian.
Lazareva I.P ., Kuchko A.A., Kravchenko A.V ., Gabukova V .V ., Litinskiy P .YU., Potasheva
M.A., Kalinkina N.M. Vliyanie aerotekhnogennogo zagryazneniya na sostoyanie
sosnovykh lesov Severnoy Karelii. [Influence of industrial air pollution on pine
forests in northern Karelia]. Preprint. KNTS RAN, 1992. In Russian.
Lesa Severo-Zapadnogo kraya RSFSR v tsifrakh (Pskovskaya, Novgorodskaya,
Cherepovetskaya i Leningradskaya gubernii). [The forests of the Russian North-West
Area in numbers (Pskov, Novgorod, Cherepovets and Leningrad regions)]. L., 1926.
390 pp. In Russian.
Lesa SSSR (karta, 1:2500000). [The forests of the USSR (map)]. M, Goskomles
SSSR, 1990. In Russian.

59THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Lesnoy fond Rossii (po dannym gosudarstvennogo ucheta lesnogo fonda po
sostoyaniyu na 1 yanvarya 1998 g.). [The forest resources of Russia (according tothe government forest account of 1 January 1998)]. M., 1999. 650 pp. In Russian.
Lesnoy kodeks Rossiyskoy Federatsii. [The Forest Code of Russian Federation]. M.,
VNIITSlesresurs, 1997. 66 s. In Russian.
Lesnoy spravochnik. [Forestry handbook]. SPb., 1902. 191 pp. In Russian.Lesopolzovanie v Rossiyskoy Federatsii v 1946-1992 g.g. [Forest use in the Russian
Federation during 1946-1992.] M.: FSLKH, 1996. 313 s. In Russian
Lesopromyshlenniy kompleks Respubliki Kareliya. [The forest industry in the Karelia
Republic]. Petrozavodsk, 2000. 162 pp. In Russian.
Linder P ., Jonsson P ., Niklasson M. Tree mortality after prescribed burning in an old-
growth scots pine forest in northern Sweden. //Silva Fennica 32(4), 1998, pp. 339-349.
Luganskiy N.A., Terinov N.I., Zalesov S.V . Sostoyanie i perspektivy lesnogo
khozyaistva Urala. [Conditions and perspectives of the forestry in the Ural
Mountains]. // Lesnoy zhurnal. 1992. „4. pp. 12-19. In Russian.
L’vov P . (ed.). Organizatsiya lesosechnykh i lesovosstanovitelnykh rabot v
lespromkhozakh. [Management of logging and reforestation in lespromkhozes].
Arkhangelsk, 1963. 100 pp. In Russian.
Maevski P ., Pautov Yu.A. Problemy sokhraneniya devstvennykh lesov pri perekhode k
ustoychivomu lesoupravleniyu v Respublike Komi [Virgin forest preservation during
the transition to sustainable forest management in the Komi Republic] //Korennye
lesa taezhnoy zony Evropy: sovremennoe sostoyanie i problemy sokhraneniya.
Petrozavodsk, 1999, pp. 239-243. In Russian.
Magarinskiy V .V . O polozhenii kazennogo lesnichego. [On the position of the
government forester]. //Lesnoy zhurnal. 1896. „. 2. pp. 292-295. In Russian.
Melchanov V .A., Danilik V .N. Izmenenie stokoreguliruyushchei roli lesov Srednego
Urala pod vliyaniem vyrubok. [Changes in the water-regulating properties of the
Middle Ural as an effect of logging] //Izmenenie vodookhranno-zashchitnykh funktsiy
lesov pod vliyaniem lesokhozyaistvennykh meropriyatiy. M., 1973. pp.67-82. In
Russian.
Melekhov I.S. Lesovedenie. [Forest science]. M., 1980. 408 pp. In Russian.Metodika melkomasshtabnogo kartografirovaniya lesnogo fonda na osnove
kosmicheskogo fotografirovaniya. [A method for small-scale forest mapping using
satellite images]. M, 1981, 21 pp. In Russian.
Morozov G.F . K otkrytiyu vserossiyskogo delegatskogo sezda Soyuza Lesovodov. [To
the opening of the all-Russian congress of the union of foresters]. //Lesnoy zhurnal.
1917. „ 9-10. pp. 611-614. In Russian.
Morozov G.F . Tipy i bonitety. [Forest types and site productivity]. //Lesnoy zhurnal.
1912. „ 6-7. pp. 843-871. In Russian.
Morozov G.F . Uchenie o lese. [The study of forests]. 1949. 456 s. In Russian.Murzaeva M.K. Osobennosti mikroklimata na lesosekakh razlichnykh sposobov rubok.
[Microclimatic features of cutovers subject to different types of cut]. //Lesa Urala i
khozyaistvo v nikh. „. 11. 1978. pp. 73-77. In Russian.
Nepomilueva N.I. O sokhranenii taezhnykh landshaftov na evropeiskom severo-
vostoke. [On the protection of taiga landscapes in north-eastern European Russia]. /
/Botanicheskiy zhurnal, 1981, t.66, „ 11, pp. 1616-1622. In Russian.
Ohlson M., Elling T . Long-term spruce forest continuity - a challenge for a
sustainable Scandinavian forestry. //Forest ecology and management, 124, 1999, pp.
27-34.
Odin iz lesnichikh Severa. K voprosu o khozyaistve v lesakh Severa. [A forester of the
North on the management of the Northern forests]. //Lesnoy zhurnal, 1894, „ 2, pp.
153-187. In Russian.
Orlov M.M. Uchenie o lesnom khozyaistve, ego razvitie, metody i zadachi. [The study
of forestry, its developement, methods and objectives] //Lesnoy zhurnal. 1895. „ 3.
pp. 285-307. In Russian.
Osnovnye polozheniya po rubkam glavnogo polzovaniya v lesakh Rossiyskoy
Federatsii. [Main directives for final fellings in the forests of the Russian
Federation]. M., 1994. 27 pp. In Russian.
Osnovnye polozheniya po rubkam ukhoda v lesakh Rossii. [Main directives for
intermediate fellings in the forests of the Russian Federation]. M., 1993. 63 pp. In
Russian.
Osobo okhranyaemye prirodnye territorii, rasteniya i zhivotnye Vologodskoy oblasti.
[Protected areas, plants and animals of the Vologda region]. Vologda, 1993. 256 pp.
In Russian.
Ovchinnikov N.Ya. Karelo-Murmanskoe lesnoe khozyaistvo i ego perspektivy v svyazi
s zaseleniem kraya. [Forestry and its perspectives in the Karelia-Murmansk area
against the background of colonization]. 1928. .132 pp. In Russian.
Pautov Yu.A. Tekhnogennaya struktura vyrubok - osnova tekhnologii
lesovosstanovleniya. [The tekhnogenic structure of clearcuts - a basis for
reforestation]. Syktyvkar , 1992. 20 pp. In Russian.
Pervozvanskiy I.V . Ocherki po razvitiyu lesnogo khozyaistva i lesnoy promyshlennostiKarelii. [Notes on the developement of forestry and forest industry in Karelia]. //
Trudy Karelskogo filiala AN SSSR. „ XIX. Petrozavodsk, 1959. pp. 5-17. In Russian.
Petrov A.P . Ekonomicheskie i ekologicheskie prioritety v osvoenii i vosproizvodstve
lesnykh resursov. [Economical and ecological priorities for the use and reproduction
of forest resources]. //Lesnoe khozyaistvo. 1990. „6. pp. 5-8. In Russian.
Petrov A.P . Metody opredeleniya popennoy platy i stoimostnoy otsenki lesnykh
resursov za rubezhom. [Methods for setting of stumpage fees and the costs of
inventorying forest resources abroad]. //Lesnoe khozyaistvo. 1989. „ 8. pp. 48-50.
In Russian.
Petrov A.P ., Burdin N.A., Koyukhov N.I. Lesnoy kompleks. [The forest cluster]. M,
1986. 296 pp. In Russian.
Petrov B.S. Ocherki o razvitii lesnoy promyshlennosti Urala. [Notes on the
developement of the forest industry in the Urals]. 1952. In Russian.
Petrov M.F . Podsochka sosny v Karelii. [Resin tapping in Karelia]. Petrozavodsk,
1936. 51 pp. In Russian.
Poluiko I.Z. Lesa i lesnaya promyshlennost Karelo-Finskoy SSR. [The forests and
forest industry of the Karelian-Finnish Soviet Republic]. Petrozavodsk, 1949. 72 pp.
In Russian.
Poluiko I.Z. Lesa Kemskogo basseina i puti ikh ratsionalnogo ispolzovaniya. [The
forests of the Kem basin and their rational use]. Petrozavodsk, 1959. 52 pp. In
Russian.
Ponomarev D.S. Gornozavodskoe lesnoe khozyaistvo i vozmozhnost ego progressa.
[Forest management for iron factories and its development possibilities]. //Lesnoy
zhurnal. 1897. „. 2. pp. 229-238. In Russian.
Potapov P .V ., Yaroshenko A.Yu. Poslednie massivy malonarushennykh taezhnykh lesov
Evropeiskogo Severa Rossii. [The last areas of intact taiga forests in northern
European Russia]. //Lesnoy byulleten, 1999, „1, pp. 15-17. In Russian.
Pravila rubok glavnogo polzovaniya v ravninnykh lesakh Evropeiskoy chasti
Rossiyskoy Federatsii. [Final felling regulations for the plains forests of European
Russia]. M., 1994. 32 pp. In Russian.
Redko G.I., Babich N.A. Korabelniy les vo slavu flota rossiyskogo. [Forests for ship-
building in honor of the Russian navy]. Arkhangelsk, 1993, 93 pp. In Russian.
Rubki ukhoda v lesakh RSFSR. [Thinnings in the forests of Russia]. M, 1974. 136 pp.
In Russian.
Rudzkiy A. Affektirovannaya tsennost lesa. [The spiritual value of the forest]. //
Lesnoy zhurnal. 1879. „ 10. pp. 539-555. In Russian.
Rudzkiy A. Chto takoye lesoustroystvo? [What is a forest inventory?] //Lesnoy
zhurnal. 1881. „ 10. pp. 633-656. In Russian.
Sabinin L.H. Lesnye narusheniya i poryadok ikh presledovaniya. [Illegal forestry
activities and their punishment]. SPb., 1909. 196 pp. In Russian.
Sakovets V .I., Germanova N.I., Matyushkin V .A. Ekologicheskie aspekty
gidrolesomelioratsii v Karelii. [Ecological aspects of forest drainage in Karelia].
Petrozavodsk, 2000. 155 pp. In Russian.
Saveljeva E.A. (ed.). Istoriko-kulturniy atlas Respubliki Komi. [Historical and cultural
atlas of the Komi republic]. 1997. 384 pp. In Russian.
Sbornik normativnykh materialov po lesnomu khozyaistvu. [Handbook of forestry
regulatory documents]. M., 1984. 190 pp. In Russian.
Semenov B.A., T svetkov V .F ., Chibisov G.A., Elizarov F .P . Pritundrovye lesa Evropeiskoy
chasti Rossii (priroda i vedenie khozyaistva). [Subtundra forests of European Russia
(nature and management)]. Arkhangelsk, 1998. 332 pp. In Russian.
Shavnin A.G. Vozrastnoe stroenie i khod rosta raznovozrastnykh elnikov Srednego
Urala. [Age structure and growth of uneven-aged spruce forests in the Middle Urals].
Avtoreferat diss. ... k.b.n. Vladivostok, 1962. 15 pp. In Russian.
Shiyatov S.G. Ekologicheskie tipy verkhney granitsy lesa na Urale. [Tree line
ecotypes in the Ural mountains]. //Botanicheskie issledovaniya na Urale:
informatsionnye materialy. Sverdlovsk, 1984. pp. 39-41. In Russian.
Scherbakov N.M., Volkov A.D. Lesnye resursy KASSR, ikh ispolzovanie i
vosproizvodstvo. [The forest resources of Karelian Republic, their utilization and
reproduction]. Petrozavodsk, 1985. 30 pp. In Russian.
Shubin V .I. Lesovosstanovlenie na vyrubkakh Karelskoy ASSR. [Reforestation of
clearcuts in the Karelian republic]. //Problemy lesopolzovaniya v taezhnoy zone
SSSR: tez. dokl. Krasnoyarsk, 1988. pp. 266-268. In Russian.
Shumakov V .S., Voronkova A.B., Isaev V .I., Murzaeva M.K. Izmenenie vodno-
fizicheskikh svoystv pochv Urala pod vliyaniem rubok i mekhanizirovannykh
zagotovok. [Changes in the physical properties of soils in the Ural area as an effect
of logging and mechanized harvesting]. //Izmenenie vodookhranno-zashchitnykh
funktsiy lesov pod vliyaniem lesokhozyaistvennykh meropriyatiy. M.: VNIILM, 1973.
pp.18-34. In Russian.
Sinkevich M.P . K khozyaistvennoy kharakteristike rubok glavnogo polzovaniya v
Karelskoy ASSR. [Silvicultural kharacteristics of final fellings in Karelia]. L., 1958.
34 pp. In Russian.

60THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
Sinyaev N.V . Lesnoy kompleks Karelii. Etapy perestroyki. [The forest cluster of
Karelia. Stages of transition]. Petrozavodsk, 1990. 94 pp. In Russian.
Skvortsov V .E. Atlas-opredelitel sosudistykh rasteniy taezhnoy zony Evropeiskoy
Rossii. [Field guide of the vascular plants of the taiga zone of European Russia]. M,
Greenpeace, 2000. 587 pp. In Russian.
Skvortsova E.B., Ulanova N.G., Basevich V .F . Ekologicheskaya rol vetrovalov. [The
ecological role of windthrows]. M., 1983. 190 pp. In Russian.
Smirnova O.V ., Chistyakova A.A., Popadyuk R.V ., Evstigneev O.I., Korotkov V .N.,
Mitrofanova M.V ., Ponomarenko E.V . Populyatsionnaya organizatsiya rastitelnogo
pokrova lesnykh territoriy (na primere shirokolistvennykh lesov evropeiskoy chasti
SSSR). [Population structure of the vegetation in forest areas (using the hardwoods
of the European part of the USSR as an example)]. Pushchino, 1990. 92 pp. In
Russian.
Smolonogov E.P . Materialy k kharakteristike mikroklimaticheskikh usloviy na
kontsentrirovannykh vyrubkakh. [Characterization of the microclimatic conditions on
large clearcuts]. //Trudy instituta biologii UFAN. 1966. Vyp. 16. pp. 25-39. In Russian
Stoletie lesnogo departamenta. [One hundred years of the Forest Department
(facsimile of the 1898 edition)]. M.: VNIITSlesresurs, 1998. 252 pp. In Russian.
Storozhenko V .G. Gribnye derevorazrushayushchie kompleksy v genezise elovykh
biogeotsenozov. [Wood decomposition fungi in the genesis of spruce ecosystems].
Avtoreferat diss. ... d.b.n. M., 1994. 43 pp. In Russian.
Storozhenko V .G. Struktura i porazhennost derevorazrushayushchimi gribami
raznovozrastnykh elnikov severnoy taigi. [Structure and damage by wood
decomposition fungi in spruce forests of the northern taiga]. //Lesovedenie. „ 1.
1998. pp. 42-49. In Russian.
Suvorov V .I. Osobennosti rosta eli v posevnykh kulturakh na vyrubkakh gornoy chasti
Urala. [Peculiarities of spruce growth in seeded plantations after clearcuts in the
Ural Mountains] //Problemy rubki i vosstanovleniya lesa. M., 1968. pp. 36-44. In
Russian.
Sðarvin N. Osoboe mnenie. [Special opinion] //Kublitskiy-Piottukh A.F ., Nazarov D.D.
Kazennoe lesnoe khozyaistvo v Arkhangelskoy i Vologodskoy guberniyakh. SPb, 1913.
In Russian.
Sðergold O.E., Dyrenkov S.A., Kobak E.O. Lesovodstvennye rezultaty razlichnykh
rubok, primenyavshikhsya v proshlom v Permskoy oblasti. [Silvicultural results of
different felling types, used in the past in the Perm region]. //Lesa Urala i
khozyaistvo v nikh. Sbornik trudov Uralskoy LOS VNIILM. Vyp. 5. 1970. pp.121-123. In
Russian.
Sðergold O.E., Timofeev G.P ., Dyrenkov S.A. K izucheniyu istorii i rezultatov rubok
glavnogo polzovaniya v elovo-pikhtovykh drevostoyakh Permskoy oblasti. [On the
history and results of final fellings in spruce-fir stands of the Perm region] //Lesa
Urala i khozyaistvo v nikh. Sbornik trudov Uralskoy LOS VNIILM. „ 2. 1968. pp. 84 -
86. In Russian.
Tarasov E.M. Lesnye bogatstva i dokhody Rossii v 1913 godu. [Forest capital and
revenues in Russia in 1913] //Trudy Gosplana SSSR. Kn. 6. Vyp. 2. Lesnye bogatstva
SSSR. M., 1925. pp. 5-43. In Russian.
Tchertov O.G. Ekologiya lesnykh zemel. [Ecology of forest soils]. L., 1981. 192 pp. In
Russian.
Tchuprov V .I., Zabortseva L.P . Lesnoy kompleks Respubliki Komi: istoriya i
sovremennost. [The forest cluster of the Komi Republic: history and current state].
Syktyvkar , 1998. 101 pp. In Russian.
Teploukhov A.E. Ustroystvo lesov v pomeshchichikh imeniyakh. Rukovodstvo dlya
upravitelei, lesnichikh i zemlemerov. [Inventory and regulation of private forest
estates. Manual for managers, foresters and land surveyors]. SPb., 1848. 256 pp. In
Russian.
Terentev V .I. K kharakteristike erozionnykh protsessov na vyrubkakh v gornoy polose
Srednego Urala. [Contribution to the description of erosion processes in the
mountains of Middle Ural]. //Lesa Urala i khozyaistvo v nikh. „. 1. 1968. pp.323-331.
In Russian.
Thirgood J.V . Man’s impact on the forests of Europe //Journal of World Forest
Resources Management, 1989, vol. 4, pp. 127-167.
Timofeev N. O lesakh krainego Severa [On the forests of the Far North]. //Lesnoy
zhurnal. 1894. „ 2. pp. 208-222. „ 4. pp. 433-472. In Russian.Treinis A.M. Podsochka lesa. [Forest resin tapping]. M-L., 1961. 356 pp. In Russian.
Tseplyaev V .P . Lesnoe khozyaistvo SSSR. [Forest management in the USSR]. M.,
1965. 408 pp. In Russian.
Tsvetkov M.A. Izmenenie lesistosti Evropeiskoy Rossii s kontsa XVII stoletiya po 1914
god. [Change in the forest cover of European Russia from end of the XVII century to
1914]. M., 1957. 214 pp. In Russian.
Tsvetkov V .F . K voprosu o "korennykh lesakh" na Evropeiskom Severe.. [About the
"primary forests" of northern European Russia] //Korennye lesa taezhnoy zony
Evropy: sovremennoe sostoyanie i problemy sokhraneniya. Petrozavodsk, 1999, pp.
57-58. In Russian.
Turmer K. Vazhnost iskusstvennogo lesovozrashcheniya [The importance of artificial
reforestation] //Lesnoy zhurnal. 1883. „1. pp. 34-39. In Russian.
Vakurov A.D. Lesnye pozhary na Severe. [Forest fires in the North]. M.: Nauka, 1975.
100 pp. In Russian.
Valyaev V .N. Vyborochnye i sploshnye rubki v Karelii. [Clearcuts and selective
cuttings in Karelia]. Petrozavodsk, 1984. 64 s. In Russian.
Vasilyauskas R., Stenlid J. Biologiya i struktura populyatsii gribov ranevogo
kompleksa v drevostoyakh eli evropeiskoy (Picea abies(L.)Karst.). [Biology and
population structure of wound group fungi in stands of Norway spruce (Picea abies
(L.) Karst.)]. //Gribnye soobshchestva lesnykh ekosistem. Petrozavodsk, 2000. pp.
76-133.
Vinogradov B.V . Distantsionnaya indikatsiya taezhnykh geosistem v raznykh
spektralnykh intervalakh. [Remote sensing of taiga ecosystems using different
spectral bands]. //T aiga v globalnoy ekosisteme Zemli. Irkutsk, 1978, pp. 34-41. In
Russian.
Voronchikhin N.Z. Ediniy lesozagotovitelno-vosstanovitelniy lesnoy kompleks [The
integration of logging and reforestation] //Osnovnye napravleniya
sovershenstvovaniya vyrashchivaniya khvoynykh lesov. Perm, 1982. pp. 45-47. In
Russian.
World forest products statistics. A ten-year summary, 1946-1955. Rome, 1958. 197 pp.
Yaroshenko A.Yu., Morozov A.S., Agafonova A.A., Zakharova N.V ., Koltsov D.B.,
Loskutova Yu.A., Pakhorukova K.A., Fadyukova O.E. Lesa zapovednika Basegi:
estestvennaya strukturno-dinamicheskaya organizatsiya i ee izmenenie v rezultate
rubok poslednego stoletiya. [The forests of the Basegi nature reserve: natural
structure and it’s change due to timber harvesting during the last century]. M.: Dialog
- MGU, 1998. 50 pp. In Russian.
Yaroshenko A.Yu., Potapov P .V . Primenenie kosmicheskikh mnogozonalnykh snimkov i
GIS-tekhnologiy pri tselevom landshaftnom kartirovanii v ramkakh prirodookhrannykh
proektov Grinpis Rossii. [Use of satellite multi-band images and GIS for multi-
purpose landscape mapping in Greenpeace Russia]. //ArcReview - sovremennye
geoinformatsionnye tekhnologii. M, 1999, „4, pp. 15. In Russian.
Yaroshenko A.Yu., Potapov P .V ., Kirichok E.I. Problemy sokhraneniya poslednikh
krupnykh massivov neosvoennoy estestvennoy taigi Evropeiskogo Severa Rossii.
[Issues associated with the conservation of the last intact taiga areas of northernEuropean Russia]. //Korennye lesa taezhnoy zony Evropy: sovremennoe sostoyanie iproblemy sokhraneniya. Petrozavodsk, 1999, pp. 70-72. In Russian.
Yudin Yu.P . Karta rastitelnosti Komi ASSR (M 1:1000000). [Vegetation map of the
Komi republic (1:1000000)]. M, 1951.
Zhebryakov V .N., Nikonov M.V . Dinamika lesnogo fonda i vosstanovleniya elovykh
lesov Permskoy oblasti [Changes in forest resources and reforestation in the Permregion]. //Osnovnye napravleniya sovershenstvovaniya vyrashchivaniya hvoynykh
lesov. Perm, 1982. In Russian.
Ziabchenko S.S. Sosnovye lesa Evropeiskogo Severa. [Pine forests of the European
North]. Leningrad, 1984. 244 pp. In Russian.
Zubareva R.S. Lesorastitelnye usloviya i tipy temnokhvoynykh lesov gornoy polosy
Srednego Urala. [Forest site conditions and forest types at the Middle Ural
Mountains]. //Trudy Instituta ekologii rasteniy i zhivotnykh. 1967. Vyp. 53. pp. 13-87.
In Russian
Zubov S.N. Razrabotka tekhnologii i sostavlenie tekhnologicheskoy karty osvoeniya
lesoseki. [Developement of technology and a logging plan for cut place].
Domodedovo, 1995. 58 pp. In Russian.

61THE LAST INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN RUSSIA
APPENDIX  B
MAP OF INTACT FOREST LANDSCAPES
62 63
64 6566 67
70 7168 69
72 73
72
74
74
LEGENDMurmansk
St. Petersburg
VologdaArkhangelsk
Syktyvkar
PermPetrozavodsk
Novgorod
KirovPskov
KostromaYaroslavl
Country borders
Regional borders
Regional centersTowns with population over 50 thousand
Other settlements
Roads
Railroads
RiversLakes
Federal level nature protection areas
(nature reserves and national parks)
Subtundra forest border (unproductive forest
excluded from industrial exploitation)
Borders of intact forest lanscapes
MAIN LAND CATEGORIES OF THE INTACT
FOREST LANDSCAPES:
ForestBogsTreeless mountain areasFINLAND
Map of intact forest landscapes for August 2000
Scale for all sheets 1:1,500,000

MURMANSK
AlakurttiTuloma
Laplandsky
Nature Reserve
Montchegorsk
Topozero
Lake62
Kola
ApatityKovdor
KandalakshaPolyarnye
ZoriOlenegorskKolaLotta
Verkhnetulomskoye
reservoir
Imandra Lake
Kolvickoe Lake
Knyazhegubskoe
reservoir
PyaozerskyLoukhiPyaozero
LakeTiksheozero
LakeTumcha
Paanayarvi
National ParkFINLAND
KARELIA REPUBLICWHITE SEAMURMANSK REGION
Kandalakshsky
Nature ReserveKandalakshsky
Nature Reserve

Severomorsk63
Kandalakshsky
Nature Reserve
RevdaLovozeroVoronya
PonoyIokamgaUmbozero
Lake
WHITE SEABARENTS  SEA
 Purnach PanaMURMANSK REGION
 Strelna

LenderyKem
Kostomuksha
Nadvoitsy
SegezhaBelomorskNuk Lake
Segozero reservoirVygozero
Lake
Medvezhegorsk
KondopogaOnega Lake
Syamozero LakeVolomaFINLANDBorovoyKem
Ledmozero
MuezerskyKuyto Lake Voinica
Belomorsko-Baltiysky canal
Belomorsko-
Baltiysky canal
Porosozero
Suoyarvi
Yanisyarvi Lake SunaKostomukshsky
Nature Reserve
Kivatch Nature
Reserve64
KARELIA REPUBLIC

Vodlozersky
National
ParkARKHANGELSK REGION
OnegaSumskoy PosadWHITE  SEA
Onega
ObozerskySeverodvinsk
Nukhcha
Vyg Vozhma
Savinovsky
Mirny
Plesetsk
MoshaUndosha
Vodlozero LakeKozhozero Lake
KARELIA
REPUBLIC65

ARKHANGELSK
KholmogoryWHITE  SEA
Mezen
NovodvinskLeshukonskoyeKuloyMezen
Pinega
KarpogoryEzhugaSevernaya DvinaPonoy
Lukovetsky PinegaPinezhsky
Nature Reserve
PinegaPeza
 Soyana66
NENETS
AUTONOMOUS
DISTRICT
ARKHANGELSK  REGION

LeshukonskoeNENETS AUTONOMOUS REGIONBARENTS  SEA
Vozhgora
Vazhgort Vashka MezenARKHANGELSK  REGION
KOMI  REPUBLICMezen Yamozero
LakeTsilmaPeza YobyshSula
Pesha67

Ust-Tsilma
VelyuPetchora
KOMI REPUBLICNovy Bor
Izhma
IraelShcelyayurMutny
MaterikUst-UsaPetchora
 Kolva
Tsilma
IzhmaKozhvaSozva
Lemyu68
NENETS AUTONOMOUS REGION

Yudyg-Va
National
ParkNENETS AUTONOMOUS REGION
KOMI  REPUBLIC
KHANTY-MANSI
AUTONOMOUS
REGIONInta
PetchoraKozhimAbez
VouktylUsinsk
Petchora
PetchoraUsa
Usa
KozhimAdzva
 Lapin
Shuger
Podcherie69

ARKHANGELSK REGIONBereznikUst-VaengaEmetsk
Rochegda
Dvinskoy
Shenkursk
Solginsky
KuloiVelskKizemaOktyabrskyLedPinega
SukhonaUstiaEmtsa
Severnaya Dvina
VagaVaengaPokshenga
Sura
VOLOGDA REGION70

Usogorsk
LusaKotlasSevernaya
UgVymPinega
YarengaVashka
SysolaARKHANGELSK REGIONKOMI
REPUBLIC
MezhduretchenskBlagoevo
Koriazhma
VisingaVytchegodskyMikun
Zheshart
Veliky Ustug
VOLOGDA REGIONKIROV REGIONPinega
Ilesha
UftugaVytchegdaMezen
Dvina
Viled
Demianovo
PodosinovetsLusa
Obyatchevo71

UkhtaSosnogorsk
Izhma
KOMI REPUBLIC
KIROV REGIONEmva
Obyachevo
MurashiKoigorodok
OparinoUchta
Vym
VisheraSindorskoe Lake
Vytchegda
Sysola
Lusa
LetkaKobra
Viatka72
KOMI  REPUBLIC

Cherdyn
KamaPetchora
Petchora
KolvaKOMI REPUBLICTroitsko-
PetchorskNeftepetchorsk
KrasnovisherskPERM REGIONMylva
Lozva
Yazva  KHANTY-
  MANSI
AUTONOMOUS  REGION
SVERDLOVSK
REGIONPetchoraIlych
Unia
SolikamskVisheraPechoro-Ilychsky Nature
Reserve (with buffer zone)
Vishersky
Nature
Reserve73

T cherepovetcVOLOGDA REGION
Kaduy
Sheksna
Darvinsky
Nature
ReserveVOLOGDASheksnaSuda
Vesyegonsk
BreitovoPoshekhonyeSokolUstye
Gryazovets
DanilovRussky Sever
National park
RybinskyReservoirKubenskoe LakeSheksna Reservoir
TVER REGIONYAROSLAVL REGIONSogozhaVologda
MolomaChagodoshaSuda
 Polest
PSKOV REGION
Polistovsky Nature
ReserveStaraya RussaIlmen Lake
Rdeysky Nature
ReserveNOVGOROD REGION
TVER REGIONValdai
National
ParkParfinoSoltcy
DnoPorkchov
Dedovichi
Kholm
LoknyaDemyansk
OstashkovLovat Pola Shelon
 Polomet
Seliger Lake74

Greenpeace Russia
Global Forest Watch
Forest Club
of Russian
Non-govermental
OrganisationsMoscow, 127994, GSP-4, Russia
tel.: 7 (095) 257 4116, 257 4118fax: 7 (095) 257 4110e-mail: alexey@greenpeace.ruhttp://www.greenpeace.ru
10 G Street NE • Washington, DC 20002 USA
tel.: +1 (202) 729 76 00fax: +1 (202) 729 76 86e-mail: gfw@wri.orghttp://www.globalforestwatch.orghttp://www.wri.org
Moscow, 121019, P.O.B. 211, Russia
tel., fax: 7 (095) 124 50 11, 124 79 34e-mail: picea@online.ruhttp://www.forest.ru