# Archivo original: the-untouchables-rimbunan-hij.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:00 -03 2025

THE
UNTOUCHABLES
Rimbunan Hijau’s
world of forest crime 
& political patronage THE
UNTOUCHABLES
Rimbunan Hijau’s
world of forest crime 
& political patronage 
THE
UNTOUCHABLES
Rimbunan Hijau’s
world of forest crime 
& political patronage THE
UNTOUCHABLES
Rimbunan Hijau’s
world of forest crime 
& political patronage 

The global trade in illegal and destructively
logged timber is now out of control. 
Unlawful access to forest resources,
environmental damage and forest destruction,human rights abuses and social dislocation of forest-dwelling peoples in some of the poorest areas of theworld, are being fuelled by those who buy timberand timber products from these illegal sources.
One major player in this field is Rimbunan Hijau. Rimbunan Hijau is a global conglomerate of
companies controlled by the Tiong family fromSarawak in Malaysia. Initially built as a timberempire, the company now has extensive interests inlogging, timber processing, publishing, propertyinvestment, new technology and travel.
Rimbunan Hijau dominates the logging industry
in Papua New Guinea and is a powerful industryplayer in Malaysia and Equatorial Guinea. It also hassignificant forestry interests in Gabon, Indonesia,Vanuatu, New Zealand, and Russia.
1In these countries, the operations of Rimbunan
Hijau are often characterised by a disregard for thelaw with documented illegalities in many aspects oftheir operations. 
Illegal access to forest resources, environmental
damage and human rights abuses are repeatedcomplaints. But the company seems impervious tocriticism and appears to be protected by anextensive and well-established network of politicalpatronage and media control.
Timber produced by Rimbunan Hijau is traded
across the globe with little concern for theenvironmental damage, misery and sufferingcaused in producer countries.
Rimbunan Hijau’s illegal timber and timber
products are being traded across-the-counter inAsia, America, Europe, Japan, Australia and NewZealand.
2THE UNTOUCHABLES
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
THIS REPORT
• Examines the extent and impact of Rimbunan Hijau’s (RH) timber operations in five key countries;
• Highlights the environmental damage, human rights abuses and social suffering caused by RH;• Reveals some of the networks of political patronage that protect RH;• Details the global trade in illegal timber from RH logging operations;• Suggests simple and effective solutions to forest crimes and to mitigate the activities of companies like RH.Kuwene Nakeye, a landowner from the Haya clan, Kosuo tribe in a reserve she protected from logging. Kuwene is seen here with he r nephew Alex Ubiye.They
have worked together to protect their land from logging by Rimbunan Hijau.© Scheltema/Greenpeace

THE UNTOUCHABLES 3
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage Ancient forests are fundamental to life on Earth.
They provide a home and vital sustenance tomillions of people. They provide a habitat forinnumerable species of plants and animals. Andthey perform vital ecological functions.
Ancient forests are the place that millions of
indigenous peoples call home. Some of thesepeoples constitute the poorest and mostdisadvantaged of all world citizens. They sufferhuman rights abuses, great poverty, disease andother social problems as forest areas are harvested,with little or no consideration for their plight or
livelihoods.
Now, just 20
percent of the Earth’soriginal forest coverremains as large intactareas; with more thana third of these underthreat. Industrial-scalelogging poses thesingle largest menaceto the forests’survival.
2
Across the globe,
trans-nationalcorporations continueto operate
destructively, and often outside of the law, as theyharvest the world’s last remaining accessible forestresources. 
Malaysian logging company, Rimbunan Hijau
(RH) is one such corporation.
Logging destruction is fuelled by a complacent
international marketplace. In addition, consumingnations worldwide, eager to fulfil a relentlessdemand for wood and paper, turn a blind eye tothe social, environmental and legal problems that
characterise the logging operations of companieslike Rimbunan Hijau. 
The actions of forest plunderers amount to far
more than just a huge ecological disaster.
They have severe impacts on local people and on
the national economies of some of the LeastDeveloped Countries (LDCs) in the world. 
KEY POINTS
1.Much of the global trade in timber and timber
products is unlawful. 
2.Destructively and illegally extracted timber
exacts a ruinous toll on forest eco-systems andon the lives of forest-dwelling peoples. It cheatsdeveloping countries of revenue and resourcesnecessary for survival and nationaldevelopment.
3.Companies like Rimbunan Hijau operate across
national boundaries and are a key participant inthe illegal harvesting of timber.
4.Such companies operate with impunity and
cultivate a network of political patronage thatbreeds off political systems that are underimmense stress in Southern nations.
5.Only measures at both the producer level (where
forests must be protected from illegal anddestructive logging) and at the consumer level(where illegal timber and timber products must
be identified and banned) will
effectively address the problem.
6. International and bilateral
political processes, such as theConvention for BiologicalDiversity (CBD), are anopportunity for governments tofund the protection of ancientforests and put in place strictinternational guidelines andprogrammes to achieve the“significant reduction inbiodiversity loss by 2010”, agreedto at the Johannesburg EarthSummit in 2002.THE GLOBAL FOREST CRISIS
“...landowners were forced
to sign papers with a
barrel of a gun at their
back. In the presence of
police and company
officials, without proper
legal advice, with guns
pointed at them.”
Annie Kajir, Human Rights Lawyer, Port
Moresby, Papua New Guinea. 3“Some 350 million of the poorest people on Earth are
entirely dependent on forests for their survival”
World Commission on Forests and Sustainable Development 1999.4
Pepsy Diabe, Kamala clan, Kusuo
Tribe stands amidst devastationof recent logging, Wawoi Guavi,Papua New Guinea. ©Scheltema/Greenpeace

4THE UNTOUCHABLES
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage WHO IS RIMBUNAN HIJAU?
"Established in 1975, Rimbunan Hijau Group has a
diversified portfolio of businesses with estimated annualturnover exceeding USD 1 billion, withmost items exported. Currently comprising 10,000employees in Malaysia, the Group continues to expand,including diversifying overseas. Over theyears, Rimbunan Hijau Group has built up extensiveexperience in logging, sawmilling, export of logs andsawntimber and downstream processing activities,ranging from plywood to medium density fibreboardand particleboard. Rimbunan Hijau Group is also apioneer in supporting Sarawak's emphasis ondownstream activities. In 1985, it established the state'sfirst large scale plywood mill under Rimbunan Hijau
Plywood Sdn. Bhd. The Group is also the majorshareholder of Jaya Tiasa Holdings Bhd and Subur TiasaHoldings Bhd, the public listed companies on the KualaLumpur Stock Exchange with market capitalisation ofabout more than RM 2 billion and the largest plywood,veneer and particleboard producer inMalaysia.In addition to its operations in Malaysia,Rimbunan Hijau Group has expanded internationally toPapua New Guinea, New Zealand, Australia, China, HongKong, Singapore, Gabon, Rusia, Congo, EquatorialGuinea & British Guyana."
9
Malaysian German Chamber of Commerce and IndustryRimbunan Hijau is a conglomeration of many
hundreds of companies spread across threecontinents all owned and controlled by the Tiongfamily but which sometimes have no other officialconnection. 
Rimbunan Hijau has business interests in Australia,
British Guyana, China, Equatorial Guinea, HongKong, Indonesia, Gabon, Malaysia, Aotearoa (NewZealand), Papua New Guinea, Russia, Singapore,Vanuatu and an estimated annual turnover in excessof US$1 billion according to the Malaysia-ChinaBusiness Council. 
5
The Tiong family has built Rimbunan Hijau into an
immense corporate empire that started out as alogging company but which now extends to includeinterests in timber processing, agriculture (cocoa andoil palm), aquaculture, insurance, banking,publishing
6, optical fibres, information technology,
shipping, retailing, travel, real estate and propertydevelopment, mineral and mining development andprint media. 
The business dealings and corporate structure of
Rimbunan Hijau as a company are not open ortransparent, particularly as regards its manycorporate shareholdings and takeovers.
In Papua New Guinea for example, Greenpeace
research has identified over 60 separate companiesas being owned or politically controlled by the Tiongfamily — but only a small minority are openlyacknowledged as being a part of the RimbunanHijau group. The ownership and control of the rest isobscured by undisclosed buyouts, proxy directors andshareholders, outdated company records, foreignownership and widespread use of tax havens.
7
MALAYSIAN MULTINATIONAL 
LOGGING COMPANIES
Multinational Malaysian logging companies got
their start in Malaysia’s rainforests.
Malaysian logging companies are often registered
as family-owned private limited companies, allowingthem to operate secretly as they are not publiclylisted corporations.
Many of these companies have political
connections that helped them secure large areas offorest.
Within a couple of decades they left large areas of
Malaysia deforested.
Less than 15 percent ofMalaysia’s forests todayremain intact
8. 
After years of
destructive loggingpractices, the Malaysiangovernment began toenact stricter regulationsto attempt to save whatlittle rainforest was leftin the country. Thiscaused the Malaysiancompanies to lookelsewhere for lumber —a path which led themto Indonesia, Papua NewGuinea and other partsof the world.
Equipment at an RH
logging camp in Kandrian,Papua New Guinea © Solness/Greenpeace

THE UNTOUCHABLES 5
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage POLITICAL PATRONAGE 
Rimbunan Hijau enjoys wide political patronage.
In Malaysia the Tiongs have been highly astute informing strategic alliances with the Malay politicalelite and are personally involved in the SUPP – themain Chinese Party in Sarawak. 
In the early nineties, the brother of Sarawak’s
Chief Minister (who controled the allocation oflogging concessions) was a director of a RimbunanHijau company and a sister of the Chief Ministerwas a Tiong business partner. 
Tiong Hiew King has himself been a State
Senator, a position that was also occupied by one ofhis sons, and Tiong family companies have sharedcontrol of their subsidiaries with Provincial Ministersand party officials.
10
In Sarawak these ties have resulted in a blurring
of the distinction between government and logginginterests and has led “to changes in legislation that
favour corporate activities and which result in thedisregard and repression of many actors within civilsociety.”
11
In Papua New Guinea Rimbunan Hijau is also
closely connected to the political elite. 
For example, one recent Deputy Prime Minister
was criticised in an Ombudsman investigation forunlawfully pressuring the National Forest Board tofavour Rimbunan Hijau with an illegal timberpermit extension. 
12
The Minister for Justice is Chair of a company
that holds a timber permit that it sub-contracts toRimbunan Hijau. A National IntelligenceOrganisation report alleges a provincial Governorand two Members of Parliament were on RimbunanHijau’s payroll.
13
Rimbunan Hijau is just one of a number of
Malaysian companies that have global timberinterests. Many of these companies have beencriticised for poor environmental, social and humanrights records.
14
If Malaysia is to be seen as a good global citizen
this attitude must change. Malaysia will attempt toportray a commitment to the environment whenhosting the Seventh Conference of the Parties(COP7) of the United Nations Convention onBiological Diversity in Kuala Lumpur in February2004. 
Globally, there are growing calls for
governments to hold transnational corporationsaccountable for their actions in foreign countries.This is especially important for companies operatingin smaller or less developed countries where therule of law and governance frameworks may beweak. 
The final text of the Johannesburg Earth Summit– the World Summit on Sustainable Development –
made a positive statement on corporateaccountability. WSSD called for: “Active promotionof corporate responsibility and accountabilityincluding through the full development andeffective implementation of intergovernmentalagreements and measures.” 
Malaysia is a signatory to the WSSD plan of
implementation and must start to make its rhetoricmatch its actions.
In order to make real its commitment to WSSD,
the Malaysian government must consider:
•Pursuit of amendments to its Corporations Law
to increase corporate accountability;
•Passage of legislation to impose standards on
Malaysian companies operating overseas;
•Actively supporting international mechanisms
that increase the accountability of itstransnational corporations.CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY
Office of the National newspaper,
which is owned by RimbunanHijau, in Port Moresby, Papua NewGuinea © Solness/Greenpeace

6THE UNTOUCHABLES
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage Papua New Guinea is a South Pacific nation of
some five million people, most of who still dependon the environment for their daily subsistence. 
The logging industry has already acquired 70
percent of available forest resources and RimbunanHijau is at the forefront of attempts to gain accessto what remains.
RIMBUNAN HIJAU IN PNG
Rimbunan Hijau is the dominant player in the
forest industry in Papua New Guinea and it hassignificant investments in other sectors of theeconomy.
Rimbunan Hijau maintains a veil of secrecy over
the true extent of its logging and other businessinterests but it has interests in more than 60interlinked companies that are registered in PapuaNew Guinea.
These companies control more than 50 percent
of Papua New Guinea’s large-scale commerciallogging operations and at least 55 percent of logexports. 
Greenpeace estimates that Rimbunan Hijau
controls timber rights in more than three millionhectares of forest and in 2002 alone, exported logsworth more than US$50 million from Papua NewGuinea. 
15
Rimbunan Hijau also operates Papua NewGuinea’s only veneer mill and
its largest sawmill.
In Papua New Guinea
Rimbunan Hijau controlscompanies involved incommercial printing, travel,wholesale and retail sales,shipping, propertydevelopment and owns adaily newspaper, TheNational. 
Rimbunan Hijau has close
connections to Papua NewGuinea’s political elite. ThePrime Minister has beendirectly involved in thelogging industry
16and his
Deputy has been criticised inan Ombudsman Commissionreport for ‘arbitrary andirresponsible’ interference indirecting the unlawfulallocation of the Kamula Dosalogging concession toRimbunan Hijau.
17
The Secretary of the
Department of Environment
and Conservation was also criticised by theOmbudsman Commission for his role in the sameaffair. 
The Minister for Justice is the Chair of a
company
18that holds the permit for the East Kikori
logging concession. His company employsRimbunan Hijau as its logging contractor. 
The Minister for Planning, the Minister for
Privatisation and the Chief Secretary are otherprominent leaders with well-documented links tothe logging industry in PNG.
19PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Wawoi Falls from the air, Wawoi Guawi, Papua New Guinea.© Greenpeace
The rainforests of Papua New Guinea and Asia Pacific shelter
regions of unusually high biodiversity. © Dorreboom/Greenpeace


THE UNTOUCHABLES 7
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage RIMBUNAN HIJAU AND ILLEGAL LOGGING
Most large-scale logging operations in Papua
New Guinea, including those operated byRimbunan Hijau, are unlawful as they are infundamental breach of a number of basic legalrequirements. 
Most logging operations do not have the
informed consent of the local resource owners(most of whom have never even been correctlyidentified)
20, they have not been initiated and
allocated according to the requirements of theForestry Act, they are being operated in almostcomplete defiance of environmental laws andregulations and they are not sustainable, which is aspecific requirement of both the PNG Constitutionand the Forestry Act.
21
An independent review was recently ordered by
the government into a number of new loggingpermits and extensions.
22Three of the reviews
involved logging projects operated by RimbunanHijau; Wawoi Guavi, Vailala Blocks 2 and 3 andPassismanua.
The review found that the extensions to all three
projects were unlawful as they breached legalrequirements and had not followed due process.The review reached the ‘unavoidable conclusionthat there have been serious departures andbreaches from due process and there are seriousanomalies in the timber permits and agreements’.
23
As well as declaring the project extensions
unlawful, the review also found that the originaltimber permits for Vailala Blocks 2 and 3 andWawoi Guavi were also unlawful and that thetimber rights had never been properly acquiredfrom the landowners.
24
Rimbunan Hijau managed to keep its
involvement in the unlawful extension of thePassismanua timber permit out of the PNG media bythreatening a defamation action against the PostCourier newspaper.
25Rimbunan Hijau’s denial of
involvement to the media was contradicted in thesubsequent review, which confirmed that RH wasthe logging company for Passismanua.
26
KAMULA DOSA
Kamula Dosa is Papua New Guinea’s largest
unallocated logging concession in the western partof the country. It covers over 800,000 hectares andcontains an estimated 11.2 million cubic metres ofcommercial timber.
The concession is the biggest prize currently
available to the logging industry in PNG and it iscoveted by a number of logging companiesincluding Rimbunan Hijau.
Forestry laws require that the timber rights bepublicly advertised in a
competitive biddingprocess to ensure thebest possible deal forthe local resourceowners. But RimbunanHijau has made anumber of attempts toavoid this process andto unlawfully acquirethe logging rights. 
In 1997 Rimbunan
Hijau was granted anunlawful geographicalextension to its WawoiGuavi timber permitthat covered the wholeof the Kamula Dosaconcession area. Theextension wassubsequentlyinvestigated andoverturned by theOmbudsmanCommission.
27
The Ombudsman
criticised a number ofpoliticians forinfluencing the decisionof the National ForestBoard and Boardmembers for floutingthe law and putting theinterests of RH abovethose of the resourceowners and the State.
28
The Ombudsman
recommended actionagainst a number ofBoard Members andRimbunan Hijau, butthose recommendationshave not beenenforced.
In 2002, Rimbunan
Hijau again tried tounlawfully secure thelogging rights forKamula Dosa. A Cabinet submission sponsored bythe then Deputy Prime Minister and a number of hisMinisterial colleagues proposed that RimbunanHijau should be given unique tax concessions andunlimited access to Kamula Dosa without having tofollow the legal allocation process or properprocedures. 
The submission was withdrawn after it was
publicly exposed. ROBBER BARONS 
The latest official inquiry into
the forestry sector in Papua New
Guinea found that all six new
permits and permit extensions
reviewed were unlawful. This is
how the Review of Disputed
Forest Allocations, 2003,
described the logging companies
operating in PNG:
‘the overwhelming conclusion
is that the robber barons are now
as active as they ever were. They
are not only free to roam, but are
in fact encouraged to do so by
persons whose proper role is to
exercise control over them...Only
a Commission of Inquiry could
hope to unearth the entire
picture and unravel the web of
deceit’.29
The Review looked specifically
at two of Rimbunan Hijau’s
largest logging operations,
Wawoi Guavi and Vailala. In
respect of these two concessions
the Review stated:
‘The time has come for a full
investigation into the affairs of
these companies (both RH
subsidiaries). They should be
compelled to produce documents
and account for their actions’.30
Despite these findings the
Prime Minister has said:
“I must congratulate
Rimbunan Hijau for investing
heavily in the forestry
sector...(this) is in line with
government policies...The
company and other genuine
forestry companies must be
supported.”31

8THE UNTOUCHABLES
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES 
For many years, local people living within timber
permit areas have complained of the abuse of theirfundamental human rights by timber companiesand by police personnel paid by these companies. 
The alleged abuses include the deprivation of
property, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment,denial of personal security, unlawful detention,invasion of privacy, denial of freedom of movementand freedom of speech, and a failure to providegood working conditions and adequate and equalpay.
33
These are all breaches of the United Nations
Universal Declaration on Human Rights. 
The complaints and allegations of the local
people are well-documented and include signedstatements and written letters of complaint to theRoyal PNG Constabulary and a personal videotestimony of some of the victims. 
SPECIFIC ALLEGATIONS INCLUDE: • People being forced to sign agreements under
duress including at gunpoint and threats ofimprisonment and even death.
34
• The use of armed police officers with guns drawn
to emphasise the ability of company personnel toenforce their threats.
35
• Use of police ‘mobile squads’ to quell any
industrial unrest amongst logging companyemployees.
36
• Use of firearms by logging company managers to
threaten and intimidate local people.37
• Torture, physical abuse and unlawful detention
of local people by police officers ‘employed’ bythe logging company.
38
• Rape of female employees by logging company
managers and police.39THE SOCIAL IMPACTS OF LOGGING
A number of reports32have documented the negative social impacts of the logging industry in Papua
New Guinea. These negative impacts include:
Diminished food security – reduced availability of foods from within the forests (meat, insects, herbage,
fungi, fish), loss of gardens and food stands from poor logging practices, loss of water resources and reefsystems.
Loss of clean water supplies – soil erosion, poor roading and waste disposal all pollute water courses.
Poorer health – nutrition problems, water pollution, increased malaria, introduction of sexual diseases,
intoxication, industrial injuries, loss of traditional medicines.
Loss of local economic resources – loss of forest products that are traditionally traded including foods,
resins, timber for construction and canoes, building materials, medicines.
Undermining of social systems – community values undermined, social conflict, alcohol, prostitution, land
disputes, displacement of families from forest areas, marginalisation of women.
Increased gender burdens – women have to work longer and harder to look after their families
Increased conflict – with logging companies, forestry officials and police and between different local
factions or community groups
WOMEN SUFFER MOST
“Allegations of human rights abuses
against women working in isolated loggingcamps are being documented by unions bothin PNG and internationally. 
Many of these camps are so isolated the
only way in or out is by plane. Once in thecamps, many women claim they are forced tohave sex with company officials and the policewho work for them. 
Union officials have taken dozens of
statements from women and girls who saythey are routinely threatened with guns thatare fired to scare them into having sex. 
Women who become pregnant are faced
with a choice of an abortion or facing ejectionfrom the camps, with no way to travel thehundreds of kilometres home.” (ACF 2003)
© Scheltema/Greenpeace

THE UNTOUCHABLES 9
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS
OF LOGGING 
Environmental studies40indicate
that logging by Rimbunan Hijau inPapua New Guinea is among the mostenvironmentally destructive of anyselective logging operations studied anywhere onthe planet. Losses to the residual stand have beenrecorded at more than 100 trees per hectare. Whatis supposed to be selective logging is effectivelyclear felling.
The logging mainly ignores the prescriptions in
the PNG Logging Code of Practice. Buffer zones arenot respected, logging tracks are bulldozed throughstreams, poor road construction wastes logs andpollutes water courses, oil and other wastepollution is endemic, standing water attractsmosquitos and increases the incidence of malaria,and undersized logs are constantly felled.
41
Papua New Guinea’s Constitution and Forestry
Act require that all forest operations are carried outin a sustainable manner and that resources areprotected for future generations. In reality, theseprescriptions are ignored and the average life of alogging concession is just 12 years.
42This is less than
one-third of the legally mandated 40-year cuttingcycle and is also ecologically inadequate. 
NO MONITORING OR ENFORCEMENT
Despite the very poor environmental
performance of logging companies in PNG, noaction is ever taken against them. The Departmentof Environment and Conservation does not evenhave a forestry monitoring team and the 2002Ombudsman Commission found that theDepartment head, Wari Iamo has gone out of hisway to support Rimbunan Hijau.
43
Wari Iamo has been criticised by the Ombudsman
Commission for neglect of duty for supporting anillegal logging permit extension for RimbunanHijau. When disciplinary proceedings were initiatedagainst him by his former Minister for a series ofoffences, the Prime Minister himself intervened,sacking his Minister and re-instating the suspendedSecretary.WAWOI GUAVI
In an unpublished report44commissioned by
Greenpeace, scientist Dr David Melick has studiedthe environmental impacts of logging by RimbunanHijau in its Wawoi Guavi timber concession inWestern Province. 
The research uncovered an extensive catalogue
of breaches of PNG’s Logging Code of Practice. Thereport identified 261 separate breaches of 18 keylogging standards.
These breaches were seen to have serious
environmental impacts, including injury towaterways and watersheds, severe erosion andserious pollution to soil and waterways from oil andtoxic chemicals.
The study also found frequent damage to
cultural sites from logging operations and thefelling and removal of undersized trees.
Although Greenpeace and Dr Melick were in the
area at the invitation of landowners, RimbunanHijau used the Southern Command Police Task forceto try andintimidatethem and torestrict accessinto the forest.RH also placedlocked chainsand logs acrossroads toinhibitmovement inthe area. 
“Having examined some of the
logging operations, it is now
difficult to view the responsible
environmental position espoused
on behalf of Rimbunan Hijau with
anything other than cynicism” 
(Melick 2003)
Wawoi Guavi timber concessions, 
Papua New Guinea.

10 THE UNTOUCHABLES
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage Indonesia has 10 percent of the world’s
remaining tropical forests. They are home to some50 million indigenous people. These forests teemwith unique wildlife and the highest diversity oftrees and vines found anywhere in the world. 
Hundreds of unique mammal and bird species
live in the forests of Indonesia, often only on asingle island.
Yet, if the current rates of logging and forest
conversion continue, the lowland dry forests ofSumatra and Indonesian Borneo will have beencompletely destroyed by 2010.
45
Indonesia is one of the major sources of illegally
traded tropical timber. According to governmentestimates, as much as 90 percent of the country’sproduction is unlawful, amounting to some 50
million cubic metreseach year.
46
Evidence shows that
this illegal productionand trade is continuingdespite a log exportban introduced inIndonesia in November2001
48. The primary
destination of illegaltimber exports fromIndonesia is Malaysiawhere log imports arecontinuing, despite aban on log importsfrom Indonesiaintroduced in June2002. 
In October 2003, the Indonesian Minister of
Forestry called on the European Union to rejecttimber products from Malaysia, saying that they
contain a large amount of illegal wood fromIndonesia.
49
In Indonesia, much of the logging is unlawful
because it is done without a government permit orlicence. This is possible because of the bribes thatare paid to police, forestry officials and politicians.
50
Kidnapping, bribery and attempted murder have allbeen documented as the methods used by thelogging companies to protect their illegal trade.
51
ILLEGAL LOGGING, RIMBUNAN HIJAU AND
THE MILITARY
“Military involvement in illegal activities is taken
for granted in Indonesia. Hundreds of reports ofmilitary involvement in illegal logging haveemerged and there is recognition of this seriousproblem within government. Reports of militarypersonnel owning illegal sawmills, backing timberbarons and applying pressure for the release ofconfiscated logs are common and widespread.”
52
The Environment Investigation Agency (EIA)53in
London and the Indonesian group Telapak havereported links between the company PT RimbunanHijau Jaya and the Indonesian military. EIA andTelapak visited communities in West Papua andobtained documents clearly linking a military officerto PT Rimbunan Hijau Jaya and illegal logging. 
In a brief presented to the Indonesian
Government they described how the illegal loggingis being facilitated by the use of ‘military power’that is used to threaten local communities.
54
Illegal logging by PT Rimbunan Hijau Jaya has
been reported at three sites and is occurring despitethe opposition of the majority of the local people.Letters of complaint were sent to forestry officials
in 2002 but a promised
investigation has nevereventuated. 
The EIA and Telapak have
called on the IndonesianGovernment to take decisiveaction to prevent the export ofillegally felled logs and todiscipline and prosecutemilitary officers involved withlogging companies in illegalactivities.INDONESIA
“Rimbunan Hijau has
become one of the most
ruthless logging companies
in the world due to abuses
of national laws and
regulations, human rights
violations and contractual
breaches”
Richard Wilcox. Asian Economies Fuel
Forest Meltdown, published in 
The New Observer47
Merbau Logs cut on Knasaimos land © EIA/Telapak 2003

THE UNTOUCHABLES 11
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage EQUATORIAL GUINEA 
Rimbunan Hijau operates in a number of
African countries including Gabon andEquatorial Guinea, where its subsidiaryShimmer International and its manyassociated companies have been a dominantplayer in the logging sector
55under the
“sponsorship of the Minister for Forests”56,
who is also the President’s son57. 
In Equatorial Guinea, some 70 percent of
the forest has been allocated for large-scaleindustrial logging
58despite the importance of
the forest for the daily subsistence of thelargely rural population.
Although local laws require that 60
percent of log production must be processedon-shore, most timber is still being exportedas cheap raw logs
59. This deprives the country
of resource revenues, economic investmentand employment opportunities. 
Enforcement of legal requirements is
virtually non-existent in commercial logging,according to the World Rainforest Movement(WRM) and although logging companies arerequired by law to provide health, educationand social facilities for local communities,enforcement is very poor.
60
About 85 per cent of
the African rainforestthat once spread acrossEquatorial Guinea,Cameroon, CentralAfrican Republic,Congo Brazzaville, theDemocratic Republic ofCongo and Gabon hasbeen lost. Industriallogging threatens mostof what remains.
© Mauthe/GreenpeaceLandowner Sakas Aomono is dressed
in the traditional warrior gear, usedwhen going out fighting. 
Aonoma’s grandparents used the local
Bula creek as medicine. “They woulduse this creek when they were sick, itwould make them better. This creekhas faded away. It cannot heal peoplebecause they came and disturbed thebeliefs we have. It will not be thesame as before. There’s no fish sincethe company came. Before my motherand father used to do this, now thereis nothing. Our medicine is not likebefore.
“By looking at that place I feel very
sad and upset and frustrated aboutmy land being destroyed”.
Sakas Aonomo from Bula Creek, Middle Fly District, Western Province, PNG
© Scheltema/Greenpeace

12 THE UNTOUCHABLES
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage Malaysia is one of the world’s major producers
and exporters of tropical timber. It is the home basefor Rimbunan Hijau and a number of other majortransnational logging companies.
The majority of Malaysia’s timber production
comes from Sarawak where about 70 percent of the
land area has been allocated for logging. Here,
Rimbunan Hijau has an estimated 800,000 hectaresof production forest.
61
Rimbunan Hijau produces 3-4 million cubic
metres of logs per year, which gives the company a20-25 percent share of the Malaysian timberindustry.
62
SOCIAL IMPACTS OF LOGGING
Logging companies active in Sarawak are well-
known to indigenous dyak peoples for seriouslyundermining their livelihoods and survival. Widely documented negative
social consequences of thelogging industry include a severeimpact on food security, pollutionof water supplies, increasingincidences of ill-health anddisease, the disruption of localeconomies and changes in socialstability.
63
In 2002, the Penan people documented the
abuses they have suffered at the hands of thelogging industry in the Long Sayan Declaration.
64
The Penan are particularly affected as they are asemi-nomadic forest dwelling people- their foresthas been their home for thousands of years. Theirfight against logging is a fight for their lives.
Over 700 people from 40 communities
formulated the Declaration to clearly spell out theirsuffering as a people displaced and abused by thelogging industry.
The Declaration details the food shortages,
frequent illnesses and income loss brought about bylogging operations and calls for immediategovernment action as the very survival of the Penanpeople is severely threatened by the loggingindustry, which continues to reap huge profits fromthe sales of timber resources extracted from theirancestral land with impunity.MALAYSIA
“Our forest and land have been supplying us with
abundant resources and providing us with sources of
income and have also shaped our culture, beliefs and
customs. Thus, to destroy the forest has the same
impact of destroying our community.”
Long Sayan Declaration 
A Rimbunan Hijau logging tractor and feller team works in a logging concession in the middle Baram valley, Malaysia. © Dang/Gre enpeace“Members of our
community are
suffering from
poor health due
to the lack of a
balanced diet
and air and
water pollution
caused by
logging
activities.”
Long Sayan Declaration 

THE UNTOUCHABLES 13
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage As is the case in Papua New Guinea, Indonesia
and Africa, Malaysia also suffers severe anduncontrolled environmental impacts from loggingactivities.
Careless and negligent logging practices impact
on local watersheds and cause soil erosion; theydisrupt local climates and cause or exacerbate forestfires. There is also a toll on bio-diversity withinforests, and the marine environment.
A report by the World Rainforest Movement
(WRM) and Forests Monitor in 1998, listed a numberof Malaysian citizens who had their human rightsabused and freedom of movement restricted as aresult of their opposition to illegal logging. In eachcase, the named individuals had been prevented bygovernment officials from travelling to attendinternational meetings and then had their passportswithdrawn.
65
There is evidence that Rimbunan Hijau is now
trying to apply similar tactics in Papua New Guinea.In November 2003, threats were issued to a localairline to only fly RH approved passengers to anairstrip inside its Wawoi Guavi logging concessionand to deny travel to any non-governmentorganisations.
66
SOCIAL CONFLICT
AND HUMANRIGHTS ABUSES INSARAWAK
Indigenous peoples
in Sarawak have lodgedmany complaints to theauthorities aboutlogging-related andland rights problems,but their complaintshave constantly beenignored. 
Over the last 20
years, thousands ofindigenous dyak peoplein Sarawak have beenblockading andprotesting againstlogging, plantationsand other destructive development activities within
their customary land and against infringement oftheir rights. In response they have been harassed,intimidated, suppressed and arrested by thegovernment and companies. 
Supporting these company interests, police and
forest department officials have arbitrarily arrestedand detained those indigenous people who put upany form of protest, even though such protests areundertaken within the confines of their own landsand they have legitimate rights under the law tosuch forms of protest.
67
In one such protest in
August 2000, more than100 Penan people in theApoh and Tutoh regionsbarricaded a loggingroad to prevent accessby three timbercompanies including asubsidiary of RimbunanHijau.
68
The action was taken
after numerous verbaland written appeals buttheir problems wereignored. The peopleaccuse the loggingcompanies of hiringgangsters to threaten them not to pursue theirclaims of encroachment, illegal logging anddamage to fruit gardens and burial sites. 
Protests and blockades continued through 2002
and 2003.
The top politicians in Sarawak have
long been awarding logging
concessions to themselves, their
families and their supporters.” 
WRM and Forest Monitor (1998)“The activities of the
Sarawak timber company
Rimbunan Hijau have
wreaked environmental and
social havoc in Sarawak for
years through their
widespread logging
activities.” 
Utusan Konsumer, Penang, (Nov 1993)69
Previously logged Malaysian forests in the early morning fog. A Rimbunan Hijau logging road is just visible in the foreground.
© Dang/Greenpeace

14 THE UNTOUCHABLES
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage Spread over 774 million hectares, Russia has the
biggest forest area in the world. This representsabout 24 percent of all the forests on our planet.About two-thirds of these forests are located in theremote northern regions of Siberia and in the FarEast. 
In the more densely populated areas of
European Russia, Southern Siberia and parts of theFar East, forests have been severely over-loggedduring the last 50 years, placing great pressure onremaining resources.
All Russian forests are State-owned; with no
private ownership. The State is responsible forprotection and management of forests, even inconcession areas. The forest service is the biggest inthe world, employing about 220,000 people. 
Environmental activists in the Russian Far East
are becoming increasingly concerned about theextent of illegal logging in the region. 
They say the rich timber resources of the ancient
forests are being plundered despite Russia’s strictlaws on logging. Environmentalists blamecorruption by local officials and lack of funds toenforce controls on timber shipments.
70
Rimbunan Hijau has been operating in Russia
since 1997 when it acquired the rights to harvest305,000 hectares of State forest in a region that hadbeen earmarked for environmental protection.
71 
Since 1997, RH has acquired further large-scale
concession areas in the Ul’chsky/Solnechny andVaninsky districts. The Forest Club of Russia have expressed
concerns about Rimbunan Hijau’s loggingoperations:
“Logging in the upstream of river Soukpai by the
RH company will result in destruction of theexisting forest ecosystems of the basin, spreadingof forest fires, soil erosion and disturbance to thehydrologic balance of local rivers... that now servesas an important sources of means of subsistence
for most of the local residents.”
72
Rimbunan Hijau has been repeatedly fined for
violations of logging regulations and environmentallaws.
73
In 2002, Rimbunan Hijau exported 700,000 cubic
meters of timber from Russia with a value of US$58million (2001).
74Seventy-six percent of this was sold
to China. Most of this trade is believed to be withsmall buyers around the border town of Suienghe.The remaining 24 percent was exported to PacificBarter Trade Limited in Hong Kong.RUSSIA 
Region where Rimbunan Hijau already has forest
concessions
Region where Rimbunan Hijau plans to secure
forest concessions

THE UNTOUCHABLES 15
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage Although the forest industry in New Zealand/
Aotearoa is based on the plantation production ofsoftwood species, Rimbunan Hijau is a major player.
Rimbunan Hijau’s first forestry investment in
Aotearoa was the purchase of five forest licensesfrom the national government in 1990 through theTiong controlled company, Ernslaw One.
75
This gave the company logging rights in three
regions, Coromandel, Manawatu and Otago. Sincethen the company has diversified its intereststhrough investments in wood processing, timberimporting and wholesale, land and propertydevelopment, scientific products, fish farming andports.
76In particular, the timber importing
enterprise The Lumberbank, is importing timberfrom Rimbunan Hijau’s illegal operations in PapuaNew Guinea. This is a major part of the 4,000 m3 ofsawn timber imported into New Zealand from PNGin 2003.
Since 1990, Ernslaw One has expanded its forest
estate from an initial 22,000 hectares to 53,000hectares through the purchase of furtherplantations and the conversion of farmland.
In stark contrast to the performance and
management of Rimbunan Hijau’s forest operationsin tropical countries (and Russia), in NewZealand/Aotearoa, it is seeking to be a responsibleforest manager. According to the company’swebsite:
“Ernslaw One firmly believes in caring for the
environment, and strives to ensure that it’s forestand timber processing operations meet therequirements of sound environmentalmanagement. It’s plantation forests are managed asa sustainable resource.”
77
Ernslaw One has all its plantation operations
certified under the globally recognised green-labelling Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) scheme.
To become FSC certified, Ernslaw One was
required under FSC rules, to “demonstrate a long-term commitment to the Forest Stewardship CouncilPrinciples and Criteria”
78. 
It is barely credible that Ernslaw One could
demonstrate such a commitment when it is part ofthe Rimbunan Hijau group of companies that sodemonstrably fails to live up to the most basic socialand environmental standards in almost all of itslogging operations. 
However, even in New Zealand/Aotearoa Ernslaw
One’s plantation forest operations still have someway to go to meet FSC responsible managementstandards. The certification of its North Islandoperations was subject to 25 conditions thatidentify failures to comply with FSC standards andwhich require stipulated remediation, most of themwithin 12 months. 
In particular, there are major concerns on their
clear-fell logging practices in catchments of theirplantations in the Coromandel in the North East ofthe North Island that are prone to severe highrainfall events. In the implementation of the locallaw, the Resource Management Act, a number oflocal community organisations and neighbours ofthe company have been battling to protect localstreams and harbour.
Dairy farmer Paul Bibby, whose farm is a
neighbour of Coromandel’s Whangapoua Forest,appeared on TVNZ’s “Frontline” investigation of thecompany
79in 1994. His concern was that it was
logging too much, too fast and that the barehillsides would lead to a major silt problem, as hadhappened previously in the days of Forest Serviceownership. Both farms and Whangapoua Harbourhad been badly silted in the past, causing somefarms to be inundated under a metre of silt. Thecompany has denied that it is engaged in anyenvironmentally unsound practices on theCoromandel.
Local people were astounded to discover that
the local District Council had agreed to reduce thewidth of the riparian strips (strips either side of astream, river or lake that is protected) from 20metres to five metres without consulting them.There are also complaints that shellfish beds in theharbour are being buried by silt. More recently, thecompany has created further controversy by buyingup an adjacent dairy farm and proposing to build alarge sawmill and processing plant.
NEW ZEALAND/ AOTEAROA
“Ernslaw One had gone through the motions of
consulting the locals but totally refused to
accommodate any of the residents association's Draft
Code of Logging Practice. After rain, the dirty water
now extends right out through the harbour. We've
had absolutely no satisfaction from the company." 
Paul Bibby, on behalf of the Whangapoua Environmental Protection Society.Rimbunan Hijau has committed to FSC in New Zealand but still has away to go to improve plantation management, especially streamprotection. © Greenpeace

16 THE UNTOUCHABLES
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage Rimbunan Hijau interests in the Solomon Islands
are mainly through the Earthmovers SolomonIslands group, including Pacific Timbers Ltd, andmore recently, a company called Delta. RimbunanHijau’s Solomon Islands subsidiaries have been partof a handful of Asian corporate groups that havebeen logging at more than four times thesustainable rate
80. They have been criticised anddocumented as providing little benefit to the
country and for destructive practices, including:transfer pricing and under reporting of logreceipts
81 82, payments to members of parliament to
overturn the government83, what has been
described as “the worst logging seen in any tropicalforest”
84 85, social impacts86, and poor worker
conditions87.
Rimbunan Hijau operations in Vanuatu, while not
of the scale of elsewhere, have always beencontroversial. In the early 1990s subsidiarycompanies were involved in logging opposed bylandowners in remnant forest on the island ofErromango. Their Santo Veneers operation on SantoIsland have been a source of conflict with locallandholders since it started operating. In 1995, localsburned a Santo Veneers bulldozer in protest at thecompany logging in an area for which they had nocontract. The Supreme Court acquitted the localfamily concerned “after hearing evidence that SantoVeneers and Timbers Limited were logging in anarea where they had no contract and continued tolog the area even after the burning of theirbulldozer and a court injunction not to log there”.
88There have been other controversies over the
project. For example; 
• An official inspection visit on one occasion in
1997 identified trees which had been cutillegally; 
• The company is believed to be entering into
contracts after having identified only a few ofthe legitimate landholders, rather than all ofthem as required by law; 
• There are also believed to be other contractual
irregularities and reports of logging in protectedareas.
89
Santo Veneer logging has nearly exhausted the
commercial natural forests on Santo Island, largelydue to the over-estimation of commercial volumescontained in the forests and required to meet theveneer processing plant.SOLOMON ISLANDS
VANUATU 
Solomon Islands has witnessed poor logging practices at the hands of a number of logging companies. © Solness/Greenpeace

THE UNTOUCHABLES 17
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage The international trade in tropical timber only
exists because of the demand from the marketplace. The trade in illegal timber and the humanand environmental suffering that it causes are thedirect result of a market where the buyers of timberand timber products do not discriminate betweentimbers from different sources.
LOG EXPORTS
The major export markets for raw log exports
from Papua New Guinea, Indonesia, Malaysia andRussia are China and Japan.
90
For instance, of 1.85 million cubic metres of
declared exports from Papua New Guinea in 2002,62 percent went to China and Hong Kong and 23percent to Japan. These figures reflect a trendwhere, over the last three years, log exports toJapan have declined as China has become thedominant market. 
In both countries species like Calophyllum are
used to produce cheap plywood for theconstruction sector, with large Japanese tradinghouses like Nissho Iwai facilitating the trade. 
SAWN TIMBER 
Sawn timber is the fastest-growing timber export
from Papua New Guinea. Volumes have risendramatically from 23,000 cubic metres in 1999 to42,348 cubic metres in 2002
91. This reflects the
commissioning of Rimbunan Hijau’s major sawmillat Kamusie in Western Province. Rimbunan Hijau’s major markets for sawn timber
from Papua New Guinea are in Australia and NewZealand/Aotearoa.
In Australia, RH controls a subsidiary named TLB
Timber that operates out of Brisbane.  Thiscompany sells illegal and destructively loggedtimber to many small companies and individuals inAustralia.  This timber is then turned into mouldingsand other building components.
According to figures from the Forest Authority in
PNG, in 2002 Australia imported 16,653 cubicmetres of rough sawn timber from Papua NewGuinea.
This timber is tainted with illegality, human
rights abuses, environmental destruction, andnegative social impacts.
VENEER AND PLYWOOD
Other processed commodities experienced sharp
increases in past years, mainly due to theinstallation of Rimbunan Hijau’s Panakawa mill inWestern Province.  Exports of veneer rose from1,700 cubic metres in 1999 to 71,615 cubic metres in2002 and plywood exports likewise increased from7,000 cubic metres in 1999 to 70,083 cubic metres in2002.
92
Again Asian market countries such as China,
Taiwan and Korea imported the bulk of thesetimber products. MARKETS AND CHAIN OF CUSTODY
RH timber bound for TLB in Australia being loaded in Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea. © Scheltema/Greenpeace

18 THE UNTOUCHABLES
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage The findings illustrated in this report have clearly
identified Rimbunan Hijau as being involved insignificant forest crime. It is destructively loggingvast areas of ancient forest in defiance of nationallaws, local customs and the rights of resourceowners. It is causing large-scale environmentaldamage and increasing the poverty of local peopleunder the protection of political elites.
Rimbunan Hijau controls industrial-scale logging
operations in at least eight countries and operatesacross three continents. Many of its loggingoperations are characterised by illegal access,environmental damage, human rights abuses, socialconflict and political corruption.
Timber harvested by Rimbunan Hijau is traded
around the world – as logs, sawn timber, veneersand plywood and as finished products like furnitureand ornamental blinds. 
Traded and re-traded through Asian, American
and European ports, the illegal timber and timberproducts that come from Rimbunan Hijau’s forest
operations have been traced into the stores of someof the world’s most affluent nations.
After decades of conferences and international
commitments including the Convention onBiological Diversity, Forest Law Enforcement andGovernance processes, International Tropical TimberAgreement and the United Nations Forum onForests, now is the time for action.
Rimbunan Hijau is a transnational corporation
that represents everything that is wrong with theway in which forest resources are being managed.Rimbunan Hijau presents the perfect test againstwhich to judge the resolve of the internationalcommunity to deal effectively with the problems offorest crime and the trade in illegal timber.
Greenpeace calls on the international community
to take up the challenge and match the globalrhetoric with effective action.SUMMARY
GREENPEACE URGES:
• Protection of remaining forest areas from illegal and destructive logging; • International financial support to individual countries to replace foregone
logging revenues;
• Effective international action to enforce corporate responsibility and sanction
corporations that operate outside the law;
• International initiatives to stop the cross-border trade in illegal timber and
timber products, including consumer nation timber import controls;
• Further support for market-based initiatives that identify and label products
from sources that are environmentally, socially and economically sustainable.
SOLUTIONS © Scheltema/Greenpeace

THE UNTOUCHABLES 19
Rimbunan Hijau’s world of forest crime & political patronage REFERENCES
FOOTNOTESAustralian Conservation Foundation (2003)
Submission to the Senate Foreign Affairs,Defence and Trade References CommitteeInquiry into Australia’s Relationship withPapua New Guinea and other Pacific IslandCountries 
Barnett T (1987) Commission of Inquiry into
Aspects of the Timber Industry in Papua NewGuinea
BBC (2001) Illegal logging spreads in Russia.
Francis Markus
Brunois (1999) The Ecological Impacts of the
Wawoi Guavi Company’s LoggingExploitation on the Territory and Society ofthe Kasau People, Avenir des Peuples desForets Tropicales. Paris.
Bryant et al (1997) The lost frontier forests.
WRI, WCMC, Washington DC.
Central Bank of Solomon Islands (1995)
Annual Report, Honiara
Duncan, Prof.R.C. (1994) Melanesian Forestry
Sector Study. Australian InternationalDevelopment Assistance Bureau
Eco-Forestry Forum (2002) PNG forest
resources and the log export industry. PNGEco-Forestry Forum, Port Moresby.
EIA and Telapak (2003a) Timber traffickers:
How Malaysia and Singapore and reaping aprofit from the illegal destruction ofIndonesia’s forests.
EIA and Telapak (2003b) Above the law:
Corruption, collusion, nepotism and the fateof Indonesia’s forests.
EIA and Telapak (2003c) Brief on military
officer involved in illegal logging.
EMW (1995) ed. Frank Kurschner-Pelkmann,
Maureen Trott, Inken Wohlbrand Our treesand all the wildlife have gone. Association ofProtestant Churches in Germany, Hamburg.Erskine (1999a) An Environmental Impact
Assessment of Logging Operations in Block 3of the Wawoi Guavi TRP , Kamusie, WesternProvince, Papua New Guinea.
Erskine (1999b) Environmental and social
impact assessment of logging operations inthe Vanimo Timber Area, Sandaun Province,Papua New Guinea.
Frontline (1994) Television New ZealandForest Information Service (2003a) Rimbunan
Hijau Corporate Map. Unpublished report forGreenpeace.
Forest Information Service (2003b) Rimbunan
Hijau Logging Concessions. Unpublishedreport for Greenpeace.
Forest Information Service (2003c) Rimbunan
Hijau Logging Operations. Unpublishedreport for Greenpeace.
Forest Information Service (2003d) The Impacts
of Large-scale Logging. Unpublished reportfor Greenpeace.
Forest Information Service (2003e) Wawoi
Guavi Case Study. Unpublished report forGreenpeace.
Forest Monitor (March 2001) Sold Down the
River 
Country Profile: Equatorial Guinea.
http://www.forestsmonitor.org/reports/solddownriver/guinea.htm
Forests.org (2001) Rimbunan Hijau moves to
destroy Russia’s forests.
Four Corners (2002) The timber mafia.
Broadcast on ABC television August 2, 2002.
Greenpeace (1999) Buying Destruction.
Greenpeace International, Amsterdam.
Greenpeace Australia Pacific and Oliver, Pam
(2001) Caught Between Two Worlds- a socialimpact study of large and small-scaledevelopment in Marovo Lagoon, SolomonIslands, Suva, Fiji.
Greenpeace (2002) Partners in Crime:
Malaysian loggers, timber markets and thepolitics of self interest in Papua New Guinea.Greenpeace International, Amsterdam.
Independent Forestry Review Team (2001)
Auditing forestry projects currently ‘inprocess’ for compliance with therequirements of policy, the Forestry Act andother regulations and guidelines.
Independent Forestry Review Team (2003)
Review of disputed forest allocations.
International Network of Forests and
Communities (2002) Global Forests, GlobalCitizens.
The Jakarta Post (Oct. 15, 2003) EU Urged to
Reject KL Wood Products
Kocher-Schmidt (1999) Vanimo - Kilimeri
Intensive Interdisciplinary Research Report.
Kocher-Schmidt (2000) Lessons learned from
the Vanimo Timber Rights Purchase area.
Marshall (1989) Rimbunan Hijau. Unpublished
report
Melick, Dr D. (2003) A Preliminary
Environmental Investigation of the LoggingOperations in the Wawoi Guavi Area,Western Province, Papua New Guinea.Unpublished report for Greenpeace.
Olsen and Turnbull (18 August 1993)
Assessment of the growth rates of loggedand unlogged forests in the Solomon Islands.Solomon Islands National Forest ResourcesInventory, Working Paper
Ombudsman Commission (2002) Final Report
Investigation into a Decision of the NationalForest Board to Award Kamula Dosa toWawoi Guavi Timber Company (a subsidiaryof Rimbunan Hijau).
National Intelligence Organisation (2000)Office of Counter Intelligence Baimaru Field
Report.
Pwesei (2000) Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment of Logging Operations in theWest Coast of Manus Area, Manus Province.
Review of Disputed Forest Allocations (2003a)
Report on Confidential Matters.
Review of Disputed Forest Allocations (2003b)
Summary of Findings and Recommendations.
Review of Disputed Forest Allocations (2003c)
Review of Wawoi Guavi Blocks 1,2 and 3.
Review of Disputed Forest Allocations (2003d)
Review of Vailala TRP Blocks 2 and 3.
Sahabat Alam Malaysia (1989) The battle for
Sarawak’s forests.
Sahabat Alam Malaysia (2000) Penan stage
protest against logging companies.
Special Broadcasting Service (SBS) (2001)
Papua New Guinea - Wilderness laid wasteby corruption. Dateline May 2nd 2001
Solomon Star (November 10, 1995) 7 million
scam surfaced
Solomon Star (March 1998) Earthmovers
ordered to pay workers
Trading Post (17 January 1996), VanuatuTimber Trade Federation (2003) ‘Report on a
Mission to Indonesia 20-31st January 2003’ 
World Commission on Forests and Sustainable
Development (1999) Our forests our future.Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
World Rainforest Movement (WRM) 2001.
Equatorial Guinea: Transnational loggers inthe forest. WRM Bulletin Number 49, August2001.
World Rainforest Movement and Forest
Monitor (1998). High Stakes: The need tocontrol transnational logging companies.World Rainforest Movement and ForestMonitor.
1 International Network of Forests and
Communities (2002)
2 Greenpeace defines ancient forests as
“the world’s remaining forests that havebeen shaped largely by natural eventsand that are little impacted by humanactivities”. Logging is a threat to 72% ofthe world’s threatened ancient forests,compared to 20% threatened byagricultural clearance and 38% by miningand road-building. Greenpeace (1999a);Bryant et al (1997)
3 SBS Television, Dateline (2001).4 Quoted by International Network of
Forests and Communities (2002) 
5 From the site of the Malaysia-China
Business Councilwww.mcbc.org.my/en/profile/pro_tionghk(Nov 2003)
6 Rimbunan Hijau interests in newspaper
publishing include Sin Chew Jit Poh, theleading Chinese language daily inMalaysia, The National, an Englishlanguage daily in Papua New Guinea andGuang Ming Ribao, a Chinese daily inPenang
7 Forest Information Service (2003a)8 Bryant (1997)9 http://www.mgcc.com.my/mgcc/
memdir.nsf/ba9e7b9d0ad61b7b47256bf200400d23/2e9982968473324348256bea0041d511?OpenDocument
10 Marshall (1989)11 World Rainforest Movement and Forest
Monitor (1998), pg 8
12 Ombudsman Commission (2002)13 National Intelligence Organisation report
(2000)
14 World Rainforest Movement and Forest
Monitor (1998)
15 FIS (2003b)16 As the owner of 50% of the shares in the
Sepik River Development Corporation, theholder of a logging permit for the LowerSepik Local Forest Agreement the PrimeMinister was criticised in Barnett (1987)as SRDC was supposed to be arepresentative landowner company but itclearly was not, and the PM had putpressure on the Minister and Secretary ofForests to speed up the permit allocation(the project was also contrary to anAustralian funded Land DevelopmentFeasibility Study process)
17 Ombudsman Commission (2002) pp 96
and 97
18 Gopera Investments19 The Minister for Privatisation is a
shareholder in Heybridge Limited, thelogging contractor to Sepik RiverDevelopment Corporation (a company 50percent owned by the Prime Minister) inLower Sepik. The Minister for Planning’swife was a shareholder in Richard GaultIndustries, a logging company that wasalso part owned by the Kerawara loggingcompany. The Chief Secretary is a directorof Media Assets Limited, the permitholder for the Kapuluk loggingconcession.
20 This problem was highlighted in the
government’s 2001 ‘Audit of ForestryProjects currently in process’. Of 32
projects reviewed it was found that inevery case sufficient steps had not beentaken to identify landowners and informthem of their rights prior to the signing oflogging agreements, Independent ReviewTeam (2001) 
21 These problems have been noted in a
number of reports including IndependentReview Team (2001 and 2003); Kocher-Schmidt (1999 and 2000), Melick (2003),Erskine (1999a and 1999b), Pwesei(2000), Greenpeace (2002)
22 An independent review established by the
PNG government to investigateallegations that the six major newlogging concession allocations and permitextensions in 2002 were unlawful. Thereview comprised a forester, lawyer andlandowner specialist.
23 Review of Disputed Allocations (2003).
Covering letter to the Chief Secretarydated 25th March 2003
24 Review of Disputed Allocations (2003b,c
&d)
25 Pers Comm with Post Courier staff (and
confirmed by a copy of a letter from RH tothe PC)
26 Review of Disputed Allocations (2003 b, c
and d)
27 Ombudsman Commission (2003)28 Ombudsman Commission (2003)29 Independent Forestry Review (2003a) at
page 1
30 Independent Forestry Review (2003b) at
page 7
31 Statement of the Prime Minister given at
his party’s fund raising dinner at theGrand Palace restaurant on 30th August2003, www.pm.gov.pg/pmsoffice
32 EMW (1995), World Rainforest Movement
and Forest Monitor(1998), Kocher-Schmidt (1999 and 2000), Erskine (1999aand 1999b), Pwesei (2000), SBS (2001),Greenpeace (2002), Melick (2003).
33 The best summary of these problems can
be found in the television documentaryDateline broadcast by SBS, an Australiantelevision station, on May 2, 2001.
34 SBS (2001)35 Ibid36 Ibid37 Ibid38 Ibid39 Australian Conservation Foundation
(2003)
40 Kocher-Schmidt (1999 and 2000), Erskine
(1999a and 1999b), Pwesei (2000),Melick (2003)
41 Ibid42 Eco-Forestry Forum (2002)43 This was a finding of the Ombudsman
Commission in its investigation of theKamula Dosa affair, OmbudsmanCommission (2002)
44 Melick (2003), pg 4845 EIA/Telapak (2003 b)46 Four Corners, (2002)47 As quoted in World Rainforest Movement
(2001)
48 EIA/Telapak (2003a)49 The Jakarta Post (2003)50 EIA/Telapak (2003a & b)
51 Ibid52 EIA/Telepak, (2003b)53 Pers comm, EIA and Greenpeace
December 2003
54 EIA and Telepak, (2003c)55 World Rainforest Movement ( 2001)56 www.globaltimber.org.uk/eguinea57 Forest Monitor (2001) 58 World Rainforest Movement and Forest
Monitor (2001)
59 World Rainforest Movement (2001)60 Ibid61 International Network of Forests and
Communities (2002)
62 EMW(1995) p.102 63 World Rainforest Movement and Forest
Monitor (1998) p 33-35
64 The Long Sayan Declaration, Sarawak
Penan Association, June 2002
65 WRM and Forest Monitor (1998)66 Personal communications to Greenpeace
from PNG non government organisations(2003).
67 EMW (1995)68 Sahabat Alam Malaysia (2000)69 as quoted in EMW (1995)70 BBC (2001)71 In 1994 scientists at the Environmental
Issues Institute in Khabarovsk detailedplans for the establishment of theVerkhne-Soukpai Nature Preserve. ThisPreserve was included in the national listof Nature Preserves and National Parksapproved by the Russian FederalGovernment on 10th October 1995.When it was announced that RimbunanHijau was to be allowed to log inside theproposed Nature Preserve the RegionalAdministration claimed the area hadalready lost its environmental values dueto forest cuttings and fires. However apreliminary investigation in the area in1999 by the Biodiversity ConservationCenter and ScanEx Technical Centrecontradicted these claims(www.scanex.ru/rus/tematica/project/sukpai)
72 Forest Club of Russia.
WWW.forest.ru/eng/hot_spots
73 In 2000 Rimbunan Hijau was fined for
environmental violations (RBCKhabarovski, 17 April 2000) and furtherfines have followed according to theWorld Wide Fund for Nature (RBC Daily,18 July 2003) and forests.org(www.forests.org/recent/2001/ ruhilogg).
74 Forest Club of Russia
www.forest.ru/eng/problems/companies/rimbunan
75 The Ernslaw One Group’s major
shareholder is Callander Limited with79% ownership. Callander is a holdingcompany registered in Liberia and iscontrolled by members of the Tiongfamily. Other shareholdings are held byHabacus Pte Ltd of Singapore and ShiangYang International Ltd, of Hong Kong (theownership split is 80/10/10). Managingdirector of Ernslaw One, Thomas SongChai Leng (known as Thomas Song)reports to Dr Tiong Ik King.(www.thelumberbanknewzealand.co.nz
November 2003)
76 In Aotearoa RH has owned Ernslaw One,
Oregon Group, Manuka Holdings, theSalmond Smith Biolab group (includingArtel Industries, Biolab Scientific, ClickClack International, Selby Scientific,Newman’s Export, Rhone-PoulencLaboratory Products, and Johns Plastics) ,New Zealand King Salmon Company, NeilConstruction, Ascot ManagementCorporation and Lumberbank. ForeignControl Watchdog, CAFCA, (August2003).
77 www.thelumberbanknewzealand. co.nz
(Nov. 2003)
78 FSC certification requires an operation to
at minimum:
∑• Comply with all the laws of a country,
∑• Respect indigenous peoples’ and local 
community rights,
∑• Be beneficial to local communities,
∑
• Sustain the forest resources,
∑• Maintain and protect biodiversity,
∑• Minimise and phase out chemical  
pesticide use,
∑• Prohibit genetically engineered 
organisms,
∑• Have a detailed management plan,
∑• Monitor environmental and social 
indicators,
∑• Maintain and enhance High   
Conservation Value Forests, and 
∑• Restore natural forests if it is a 
plantation.
79  Frontline (30 October 1994)80  An AIDAB (Australian International
Development Assistance Bureau) NationalForest Resource Inventory in 1995 foundlogging was 4 time the sustainable rate,and subsequent official log exportvolumes have confirmed theunsustainable harvest has continued overthe last decade.
81 Central Bank of Solomon Is (1995). pp18.82  Duncan (1994) pp3083  Solomon Star (1995) 84  Olsen and Turbull (1993)85  World Rainforest Movement and Forest
Monitor (1998) pp57
86  Greenpeace Australia Pacific( 2001) pp
24.
87  In 1998 Earthmovers was ordered to pay
back pay of a 10% wage increase andreinstate workers over poor levels of payand working conditions Solomon Star(1998)
88  Trading Post (17 January 1996) 89  WRM and Forest Monitor (1998)90  www.ipa.gov.pg/forestry_sector.htm91 Post Courier (12/11/03) and FAO Forestry
Trade Flow Database
92  Post Courier (12/11/03) and FAO data

January 2004
Greenpeace InternationalOttho Heldringstraat 51066 AZAmsterdamThe Netherlands