# Archivo original: the-chain-of-destruction-fro.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:40:48 -03 2025

T H E  C H A I N  O F  D E S T R U C T I O N
F rom Canada’s Ancient Rainfor e s t s
to the United States Market 
1 9 9 9
1436 U Street, NW
Washington, DC 20009
© Greenpeace 1999


T A B L E  O F  C O N T E N T S
I. Executive Summary 1
II. State of the World’s Ancient Forests 4
III. The Great Bear Rainforest 7
IV . The Canadian Logging Company 10
V. The U.S. Connection to Canada’s Rainforests 14
1. The Lumber Wholesaler 16
2. The Lumber Processor 18
3. The Builder 19
4. The “Do It Yourself” (DIY) Store 20
5. The Publisher/Printer 22
6. The Paper Products Manufacturer 24
7. The Dissolving Pulp Processor 25
8. The Retailer 26
VI. The Greenpeace Ancient Forests Campaign 27
VII. Alternatives to Ancient Forest Wood 28
VIII. Moving Forward 32

I .  E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y
he world’s ancient forests provide us with clean air and water, and places to hike, camp,
fish and swim. They are home to the majority of the Earth’s terrestrial species of plants,
insects, birds and animals. They regulate weather patterns and help stabilize the Earth’s cli-
mate.  By storing carbon, ancient forests play a critical role in reducing global warming.
Approximately 433 billion tons of carbon — more carbon than will be released from the
burning of fossil fuels over the next 69 years — are stored in ancient forests.  Ancient
forests are home to as many as 200 million indigenous and tribal people worldwide.
Protection of the world’s remaining ancient
forests requires an immediate end to
destructive activities.  First and foremost,
this means stopping the biggest threat to
the remaining ancient forests: industrial
logging.
While most Americans oppose the destruc-
tion of the last ancient forests, we see little
relationship between ourselves and this
destruction. In fact, our personal and pro-
fessional decisions, and the decisions of the
businesses we work for or choose to patron-
ize, will be the deciding factors in whether
the Earth’s remaining ancient forests last
beyond our lifetime.
In Europe, Greenpeace launched an inten-
sive campaign to stop corporate consumers
from purchasing wood from Canada's
ancient forests. Greenpeace blocked ship-
ments of timber, challenged companies at
their headquarters and raised public aware-
ness about the devastation of ancient
forests. 
As a result, major companies such as B&Q
and Do It All, the two largest “do it your-
self” chains in England, and Otto, the
largest mail order company in the world,
canceled their contracts with Canadian rain-
forest timber companies or decided to stop
using ancient forest wood altogether.
In the United States, the efforts of Greenpeace, Rainforest Action Network, National
Resources Defense Council and other environmental groups resulted in many companies
such as Kinko’s, 3M, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Levi-Strauss, Nike and others committing to stop
buying ancient forest products. 
Unfortunately, the majority of American corporations, including The Home Depot, Proctor
and Gamble, Times-Mirror and Hercules refuse to take this stand. 
1T
"Any fool can destroy trees.  They cannot run away;
and if they could, they would still be destroyed,
chased and hunted down as long as fun or a dollar
could be got out of their bark hides, branching horns,
or magnificent bole backbones.  Few that fell trees
plant them; nor would planting avail much towards
getting  back anything like the noble primeval forests.
During a man's life only saplings can be grown, in
place of old trees -- tens of centuries old -- that have
been destroyed. 
Through all the wonderful, eventful centuries since
Christ's time -- and long before that -- God has cared
for these trees, saved them from drought, disease,
avalanches, and a thousand straining, leveling tem-
pests and floods, but he cannot save them from
fools."
-John Muir

The U.S. remains the largest single consumer of forest products worldwide, consuming
approximately 9.5 billion board feet of lumber alone per year — enough wood to make a
board one foot wide by one inch thick that would wrap around the world more than seven
and a half times. If the Earth's last ancient forests are to be saved, U.S. companies must live
up to their responsibility.  It is now time for corporate consumers in the U.S. to join this
trend and stop buying timber from ancient forests before these forests disappear forever.
Through its consumption, the United States, which has already destroyed most of its own
ancient forests, plays the biggest role in the destruction of ancient forests worldwide. Every
day, somewhere in the United States marketplace products manufactured from old-growth
trees are bought and sold in a wide assortment of forms that would shock the average con-
sumer. Irreplaceable ancient forests are
being destroyed to produce such dispos-
able products as plywood, phone books,
and toilet paper —  and even toothpaste
and shampoo. In almost all cases these
products can be manufactured with envi-
ronmentally appropriate alternatives. 
Consumers are rarely aware that the prod-
ucts they buy implicate them in the
destruction of ancient forests. Worse yet,
many companies actively seek to hide this
fact. In addition, many companies do not
take the time to understand the environ-
mental and social consequences behind
their procurement of forest products.
2Ancient Forest Facts
• Nearly 80 percent of the Earth’s original ancient forests have been
degra-ded or destroyed.1
• Only 22 percent of the Earth’s original ancient forests remain in areas
large enough to support their full range of native wildlife and ecosys-
tem processes.2
• Seventy-six countries have already lost all of their large areas of
ancient forest.3
• The United States has destroyed over 90 percent of its ancient forests.
• The United States is now the largest importer of forest products from
other countries.
• The United States consumes approximately 9.5 billion board feet of
lumber alone per year — enough wood to make a board one foot
wide by one inch thick that would wrap around the world more than
seven and a half times. 
• Industrial logging is the single greatest threat to the remaining
ancient forests.
• An area of ancient forest the size of a football field is logged, burned
or flooded every two seconds.  
“Our living systems and social stability are
at risk. But the solutions are profitable, cre-
ative, and eminently possible.” 
-Paul Hawken, 
Ecology of Commerce
1Dirk Bryant, Daniel Nielson and Laura Tangley, The Last Frontier Forests: Ecosystems & Economies on the Edge ,
(Washington, D.C.: World Resources Institute, 1997).
2 Ibid.
3Ibid.

As the world's largest consumer of forest products, the U.S. has the potential to have the
most impact in choosing to protect the planet's remaining ancient forests. If all the mem-
bers of the U.S. marketplace choose to seek non-wood and recycled sources where 
appropriate and buy from well-managed secondary forests instead of from sources that
destroy ancient forests, there will be no incentive to continue destructive logging practices.
The Last Temperate Ancient Rainforests In Jeopardy
Of the three major forest types — tropical, temperate, and boreal — temperate forests are
the most threatened.  Historically, these forests have been the most heavily disturbed, par-
ticularly ancient temperate rainforests. Today, ancient temperate rainforests comprise less
than .1 percent of the Earth’s landmass.  The largest unprotected temperate rainforest is
found in British Columbia, Canada, where groups and individuals are struggling to prevent
the clearcutting of the last pristine valleys.4The United States is the single largest consumer
of forest products cut from this region.  
Tracing The Chain Of Custody
This report provides concrete examples of the largely hidden chain of custody from forest to
consumer, tracing the links of the destruction of one of the Earth's most threatened forests
— Canada's Great Bear Rainforest — through processing, manufacturing, distribution and
sale in the United States. Although this report focuses on the traffic of products originating
from the Great Bear Rainforest, it provides an overview of what is happening on a wider
scale to the Earth's last ancient forests.
4Clearcutting is a destructive industrial logging practice that removes all trees from the area and destroys vital habitat.
3Defining Ancient Forests
Ancient forests are forest areas that are relatively undisturbed by human
activity.  The term refers to forest ecosystems as a whole, rather than to
the individual trees within them.  Natural disturbance such as storm dam-
age, insect infestation and natural mortality will be present, as will regen-
eration from such disturbance. Human impact is characterized by low level
hunting, fishing and harvesting of forest products, and in some cases, low
density shifting agriculture.
Ancient forests are made up of frontier forests, primary forest fragments
and old-growth forests.  These forests are home to the majority of plant
and animal species found on land.  Frontier forests are the world's few
remaining large areas of natural forest that have not been significantly
altered by human activ-ity. Roughly 20 percent of the world's original for-
est cover remains as frontier.  Primary forest fragments are forest areas
that have only been subjected to minimal human disturbance, and are
smaller than frontier forests and therefore cannot always support healthy
populations of large predators. Old-growth forests are stands of old trees,
some of which may be regrowth from intensive logging or clearance in
the distant past. 

I I .  S T A T E  O F  T H E  W O R L D ’ S
A N C I E N T  F O R E S T S
alf of the world’s forests have been completely destroyed, and most of the remaining
forests have been intensively logged. Only 22 percent of the world’s original forests remain
as “frontier forests”— large, intact areas able to provide habitat for the full range of forest
species.5
These frontier forests, together with the remaining fragments of primary forests and old-
growth stands, make up the world’s ancient forests.
Russia, Canada and Brazil are home to almost 70 per-
cent of the remaining ancient forests.  In these three
countries, industrial logging is expanding into the
ancient forests at an unprecedented rate.  Unless this
expansion of industrial logging can be stopped, most
of the remaining ancient forest areas will be fragment-
ed or lost within a few decades.  The following map
shows the locations of ancient forests that have
already been destroyed, as well as the locations of the
remaining large areas of ancient forests.  
Ancient forests provide us with clean air and water,
and places to hike, camp, fish and swim. They
are home to the majority of the Earth’s terrestrial
species of plants, insects, birds and animals. They regu-
late weather patterns, and help to stabilize the Earth’s
climate.   It is estimated that 433 billion tons of carbon
– more carbon than will be released from the burning
of fossil fuels over the next 69 years – are stored in 
4“In short, there has been a marked
shift away from perceptions of old
g rowth forests as potential sources 
of wood (especially bulk fiber), and
t o w a r ds perceptions of these for e s t s
as attractive environments. . . this
shift is projected to accelerate.”
-Industry analyst Alexander Mather speaking at 
The Globalization of Wood Conference, 1997
Ancient forests already destroyed or degraded
Only about 20% of the world’s large areas 
of ancient forests remain intactH
5 Unless otherwise specified, statistics in this section are taken from: Dirk, Bryant, Daniel Nielson and Laura Tangley, 
The Last Frontier Forests: Ecosystems & Economies on the Edge (Washington, D.C: World Resources Institute, 1997).

5ancient forests.  Ancient forests are home to as many as 200 million indigenous and tribal
peoples worldwide.6
An area of ancient forest the size of a football field is logged, burned or flooded every two
seconds.7Protection of the world’s remaining ancient forests requires an immediate end to
destructive activities.  First and foremost, this means stopping the biggest threat to the
remaining ancient forests: industrial logging.
Consumption of forest products in developed countries is increasing dramatically and is one
of the driving forces behind the destruction of the world’s ancient forests. Eighty percent of
the world’s wood consumption is in developed countries. The world trade in forest products
is worth over $100 billion dollars and is growing quick-
ly.8  In the last 25 years, lumber and pulp consumption
has doubled, and paper and paperboard consumption
has tripled. In the next fifteen years, demand for paper
is expected to nearly double again. 
6John Spears and Edward S. Ayensu, Resources, Development, and the New Century (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1985), p.304. And Norman Myers, Deforestation Rates in Tropical Forests and their Climactic Implications (London:
Friends of the Earth, 1989), p.68. And Nels Johnson and Bruce Cabarle, Surviving the Cut: Natural Forest Management
in the Humid Tropics (Washington, D.C.: World Resources Institute, 1993), p.7.
7The reduction in forest cover is about 16 million hectares/yr which equals one hectare every two seconds. This translates
to 38.4 million acres/yr or 1.2 acres every second. Bryant et al, 1997.
8Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), The FAO Yearbook of Forest Products (1997). In 1996
world trade in forest products was worth $138.7 billion.“The world uses more than five times
as much paper today as it did in 1950,
and consumption is expected to double
again by 2010.  About two thirds of the
paper produced worldwide is made
f rom virgin logs. ... Soon paper pr o d u c-
tion is expected to account for more
than half of the global industrial wood
h a rvest.” 
-Janet Abramovitz, Worldwatch Institute
Greenpeace activists hang a 
banner off the Prospect Point
observation tower above Nia-
gara Falls.

6I I I .  T H E  G R E A T  B E A R  R A I N -
F O R E S T
ainforests, most commonly associated with tropical regions, can also be found in temper-
ate regions.  Rainforests are the most species-rich of all forest ecosystems… and the most
threatened.  The World Resources Institute reports that ancient temperate forests are the
most endangered forest type worldwide.  Over half of the Earth’s temperate rainforests,
only ever comprising 0.2 percent of the Earth’s land surface, have already been degraded or
destroyed.9
The Great Bear Rainforest, on the west coast of British Columbia, Canada, is the largest
unprotected temperate rainforest left in the world.  The Great Bear Rainforest is home to
one of the largest populations of grizzly bears left on Earth, as well as black bears and the
rare white  Kermode or “Spirit” bear. This lush region is the result of over 10,000 years of
postglacial development.  It contains some of the oldest and largest trees on Earth. The
ancient western red cedar, Douglas fir, Sitka spruce and hemlock trees grow as tall as two
to three hundred feet and can live up to 1500 years. Ancient temperate rainforests have the
greatest amount of biomass, living and dead material, of any ecosystem on Earth.
Indigenous peoples, known in Canada as “First Nations,” have occupied these forests for
millennia, and 16 different language groups are spread along the coast.  No treaty has ever
been agreed between these First Nations and the Canadian government, nor have the First
Nations ever formally ceded their rights over their tra-
ditional territories.  Nonetheless, their rights are nei-
ther being adequately recognized or respected by the
logging companies, which largely depend on clearcut-
ting the ancient temperate rainforests in First Nations’
traditional territories for their timber supply.
Forest products have the third highest volume in inter-
nationally traded goods, after oil and gas.  British
Columbia supplies 35 percent of the world’s interna-
tionally traded industrial forest products. Companies in
British Columbia are logging approximately 30 billion
board feet (lumber one foot wide, one foot long, and
one inch thick) per year, one-third of which is cut from
the coastal rainforests.10
More than half of British Columbia’s ancient temperate
rainforests have already been destroyed.  The first
areas logged were the productive low elevation valley
bottoms.  Of the original 353 coastal rainforest valleys
in British Columbia only 69 remain unlogged. Logging
is scheduled to begin in almost all remaining valleys
within the next five to ten years.11
9Bryant et al, p. 12.
10 British Columbia Ministry of Forests Annual Allowable Cut Determina-
tions, 1996. 35% figure taken from an interview with Bill Dumont,
Chief Forester of Western Forest Products in Timber Trades Journal (July 1998).
11 Sierra Club of British Columbia, Half of British Columbia’s Ancient Temperate Rainforest Gone (March 19, 1997).
R

7Logging Practices 
The forest industry in British Columbia, Canada claims that, “no other forest producing
region in the world has higher environmental standards for its forest practices and opera-
tions than British Columbia (B.C.). Destructive clearcutting is not allowed.”12In reality, over
90 percent of the logging in B.C. is in ancient forests, and over 97 percent of the logging in
the Great Bear Rainforest is done by clearcutting.13Dr. C. Pielou, an eminent B.C. scientist,
has noted that “clearcutting causes two kinds of fun-
damental damage, one long-lasting, the other perma-
nent. The long-lasting damage is to the soil, the per-
manent damage is to biological diversity.”14
B.C. Government Fails to Prevent
Destruction 
In 1994, the British Columbia government appointed a
blue-ribbon panel of scientists and First Nations elders
to assess logging practices in one area of the B.C. rain-
forest. The panel concluded that, “Collectively [B.C.
forest laws and standards] do not prevent loss of bio-
diversity, degradation of terrestrial and aquatic envi-
ronments, and damage to First Nations heritage sites
and areas.”15
In 1995, the government introduced the Forest Prac-
tices Code and promised a ‘new era’ in forest management. Despite this promise, the Code
continues to allow conventional clearcutting and does little to protect wildlife or biodiver-
sity. There is no endangered species law in Canada.  Although there are some mechanisms
for protection under the  Forest Practices Code, the majority of all logging in British Colum-
bia is done under the “lower biodiversity option.”  According to the Code’s Biodiversity
Guidebook, the effects of the “lower biodiversity option” will be that, “the pattern of nat-
ural biodiversity will be significantly altered and the risk of some native species being
unable to survive in the area will be relatively high.” 
In March 1998, the government of British Columbia enacted over 550 changes to the Forest
Practices Code. These changes, drafted by the government and logging industry with no
input from the public, First Nations, or scientists, served to weaken already inadequate leg-
islation.  The Vancouver-based Sierra Legal Defense Fund reports that these rollbacks will
result in an increased size of clearcuts, damage to wildlife habitat, including salmon
streams, and risk of landslides.  Keith Moore, chairman of the government-appointed For-
est Practices Boards, states, “the regulatory streamlining may lead to environmental dam-
age that won’t show up for several years and by then it may be too late to avoid prob-
lems.”16
12 British Columbia Forest Alliance (industry lobby group) advertisement in Germany, cited in Forest Alliance News 
Release “Greenpeace Told to Tell the Truth in Germany” (February 4, 1994).
13 Sierra Legal Defense Fund. British Columbia’s Clear Cut Code (Vancouver: November, 1996) p.3.
14 Chris, Pielou, “A Clearcut Decision: A Scientist Takes a Closer Look at the Ecological Effects of Clearcutting,” 
Nature Canada (1996), 25:2.
15Clayoquot Sound Science Panel, Progress Report 2 (Victoria, British Columbia 1995). 
16 Globe and Mail , April 8, 1998, p. B6.
Roderick Island.

8IV. THE CANADIAN LOGGING COMPANY
n British Columbia, the logging industry worked with the government to establish a sys-
tem of long-term forest tenure leases that enable a handful of companies to reap huge rev-
enues from logging public and First Nation lands.  Through this system, the rights to log
almost all of the remaining intact valleys in Canada’s rainforests lie with three companies:
International Forest Products (Interfor), Doman Industries and West Fraser Timber Compa-
ny. The following sections profile each of these companies in more detail.17
International Forest Products (Interfor)
P.O. Box 49114, Four Bentall Centre Phone: (604) 689-6804
3500-1055 Dunsmuir Street Fax: (604) 688-0313
Vancouver, B.C., Canada V7X 1H7 http://www.interfor.com
President and COO: Duncan Davies
Annual Allowable Cut: 3.7 million cubic meters (1,500 million board feet)
Total sales (1997): $760 million Canadian dollars ($550 million U.S.)
U.S. sales (1997): $160 million Canadian dollars ($110 million U.S.)
Logging Activity
Interfor is one of the largest logging companies operating in Canada’s ancient temperate
rainforest. Interfor plans to log 25 pristine valleys and key ecological areas including c r i t i c a l
habitat of the rare Kermode or “Spirit” bear, and the ancient forests of Johnston Creek.
Interfor is currently logging in the valley of Ista, a place sacred to the Nuxalk people. The
logging continues despite repeated requests of the head hereditary chief Nuximlayc to
stop. Other hereditary chiefs of the Nuxalk Nation
have similarly requested Interfor to stop clearcutting
throughout their lands to no avail.18
Further north, Interfor has been logging at Kumealon
Lake, where requests by the Kitkatla people to leave
the valley intact were ignored.  If these ancient forests
continue to be logged, cultural heritage sites will be
lost, prime grizzly and wolf habitat will be destroyed,
and the future of already damaged salmon runs will
be further jeopardized.Interfor’s Infractions of Provincial Law, 
June 95 - June 97
1 infraction of the Waste Management Act
1 infraction of the Pesticide Control Act
11 infractions of the Litter Act
57 infractions of the Forest Practices Code
66 infractions of the Forest Act
17All sales figures and Annual Allowable Cut statistics for Interfor, Doman and West Fraser are public information 
and are taken from each company’s annual report for 1997, or from Hoovers Online, http://www.hoovers.com.
18Nuxalk Nation House of Smayusta Web site (http://www.nuxalk.org).I

9Environmental and Legal Record
Government and industry documents such as the Michael Jantzi Research Associates report
(1995) and the Tripp report (1994) identify Interfor’s environmental record as a major concern.1 9
Interfor has repeatedly violated Canadian law; harming the forest and its dependent
species. Between June 1995 and June 1997, Interfor has been charged and penalized 136
times for breaking provincial legislation.2 0Examples of Interfor’s major infractions include caus-
ing landslides into the fishbearing Clowhorn Creek, logging illegally inside Garibaldi Park, and
breaching an order to stop work in Clayoquot Sound. In addition to these 136 infractions, Inter-
for has failed to comply with the Forest Practices Code on an additional 414 occasions for more
minor incidences.
Major Markets
Interfor’s business consists of logging, milling and selling lumber, primarily for construction.
It operates nine lumber mills. In addition, it sells wood chips to pulp and paper mills in
British Columbia and occasionally Washington State. Interfor’s sales to the U.S. rely mostly
on western red cedar, which is used to produce decking, bevel siding and other building
materials. Interfor also exports hemlock and other species to the U.S.  Interfor provides its
corporate affiliate Sauder Industries with materials for its U.S. line of molding.
Doman Industries
Includes Western Forest Products, Western Pulp, and Eacom Timber Sales
Doman Industries Ltd. Phone: (604) 662-8808
435 Trunk Road Fax: (604) 669-8803
Duncan, B.C., Canada  V9L 2PN http://www.westernforest.com
CEO: Herb Doman
Annual Allowable Cut : 4.2 million cubic meters (1,800 million board feet)
Total sales (1997): $740 million Canadian dollars ($530 million U.S.)
U.S. sales (1997): $290 million Canadian dollars ($210 million U.S.)21
Logging Activity
Western Forest Products, a Doman subsidiary, plans to log 22 pristine valleys and key eco-
logical areas in the Great Bear Rainforest including critical habitat of the rare Kermode
bear, and the ancient forests surrounding the Ingram-Mooto Lakes. The company is currently
logging the pristine upper reaches of the Stafford River, and the rainforests of Pooley
Island, home to one of the largest wolf populations in the rainforest. Cultural heritage sites
are also under threat.
19 D. Tripp, The Use and Effectiveness of the Coastal Fisheries Forestry Guidelines in Selected Forest Districts of 
Coastal British Columbia (January, 1994), Prepared for the Ministry of Forests.
20Ministry of Forests, and Ministry of Environment, Lands and Parks. Information obtained through the Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act, including: Charges and Penalty Summary for Identified Companies, January
1985 to February 1996 (Ministry of Environment, Lands and Parks, Enforcement, Emergencies and Corporate Services,
Victoria, February 11, 1997); Enforcement Action, Administrative Review and Appeals Tracking System (Ministry of
Forests, Compliance and Enforcement Branch, Victoria, March 26, 1997); Enforcement Detail Sheets (Ministry of
Forests, Port Alberni, March 8, 1996).
21 Figure includes annual harvest on private land.

10Environmental and Legal Record
Doman has been fined over $330,000 Canadian dollars in environmental penalties. In 1994,
the B.C. Ministry of Forests found that Doman’s subsidiary Western Forest Products failed to
comply with fish and forestry guidelines in more than 80 percent of their evaluated areas.22
Between October 1995 and October 1996, Doman failed to comply with the law almost 100
times.23
Greenpeace, Sierra Legal Defense Fund and the hereditary chiefs of the Heiltsuk Hemas C o u n -
cil have recently documented violations in the Ingram and Mooto watersheds, traditional
Heiltsuk Territory that is currently under logging license to Western Forest Products.2 4
In 1996, CEO Herb Doman was convicted of insider trading along with former B.C. Premier
William Bennett. The men were ordered to pay $1 million Canadian dollars in court costs
and are currently banned from trading on the stock exchange and from directing or being
an officer in any publi c ly traded companies. The B.C. Securities Commission characterized
their activities as “deceit and greed and. . . conspiracy.” Despite these rulings, Herb Doman
continues to oversee the destruction of large tracts of intact rainforest and globally impor-
tant wildlife habitat.
Major Markets
Doman’s business consists of logging (Western Forest Products), milling and selling lumber
(both Doman and Eacom). In addition, Doman produces and sells dissolving sulphite pulp
and paper pulp through its subsidiary Western Pulp. It operates nine lumber mills and two
pulp and paper mills. Doman’s lumber is used in building materials, windows, and various
other products around the world. Its paper pulp is used to produce magazine-quality paper
as well as other paper types and tissues. Its dissolving pulp is used by the chemical industry
and ends up in a wide variety of consumer items such as cosmetics and food.
West Fraser Timber Co. Ltd.
1000-1100 Melville Street Phone: (604) 895-2700
Vancouver, B.C., Canada V6E 4A6 Fax: (604) 681-6061
http://www.westfrasertimber.com
CEO: Henry H. Ketchum III
Annual Allowable Cut (British Columbia): 4.2 million cubic meters (1,800,000 thousand
board feet)
Annual Allowable Cut (Alberta): 1.5 million cubic meters (600,000 thousand board feet)
Total sales (1997): $1.9 billion Canadian dollars ($1.4 billion U.S.)
U.S. sales (1997): $740 million Canadian dollars ($530 million U.S.)
Logging Activity
West Fraser Timber holds extensive logging rights in the ancient forests of British Columbia
and the neighboring province of Alberta. West Fraser plans to log a total of 17 pristine 
valleys and four key ecological areas within the Great Bear Rainforest. The company has
22D. Tripp, 1994.
23Ministry of Forests, and Ministry of Environment (see footnote 18).
24The violations concern the burying of felled wood in the permanent road being constructed, a violation under the 
Forest Practices Code. Also cited are violations under the Fisheries Act concerning the deposition of deleterious material,
in the form of siltation, into fish-bearing streams.


11currently started logging one pristine valley (Chambers Creek), and plans to log in six more
in the next five years. The Nanakila Institute, a Haisla First Nation-run organization, has
been struggling to protect the Kowesas valley and neighboring areas from being logged by
West Fraser. West Fraser is also logging large tracts of ancient forests outside the Great
Bear Rainforest, in British Columbia and Alberta.
Environmental and Legal Record
West Fraser has broken provincial legislation on 77 occasions in a two-year period from
June 1995 to June 1997, and has been fined a total of 34 times.25West Fraser’s mills in
Quesnel, Smithers and Kitimat have consistently been found to be in noncompliance with
pollution regulations. In a January 1994 report produced for the B.C. Ministry of Forests,
West Fraser’s Terrace Division was found to be one of the worst offenders in B.C. The report
rated West Fraser seventh out of eight forest companies with respect to overall compliance
with the Coastal Fisheries and Forestry Guidelines.26
Major Markets
West Fraser Timber is an integrated logging and forest products company that produces
lumber, pulp, paper, newsprint, wood chips, specialty wood products, fiberboard and pack-
aging material. It operates ten lumber mills, three pulp and paper mills, and one newsprint
mill. West Fraser also owns two chains of retail home improvement stores in Canada, Revy
and Lansing Buildall.
25Ministry of Forests, and Ministry of Environment, op cit.
26D. Tripp, 1994.

12V .  T H E  U . S .  C O N N E C T I O N  T O
C A N A D A ’ S  R A I N F O R E S T S  
.S. companies are linked to the destruction of ancient rainforests. Some companies,
including processors such as Sauder Moldings and wholesalers such as Furman Lumber, buy
directly from Interfor, Doman, and West Fraser. Others purchase products further down the
chain.  But every purchase at every link helps to finance the destruction of these ancient
forests. Canadian logging companies are so heavily dependent on U.S. sales that U.S. con-
sumption is fueling the chainsaws in the Great Bear Rainforest.
From Forest to Market: Links in The Chain of Custody 
The United States imports about half of B.C.’s rainforest products in the form of lumber, pulp,
and  paper.2 7The U.S. consumes approximately 9.5 billion board feet of lumber alone per year —
enough wood to make a board one foot wide, by one inch thick that would wrap around the
world more than seven and a half times. U.S. imports from Canada in 1995 were worth over U.S.
$20 billion.2 8
Lumber
Canadian logging companies Interfor, Doman and West Fraser all own and operate their
own lumber mills. Most of the lumber is pre-sold to wholesalers in the U.S. such as Universal
Forest Products or to processors such as Sauder Moldings. These American companies then
sell their products, often repackaged with their own label, to retailers or to the building
and construction industry. By the time the products get to a home improvement or “do it
yourself” (DIY) retailer, they have gone through many hands and are rarely marked with
their place of origin.  Most consumers are shocked to learn that they buy products that con-
tribute to the destruction of the last ancient forests.
Pulp and Paper
Doman and West Fraser also own and operate pulp and paper mills; Interfor does not pro-
duce wood pulp directly, but it does have a long-term contract with Fletcher Challenge Ltd.,
a New Zealand company with pulp mills in British Columbia. About half of the volume
logged in British Columbia’s ancient forests ends up as pulp and paper through a combina-
tion of whole logs, wood chips and sawdust.
Pulp and paper is sold in the U.S. to a wide range of printers such as R. R. Donnelley and
Sons or paper products manufacturers such as Proctor & Gamble. Dissolving grades of pulp
used in food additives, adhesives, and other items are normally purchased directly from
Doman in British Columbia and then transported to processing companies such as Hercules,
who in turn sell their chemicals to various manufacturers that produce the final products.
The U.S. Consumer
The final link in the chain of custody is the U.S. consumer.  Ancient forest lumber and wood
products are also sold at lumber yards and “do-it-yourself” stores such as The Home Depot.
In addition, consumers purchase products derived from ancient forests at nearly all major
retail chains including Wal-Mart and Sears.  Sears, for example, sells Proctor & Gamble prod-
ucts containing materials from ancient forests, and prints its catalog on Fletcher Challenge
paper.
Taking Responsibility
Along with consumers, U.S. corporations have both the responsibility and the leverage to
help protect these ancient, globally significant, and irreplaceable ecosystems, as well as the
communities that depend on them.
The following chart presents a visual representation of the links between U.S. consumers
and the destruction of B.C.’s ancient forests.
27Council of Forest Industries, British Columbia Forest Industry Fact Book (1996).
28Ibid.U

13
Interfor , Doman, West Fraser
LUMBER 
WHOLESALER
e.g. Furman Lumber,
Universal Forest Products
e.g. Oakwood HomesBUILDERLUMBER 
PROCESSOR
e.g. Sauder 
MouldingsPAPER 
PRODUCTS MANU-
FACTURER
e.g. Proctor 
& Gamble
T O I L E T P A P E R
P A P E R T O W E L S
T I S S U E P A P E R
D I A P E R S
F E M I N I N E H Y G I E N E
W R I T I N G P A P E RDISSOLVING 
PULP 
PROCESSOR
e.g. Hercules
PRODUCTS MAN-
UFACTURER
F O O D S
T O O T H P A S T E
C O S M E T I C S
P H A R M A C E U T I C A L S
P A I N T
I N K
A D H E S I V E S
C L O T H I N GPRINTER
e.g. Times Mirror,
R.R. Donnelley 
and Sons
B O O K S
B I B L E S
M A G A Z I N E S
N E W S P A P E R S
C A T A L O G S
T E L E P H O N E
D I R E C T O R I E S
R E T A I L I N S E R T S
W O O D C H I P S & S A W D U S T
DO IT 
YOURSELF 
STORE
e.g. The Home DepotM O L D I N G S
D O O R S
W I N D O W F R A M E S
F U R N I T U R E
C E D A R P R O D U C T SL U M B E R
RETAILER
e.g. Walmart
Chain of Custody


14The Lumber Wholesaler
Wholesale distributors in America buy lumber directly from the B.C. producer and have it
shipped to large warehouses and holding yards. American wholesalers buy large quantities
of lumber directly from the B.C. producer, and then market and sell smaller quantities to
retail lumber yards, large developers, “do-it-yourself” stores, and manufacturers.  Whole-
salers distributing ancient rainforest products include Universal Forest Products and Furman
Lumber. These companies are profiled in the following sections.
Universal Forest Products
Universal Forest Products, Inc. Phone: (616) 364-6161 
(NASDAQ: UFPI) Fax: (616) 361-5558
2801 East Beltline N.E. http://www.ufpinc.com
Grand Rapids, MI 49525
CEO: William G. Currie
1997 Sales: $1.1 billion
In total, Universal Forest Products manufactures and distributes lumber products to the
home improvement/Do-It-Yourself (DIY), manufactured housing, conventional site-built
housing, and industrial markets. Universal Forest Products operates 71 facilities in 64 loca-
tions throughout the North America.
Destruction of the Great Bear Rainforest
Universal distributes Doman lumber, and also buys from West Fraser. Both of these compa-
nies are involved in clearcutting the ancient forests of the Great Bear Rainforest.  
Products
Universal is the nation’s largest producer of pressure-
treated wood and is North America’s largest manufac-
turer of engineered roof trusses for both the manu-
factured housing market and the conventional site-
built housing market. The company’s other principal
products are dimension lumber, and finished goods
such as fence panels, deck components, and kits for
various outdoor products. It also makes pallets and
crates for industrial use.
Customers
Fifty percent of sales are to retail outlets such as
Home Depot, HomeBase, Lowe’s and Builders Square.
Home Depot alone accounts for eighteen percent of
Universal’s total sales.The following lumber
wholesalers have
agreed not to place any
new orders from the
logging companies
Interfor or Doman:
Jewson (U.K.)
Harcros (U.K.)
Wickes (U.K.)
Doman lumber 
at a wholesaler 
lumberyard.

15Furman Lumber
Furman Lumber, Inc. Phone: (978) 670-3800
32 Manning Rd. Fax: (978) 670-3999
Billerica, MA 01821 http://www.furmanlumber.com
CEO: Barry Kronick
1997 Sales: $500 million
Furman Lumber is a distributor of lumber products and building materials. Furman operates
twelve distribution centers nationally as well as a sales office in Portland, Oregon that ser-
vices retail lumberyards, home centers, and industrial customers. 
Destruction of the Great Bear Rainforest
Interfor’s Internet site contains a direct link to the Furman Lumber site and states that Fur-
man offers tips on the best way to use Interfor’s wood products.29Interfor is one of the
three largest companies clearcutting the ancient forests of the Great Bear Rainforest.
Furman is well aware of the problem of diminishing forest cover. Ed Bouverat, a national
product design manager at Furman, states in an article published in The Southface Journal
of Energy and Building Technology (February 1997) : “Industrial society is destroying the
world’s forests at an astonishing rate. It is estimated that of 6.2 billion hectares of undis-
turbed primary forest that existed in the world before settled agriculture began, less than
25 percent remains. In the United States, of 438 million hectares of original forest cover, less
than 15 percent remains.”
His conclusion is to switch to engineered wood products, which he states are “ e n v i r o n m e n -
tally smart” because they avoid price increases “resulting from the protectionism of our
remaining old growth forests.” Bouverat adds, “Trees used to produce EWP (environmental-
ly wise products) are not the trees of environmental concerns. Because the logs used for
EWP manufacturing are first reduced to smaller pieces of wood fiber, the original log size is
not important. Smaller and younger trees can be used. These trees are farmed and raised as
a crop. Forests are managed, planted and harvested.”30However, Furman continues to buy
wood from ancient forests.
Products
Furman sells dimension lumber, studs, boards, pattern stock, timbers, siding, shingles, panel
products, shakes, flooring, stepping, decking, fencing, treated wood products, landscape
products, engineered wood products, and selected building materials. A detailed product
list is available from the company’s Web site.31
Customers
Forty-five percent of Furman’s sales are to retail outlets such as Home Depot, Lowe’s, and
Carolina Builders.32
29Interfor Web site (http://www.interfor.com/products/links/links.html).
30Southface Energy Institute Web site (http://southface.org/home/sfpubs/sfjv297/sfjv297.html).
31Furman Lumber Web site (http://www.furmanlumber.com/products.htm).
32Forbes Web site (http://www.forbes.com/tool/toolbox/private500/1997/9951.htm).

16The Lumber Processor 
Lumber processors, otherwise known as “remanufacturers” or “ secondary manufacturers,”
buy directly from logging companies, or from a broker or wholesaler, and sell their finished
product directly to other companies or to retail outlets. They produce window and door
components, furniture, floor and roof trusses, modular components for the home 
construction industry, moldings, flooring and cedar garden products. Many remanufacturers
process lumber in great enough quantities to purchase it directly from the producer, including
such processors as Sauder or Premdor.
Sauder Moldings, Inc.
Sauder Moldings, Inc. Phone: (360) 384-4774
5575 Nordic Pl. Fax: (360) 384-4943
Ferndale, WA 98248-9138 http://www.mouldingsinc.com
General Manager: Paul Douglas
President, Sauder Industries: William Sauder
Sales: under $20 million
Destruction of the Great Bear Rainforest
Sauder is a corporate affiliate of Interfor, one of the companies clearcutting the Great Bear
Rainforest, from which it receives the majority of its lumber. Both Sauder and Interfor are
fully controlled by the Sauder family. William Sauder, the president of Sauder, is the single
largest shareholder of Interfor.
Products
Sauder specializes in the production of 80 types of
door, window and baseboard hemlock moldings at
various sawmills in the United States as well as Cana-
da.
Customers
Sauder’s manufacturing centers and warehouses in
Ferndale, WA, Renton, WA and Taigard, OR supply
customers throughout the Pacific Northwest. One of
the biggest, if not the biggest, customer of Sauder
hemlock moldings in the U.S. is The Home Depot,
accounting for several million dollars per year. Anoth-
er major customer is Dunn Lumber, which sells Sauder
moldings at all of its 10 retail stores in the Pacific
Northwest.
The following 
lumber processors
have either restricted
or agreed not to
place new orders
from Interfor and/or
Doman:
Rugby  (U.K.)
Larch-Lap (U.K.)
Sauder hemlock moldings at
The Home Depot.

17The Builder
The term "builder" refers to construction companies, building contractors, and sometimes
architects.  The construction sector is the largest single consumer of wood in the U.S.  In
fact, seasonal house-building is what drives the logging industry in the Great Bear Rainfor-
est.  One and a half million houses are built each year in the U.S., over 90 percent of which
are wood framed. One fifth of the $280 billion domestic residential construction industry is
controlled by a handful of large builders such as Oakwood Homes.  The rest is conducted by
small local contractors.
Oakwood Homes
Oakwood Homes (NYSE: OH) Phone: (336) 664-2400
7800 McCloud Rd. Fax: (336) 664-2370
Greensboro, NC 27409-9634 http://www.oakwoodhomes.com
CEO: Nicholas J. St. George
1998 Sales: $1.5 billion
Oakwood Homes claims to be the largest retailer of manufactured homes in the world, with
350 company-owned retail centers, and about 700 independent retailers.  It is the third
largest overall manufactured housing company in the U.S., behind Fleetwood and Champi-
on, with 32 manufacturing plants.  
Oakwood was founded in 1946, and after steady
growth in the 1970s and 80s, it began merging
with several other housing companies such as
Golden West, Destiny Industries and Schult
Homes.  Sales revenue has doubled in the last
three years, and it is now one of the fastest
growing companies on the New York Stock
Exchange.
Destruction of theGreat Bear Rainforest 
Oakwood Homes and its subsidiary, Schult
Homes, have used commodity grade lumber
from West Fraser, one of the primary companies
logging in the Great Bear Rainforest and other
ancient forests in Canada.
Products
Oakwood builds and sells both single- and multi-section homes, ranging from 765 to 2,500
square feet, starting at about $15,000.  Brands include Freedom, Golden West, Villa West,
and Peachtree.  Oakwood also sells "modular homes" which are delivered in pieces and
assembled on-site, in as little as 24 hours.The following builders
qualify as innovative
leaders in the industry
for switching to FSC-
certified lumber and/or
using only salvaged
wood:
The builders of the
Olympic Games in
2000
Matsuzaki Architects
140 building 
corporations in the
Netherlands
1.5 million houses 
are built each year 
in the U.S.

18The “Do It Yourself” (DIY) Store
Lumber is distributed in the U.S. by thousands of small firms that sell to residential building
contractors, homeowners and small manufacturing concerns. A significant amount of lum-
ber and wood products are sold by DIY retailers (between 15-50 percent of DIY stores’ total
sales is lumber).33The Home Improvement Research Institute projects that annual sales for
the DIY industry will jump from $134 billion in 1996 to $170 billion by the year 2000.34The
Home Depot dominates the DIY market and is now the largest retailer of wood products in
the world.
The Home Depot, Inc.
The Home Depot, Inc. (NYSE: HD) Phone: (770) 433-8211
2455 Paces Ferry Rd. Fax: (770) 431-2685
Atlanta, GA 30339-4024 http://www.homedepot.com
CEO: Arthur Blank
1998 Sales: $24 billion
With over 750 retail outlets in North America and South America, as well as over $20 billion
in sales annually, The Home Depot is the largest DIY, and the largest retailer of wood prod-
ucts in the world.
In fiscal year 1998,3 5The Home Depot had a consolidated
turnover of $24 billion (up from $19.5 billion in 1997).
The Home Depot is one of the top ten retail businesses
in the U.S. with an approximate market share of seven
percent for home products.  
Destruction of the Great Bear Rainforest
The Home Depot sells wood products derived from
ancient forests in British Columbia, especially products
from Sauder Moldings, which are clearcut from the
Great Bear Rainforest. The Home Depot also purchases
wood from Universal and Furman distribution firms,
both of which buy ancient rainforest lumber.
Surveys of The Home Depot’s stores and distribution centers throughout the U.S. have 
also found that The Home Depot carries products that contribute to ancient forest destruc-
tion in other parts of the world, including the U.S., South America, Indonesia and Malaysia.
Some of the largest DIY chains in Europe have canceled contracts with firms that clearcut in
the Great Bear Rainforest and other ancient forests.  They have committed to purchase only
wood from secondary forests and/or independently certified sources as supplies become
available. B&Q (which will be part of the third largest “do it yourself” chain in the world as it
merges with Castorama) has ceased purchasing all timber products from British Columbia.
Approximately 90 percent of the products currently on B&Q’s shelves are independently cer-
tified and/or from second-growth sources.  German DIY chain, OBI, the sixth largest in the
world, has begun to take steps to remove all ancient forest lumber from its shelves. 
33 According to Peter Caruso, Merrill Lynch, home improvement retail analyst. 
34The Home Depot Annual Report (1996).
35ending Jan 31, 1998.Greenpeace activists
inflate a 40-foot
bear atop The 
Home Depot in Tuk-
wila, Washington.The following DIY
retailers have agreed
not to place any new
orders for timber
products from British
Columbia:
B&Q (U.K.)
Do It All (U.K.)
Sainsbury’s     
Homebase (U.K.)
OBI (Germany,  
Austria, Italy)

19Despite the fact that The Home Depot was alerted to the ramifications of its purchasing
policies more than two years ago, it has failed to take steps to end purchases from compa-
nies clearcutting the Great Bear Rainforest.  Nor has it agreed to address a phase-out of
ancient forest products.
In 1992, The Home Depot promised to phase out all unsustainably produced tropical rain-
forest products.  As of 1999, it has failed implement any such policy.  On occasion, The
Home Depot has made efforts to provide its consumers with some options for buying certi-
fied forest products.  However, the company has refused to address issues pertaining to its
procurement of vast quantities of ancient forest products or toward phasing out these and
other forest supplies.  
The Home Depot plans to more than double its number of stores over the next three
years,36increasing its overall purchase of forest products at a corresponding rate.  Until The
Home Depot begins to phase out products derived from the destruction of ancient forests,
laudatory steps to phase in certified wood, such as joining of the Certified Forest Products
Council will continue to be outpaced by the damage caused by its increasing ancient forest
consumption. 
Products 
Building materials, which made up 34 percent of The Home Depot’s sales in 1998, include
such items as Sauder Moldings, whitewood mill products and western red cedar decking
and fencing — all of which are derived from the clearcutting of ancient temperate rain-
forests. Other products often derived from ancient forests include plywood and hollow-core
doors manufactured from “lauan” (also called “meranti” or “Asian mahogany”); dowels,
tools and wheelbarrow handles from Ramin and other Southeast Asian hardwoods;
mahogany doors from Central or South America; and siding and decking material from
Northern California’s last remaining ancient redwoods.
36Home Depot Web site (http://www.homedepot.com).

20The Publisher / Printer 
Paper from the Great Bear Rainforest reaches almost every corner of the United States
printing industry in one form or another. For example, Fletcher Challenge newsprint and
telephone directory paper, which is produced with Interfor wood chips, has been used by
both of the two largest printers in North America: R. R. Donnelley and Sons, and Quebecor.
World Color, another major American printer, uses Fletcher Challenge paper to print the
Sears Catalog, and Times Mirror uses it to print the L.A. Times . 
Times Mirror
Includes Los Angeles Times
Time Mirror (NYSE: TMC) Phone: (213) 237-3700
Times Mirror Square Fax: (213) 237-5000
Los Angeles, CA 90053 http://www.tm.com
CEO: Mark H. Willes
1997 Sales: $3.3 billion
Times Mirror publishes and prints the L.A. Times and other newspapers, special-interest
magazines, and has a “Professional Information” segment which owns companies involved
in flight information, training and consulting, and the health industry.
The L.A. Times , one of the largest users of both recycled and virgin fiber newsprint in North
America, is one of Fletcher Challenge’s largest customers.
Destruction of the Great Bear Rainforest
In 1994 the L.A. Times was alerted to the fact that its newsprint was derived from ancient
forest destruction.  After being targeted for protest, company officials agreed in 1998 to
investigate the issue and act responsibly.  To date, the L.A. Times has
taken no positive steps on the issue.  On January 6,
1999, the L.A. Times announced that it would not
stop buying ancient forest newsprint.
Products
Times Mirror publishes and prints seven newspapers
including the L.A. Times , Newsday , The Baltimore Sun
and the Hartford Courant , and numerous special-inter-
est magazines including Golf, Popular Science , The
Sporting News , Field & Stream , and Yachting .
Customers
The Times Mirror’s seven newspapers have a circulation of
2.3 million, and its magazines reach another 40 million people per month. In
addition to serving members of the general public, its subsidiary AchieveG-
lobal is the largest provider of skills training and consulting services in the world, serving
453 of the Fortune 500 companies.The following U.S.
magazines and publi-
cations have commit-
ted to going ancient
forest free, and will
be requiring ancient
forest free fibers from
their printers:
National
Geographic
Mother Jones
Utne Reader


21R. R. Donnelley and Sons
R. R. Donnelley and Sons (NYSE: DNY) Phone: (312) 326-8000
77 W. Wacker Dr. Fax: (312) 326-8543
Chicago, IL 60601-1696 http://www.rrdonnelley.com
CEO: William L. Davis
Sales: $4.9 billion
R. R. Donnelley is the second largest commercial printer in the world, tied with Quebecor
Printing. It prints a diversity of paper products and claims to be “the leading printer of book
in North America,” serving publishers such as Fodors and Viking. 
Destruction of the Great Bear Rainforest
R. R. Donnelley & Sons buys paper from Fletcher Challenge, logged by Interfor. In 1997, R.R.
Donnelley & Sons was alerted to the fact that its paper was derived from ancient forest
destruction.  To date, the company has not changed its purchasing policy to address these
issues. 
Products
Primary sales are catalogs, retail inserts, magazines, books, telephone directories, and finan-
cial services publishing.
Customers 
R. R. Donnelley & Sons has long-term telephone directory printing contracts with four of the
five Regional Bell Operating Companies in the U.S. It also serves eight of the top ten maga-
zine publishers in the U.S., printing leading magazines such as Time, Sports Illustrated, Peo-
ple and TV Guide. It prints catalogs for JC Penny, Toys R Us, and many other companies.
37 R.R. Donnelley & Sons Web site (http://www.rrdonnelley.com).

22The Paper Products Manufacturer
Between 1961 and 1994, per capita consumption of paper increased by 86 percent globally
and by 350 percent in industrialized countries such as the U.S.38American paper products
manufacturers such as Proctor & Gamble commonly buy paper directly from British Colum-
bia companies, and more often than not, the paper is then converted into disposable prod-
ucts such as diapers or paper towels. This is the most wasteful of all the sectors outlined in
this report.
Proctor & Gamble
The Proctor & Gamble Company Phone: (513) 983-1100
(NYSE: PG) Fax: (513) 983-9369
One Proctor & Gamble Plaza http://www.pg.com
Cincinnati, OH 45202
CEO: John Pepper
Sales: $36 billion
Proctor & Gamble (P&G) is the world’s largest manufacturer of household products, and is
ranked by Forbes magazine as as the 33rdlargest company in the world. It is also the world’s
largest advertiser.39P&G’s paper product sales are approximately $10 billion per year.  P&G
dominates the diaper and feminine products market worldwide.  The company  is a major
producer of tissue paper and other household paper items, along with competitors Scott
Paper and Kimberly Clark.
The company’s acquisitions reached record levels last year, with total spending in
excess of $3 billion. Recent acquisitions include paper companies in Mexico and
Korea, as well as Tambrand, Inc. and its leading brand Tampax.
Destruction of the Great Bear Rainforest
Proctor & Gamble purchases paper from West Fraser and cellulose compounds
from Doman (via Hercules chemical company). West Fraser and Doman are two
of the three largest companies logging the ancient forests of the Great Bear Rain-
forest.
Products
Major paper products available in the U.S. include Pampers, Luvs, Always, Tampax,
Royale, Bounty and Charmin. Additional brands are available in Europe, Asia and
Latin America.40
Cellulose compounds, frequently derived from ancient forest trees, are commonly used in
cosmetics and pharmaceuticals, and may very well be present in any number of such prod-
ucts manufactured by the company. Products that contain cellulose gum include Crest
toothpaste and Sunny Delight drink. Other Proctor & Gamble products range from Max Fac-
tor cosmetics to Tide laundry detergent.41
38World Resources Institute, 1997.
39 Hoovers Online Web site (http://www.hoovers.com).
40Proctor and Gamble Web site (http://www.pg.com/about/products/paper.htm).
41A complete product list can be found at http://www.pg.com/about/products/products.htm.

23The Dissolving Pulp Processor
Doman is one of two dissolving pulp producers in Canada (Tembec in Quebec is the second).
As of 1997 there were only eleven dissolving pulp producers in the world, each one with its
particular grades of pulp, often tailored to exact specifications of the purchaser. American
companies such as Hercules buy dissolving sulphite pulp from Doman’s Port Alice mill; from
there, it is transported by ship and then by train or truck directly to the processing plant.
The final product can be practically anything from toothpaste to ballistics.
Hercules Inc.
Hercules Inc. (NYSE: HPC) Phone: (302) 594-5000
1313 North Market Street Fax: (302) 594-5400
Wilmington, DE 19894-0001 http://www.herc.com
CEO: R. Keith Elliott
Sales: $1.9 billion
Having scaled back by divesting itself of several divisions, Hercules Incorporated has found
its strength as a worldwide supplier of specialty chemical products. Hercules is a market-ori-
ented, technology–based supplier of chemical additives to the world pulp and paper indus-
try. Half of Hercules’ total sales comes from food and functional products that are used in
everyday items. Wood fiber compounds (cellulose) derived from dissolving sulphite pulp are
used for everything from thickeners in latex paint to natural gum ingredients used to provide
texture in foods, beverages and toothpaste. Hercules will nearly double in size if it completes
its announced purchase of BetzDearborn, a company specializing in chemicals for paper pro-
duction and wastewater treatment.
Destruction of the Great Bear Rainforest
Hercules purchases large quantities of dissolving sulphite pulp derived directly from the
ancient temperate rainforest by Western Pulp (Doman Industries).
In the past year, several consumers including Union Carbide and Courtaulds (U.K.), Lenzing
(Austria) have stopped buying dissolving pulp from British Columbia and proved that it is
not necessary to use ancient forest fibers for their products requiring dissolving pulp. Her-
cules Aqualon (Europe) currently produces its products without using pulp from Doman.
Hercules U.S. should be able to do the same.
In September 1998 Hercules was alerted to the environmental consequences of its procure-
ment policies.  To date Hercules has not ended its purchases from Doman industries.
Products
Hercules supplies food processors in 110 countries around the world.4 2It also supplies pulp and
paper mills, and makers of packaging, tissue, beverage containers, adhesives, cigarette filters,
chewing gum, wires, cables, fragrances, printing inks, paints, oral hygiene products, cosmetics,
pharmaceuticals, clothing, beverages, dairy and bakery products. Hercules’ brand-name chem-
icals include Culminal, Natrosol, Klucel, Aqualon and Parcell.
Customers
Hercules’ customers range from oil field service companies to manufacturers of oral hygiene
products. Proctor & Gamble is one of Hercules’ more well-known customers.
42Hercules Web site (http://www.herc.com).The following U.S.
paper products 
manufacturers have
committed to going
ancient forest free:
Seventh 
Generation
Hallmark Cards

The Retailer
Nearly all retailers in the U.S. sell products derived or packaged from ancient forest prod-
ucts.  Many of the products described in other sections of this report are sold in general
retail outlets, such as Wal-Mart.
Wal-Mart
Wal-Mart (NYSE: WMT) Phone: (501) 273-4000
702 SW Eighth St. Fax: (501) 273-1917
Bentonville, AR 72716-8611 http://www.wal-mart.com
CEO: David D. Glass
1998 Sales: $138 billion
Wal-Mart is the world's largest retailer, bigger than Sears, Kmart, and J. C. Penney com-
bined.  It is also one of the largest grocers in the U.S., and the third largest company in the
Fortune 500.  Wal-Mart has entered the global market, expanding into Mexico in 1992, into
Canada in 1994, into Germany in 1997 by buying 21-store Wertkauf, and into Brazil in 1998
by buying 40 percent of Lojas Americanas.  In 1999, Wal-mart further expanded in Germany
by buying 74 Interspar stores.  It has additional smaller chains in Argentina, China, Indone-
sia, and Korea.
By stocking the shelves of over 3,600 stores
with paper products, publications, and pack-
aging, the company has a dramatic impact
on the world's forests.
Destruction of the Great Bear Rainforest 
Wal-Mart sells Proctor & Gamble products
derived from the logging companies West
Fraser and Doman, numerous household
items made using dissolving sulphite
pulp/cellulose gum from Doman or Hercules,
and magazines and newspapers printed or
published by R. R. Donnelley & Sons or Times
Mirror.  Additionally, many of its products
are packaged in linerboard from West Fras-
er's Eurocan mill.  All of these companies are
clearcutting the Great Bear Rainforest.
Products
Wal-Mart sells almost everything consumed
by the average homeowner, including house-
wares, domestic goods, groceries, and sta-
tionery.
24The following retailers
are committed to
going ancient forest
free:
Otto (owns
Eddie Bauer)
Patagonia
Proctor & Gamble
products on the
shelves of Wal-Mart.

25V I .  T H E  G R E E N P E A C E  A N C I E N T
F O R E S T S  C A M PA I G N  
n  order to end destructive logging practices and protect the Earth’s last ancient forests,
the Greenpeace Ancient Forests Campaign is working to:
•  End the purchase of products from companies that destroy ancient forests
•  Direct forest product consumption toward well-managed secondary sources, recy-
cled or non-wood fiber and reclaimed wood
•  Create consumer awareness of the threats to the last ancient forests
Changes in the marketplace will place pressure on logging companies and governments to
act responsibly, and catalyze a shift toward responsible consumption.  Consumers have the
right to know whether the products they buy are fueling ancient forest destruction.
Breaking the “Chain of Destruction”
The companies logging the Great Bear Rainforest export more than three-quarters of their
pulp and timber to the United States, Europe and
Japan.
In Europe, Greenpeace launched an intensive cam-
paign to stop corporate consumers from purchasing
wood from Canada's ancient forests. Greenpeace
blocked shipments of timber, challenged companies at
their headquarters and raised public awareness about
the devastation of ancient forests. 
As a result, major companies such as B&Q and Do It
All, the two largest “do it yourself” chains in England,
and Otto, the largest mail order company in the world,
canceled their contracts with Canadian rainforest tim-
ber companies or decided to stop using ancient forest
wood altogether.
In the United States, the efforts of Greenpeace, Rain-
forest Action Network, National Resources Defense
Council and other environmental groups resulted in
many companies such as Kinko’s, 3M, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Levi-Strauss, Nike and others committing to
stop buying ancient forest products. Unfortunately,
others, such as The Home Depot, Proctor and Gamble,
Times-Mirror, and Hercules, refuse to take this stand. 
The U.S. remains the largest single consumer of forest products worldwide.  If the Earth's
last ancient forests are to be saved, U.S. companies must live up to their responsibility. It is
now time for corporate consumers in the U.S. to join this trend and stop buying wood prod-
ucts contributing to ancient forest destruction, or the forests will disappear forever.
Ancient-forest-friendly companies have conducted extensive audits to determine where
their forest products were coming from.  Many, such as Courtaulds, Lenzing and Union Car-
bide, tested alternative supplies and in some cases developed new technologies to adapt to
different fiber supplies.  The companies also sought written guarantees that their suppliers
would not purchase products derived from ancient forest destruction.  Some, such as
Kinkos, have introduced alternative tree-free paper.  Others, such as B&Q, are buying forest
products that have been independently certified through the Forest Stewardship Council. I
“I wrote to you on August 14, 1997 
e x p ressing our concern about the clear c u t-
t i n gof intact virgin rainforest valleys in
British Columbia, and urging you to active-
ly pursue an alternative policy...We are
committed as a business to move to wood
pulp originating solely from existing sec-
ondary forests....We strongly request that
WFP reconsider their policy in relation to
harvesting in these central coast water-
sheds.”
-letter from Courtaulds UK to Western 

26V I I .  A L T E R N A T I V E S  T O
A N C I E N T  F O R E S T  P R O D U C T S  
n the last 25 years, lumber and pulp consumption has doubled and consumption of paper
and paperboard has tripled. In the next fifteen years demand for paper is expected to
almost double again.43Unless alternatives are employed and consumption is reduced, we
run the risk of destroying the last ancient forests in our lifetime.
Consumption Reduction and Efficiency
Improving efficiency and reducing consumption are essential elements in ensuring the pro-
tection of the world’s remaining ancient forests. Solutions include mill efficiency, reducing
waste at construction sites and improving
design construction methods.44Over one tril-
lion board feet of lumber has been milled in
the U.S. this century, and much of it is ready
to be reused as older buildings are torn
down. In addition, some of the more than
half a million buildings that are demolished
each year could be refurbished or converted
to other uses.
The first steps toward environmentally
responsible procurement policies are increas-
ing efficiency and  reducing consumption.
Eliminating wasteful use and redesigning
construction will not only reduce consump-
tion, it will also reduce costs.
About 15 percent of the wood delivered to construction sites ends up in landfills, and an
estimated 20 percent of the wood used in home construction could be saved by more effi-
cient framing techniques.  If measures to reduce this waste were adopted nationally in the
U.S., the demand to cut hundreds of thousands of hectares of forests would be eliminated
each year.45
In 1995, the New York Times reduced the size of its newspaper by eliminating part of the
margin space around the text; this simple redesign reduced its costs for paper and helped to
save thousands of acres of forests. 
Recycled or Reclaimed Forest Products 
Recycled paper is now widely available. It is also possible to recycle or reclaim building
materials. Building construction consumes 40 percent of the timber used in the U.S. each
year.  Modern wooden buildings not only use large amounts of timber, they are less energy
efficient and more expensive to build. Alternatives are available and include a number of
earth-based materials, a growing number of engineered products made from various
organic materials, and recycled materials.
43Worldwatch Institute, State of the World 1997 (New York: WW Norton and Company, 1997).
44See Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) Web site (http://www.nrdc.org/nrdcpro/reports/lawoodus.html).
45 NRDC, Wood Use Efficiency: A Crucial Step for Protecting Our Forests, 1996.I
“I am initiating a review of our operations
worldwide to identify any uses of paper,
pulp or lumber from old growth rain-
forests. If any such uses are identified we
will seek alternatives and construct a
phase-out.”
-Daryl Hugget, 3M letter to the Rainforest 
Action Network, 1997 

27Wood entering landfills can also be recaptured and a growing number of mills are now
being built to capture this wood stream and recycle it into medium density fiber (MDF)
panel boards.  As much as 12 percent of landfill space in the U.S. is consumed by waste
wood.
Non-Wood Construction Materials
Construction quality non-wood materials are becoming increasingly available.  One example
is agricultural straw panel boards.  Currently, farmers are burning straw on large areas of
wheat and rice fields following harvest, creating serious regional air pollution problems.  A
number of processing plants are springing up in Canada and the U.S. to take this straw and
turn it into non-structural board panels as a replace-
ment for medium density fiber board and particle
boards from wood.  In Manitoba, Canada, and in
Texas farmers working with straw board plants have
found that they make more money now from their
straw then from the grain crop itself.  Cabinet and
furniture kit manufacturers have found that the
straw board is better than the wood-based products
it replaces as it is both lighter (saving on shipping
costs), easier to work (saving on machining costs), has
high water resistance characteristics (improving dura-
bility) and is formaldehyde free (reducing health risks
to workers and the end consumer).
Non-Wood Pulp and Paper 
Products
Paper and other pulp products account for 40 percent of the world’s industrial wood use.
Yet in China, as much as three-quarters of the paper is made from non-timber sources such
as cereal straw. Today, paper and building material can be made from agricultural sources
such as hemp, kenaf and crop residues (for example, rice and wheat straw residues) that
result from from grain production. In fact, there are currently 300 paper mills in the world
that use tree-free fiber for paper production.46
This year Kinko’s, as part of its commitment to eliminating ancient forest products, is intro-
ducing a new line of tree-free paper. 
Products from Secondary Forests 
Well over half of the world’s remaining forests are secondary; that is, already logged once
and allowed to regrow or converted into plantation forests. If the alternatives listed above
are implemented, and if secondary forests are well managed (see following section), there
will be enough fiber supply to meet the world’s demands. There are alternatives to logging
ancient forests. For example, in December 1998, the Svetogorsk pulp and paper mill in Rus-
sia announced plans to completely phase out the use of ancient forest wood in its produc-
tion. This announcement is the first of its kind in the world. Svetogorsk produces 180,000
tons of printing paper per year, 70 percent of which is exported to Europe and the Americas.“People are only now starting to under-
stand the importance of ancient forests to
biodiversity. In our opinion it is important
also for the industry to respect the needs of
the environment.”
-Reino Kotti, Deputy Chief, Forestry 
Department, Svetogorsk mill
46A. Soltani & P. Whitney; “Cut Waste, Not Trees” , (Rainforest Action Network, 1995).

28Independently Certified Forest 
Products
What guarantees can a consumers have that the wood products they do buy come from
well-managed forests and do not contribute to ancient-forest destruction?  A number of
certification and labeling systems for forests are coming into the market, but the quality of
their standards vary considerably.  Many do little more than certify “business as usual.”  The
best certification and labeling system, and the most widely supported, is that of the Forest
Stewardship Council (FSC).  This independent, non-governmental system was established to
support environmentally sound, socially beneficial and economically viable forestry man-
agement around the world, and the marketing of forest products from such forests.  Its
internationally-recognized principles and criteria of forest stewardship have received wide
endorsement.
Support for the FSC label is running high among many major purchasers and retailers of 
forest products. In the United Kingdom, a group of companies with annual turnover of
wood and wood products totaling more than 2.4 billion pounds sterling has agreed to 
preferentially purchase FSC certified products as they become available and eliminate pur-
c h a s e s coming from forests which are not well managed. In November of 1997, the Certified
Forest Products Council was launched in the U.S., representing 140 corporate members
including the Turner Corporation, the nation’s leading general builder, and Habitat for
Humanity, one of the largest homebuilders in the country. Other groups of buyers support-
ing the FSC system have been established in the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Switzerland,
Germany, Brazil and Japan.

29“Kinko’s Inc. is concerned about the 
protection of the world’s remaining old
growth forests. We are committed to 
implementing policies that will help to
insure these forests are permanently 
protected, and to insure that Kinko’s Inc. 
is in no way a participant in the loss of
these irreplaceable natural resources.”
-Kinko’s Inc., Oct. 16, 1998“For many years choice was a value 
perception balancing quality and price, 
but over the last few years this has been
widening by an environmental dimension.
Growing numbers of consumers, and I
think this is hardening with the new 
generations, now want to know “where
from” and “how produced.”
-Ross MacLaren, Managing Director of
Homebase U.K.“Our corporation is concerned about the
protection of the world’s remaining ancient
forests, including the Great Bear Rainforest
in Canada.”
-Dell Computer Corporation, Oct. 19, 1998
“BBC Magazines is extremely concerned
about the current activities and future
plans of Western Forest Products in the
Great Bear Rainforest area of British
Columbia…we require a written 
guarantee from you that in future none 
of the paper BBC Magazines buys from
you will have been made from pulp 
originating from this area.”
-BBC Worldwide Publishing, U.K., 
January 1998“Bristol-Myers Squibb Company is 
concerned about the protection of the
world’s remaining ancient rainforests.
Specifically, we agree that the Great Bear
Rainforest in British Columbia should 
be preserved.”
-Bristol-Myers Squibb, Nov. 3, 1998

30V I I I .  M O V I N G  F O R W A R D
Greenpeace is calling on companies to:
Conduct an audit of their suppliers to determine if any of their wood-based products 
(including lumber, paper, pulp, and cellulose) are derived from ancient forests.
Immediately suspend contracts for any materials that are derived from Interfor, Doman
or West Fraser, all of whom are logging or planning to log in pristine areas of the Great
Bear Rainforest.
Inform suppliers of all wood-based products that the company will be phasing out 
purchases from any sources engaged in logging ancient forests. (This policy excludes pur-
chases from forest-dependent communities in ancient forest areas, who locally control and
manage their resources in an ecologically responsible manner, and purchases certified by an
independent organization, where appropriate.)
Inform suppliers that in the future, the company will give purchasing preference to the
following types of products:
• recycled or reclaimed products 
• products from well managed secondary forests 
• products that are independently certified by the FSC or others with similar exacting stan- 
dards
• products from community-based operations and 
• products derived from appropriate alternative fibers
Commit to significantly reduce overall consumption of fiber through conservation and 
efficiency.
Greenpeace is calling on individuals to:
Refuse to buy products that destroy ancient forests.
Ask local hardware or lumber stores not to sell products that destroy ancient forests.
Ask them to carry alternatives that can reduce pressure on forests, such as recycled or
reclaimed wood, FSC certified wood, wood from community-based operations, and environ-
mentally sound non-wood alternatives such as ag-straw panels as they become available.
Write a letter to The Home Depot, Proctor & Gamble, Sears and other companies listed in
this report and ask them to stop destroying the world’s remaining ancient forests.
Visit the Greenpeace Web site at www.greenpeaceusa.org to learn more about ancient
forest issues and how to support Greenpeace’s forest campaign.

31A P P E N D I X
1. U.S. companies committed to going
ancient-forest-free:
3M Corp.
Advanced Micro Devices Inc.
Bristol Myers Squibb Co.
Dell Computer Corp.
Estee Lauder Cos.
Hallmark Cards Inc.
IBM Corp.
Johnson & Johnson
Kinko’s, Inc.
Levi Strauss & Co.
Liz Claiborne Inc.
Lockheed Martin Corp.
The McGraw-Hill Cos.
Mitsubishi Electric of America
Mitsubishi Motor Sales of America
Mother Jones magazine
Mutual of Omaha Insurance Co.
National Geographic
Nike Inc.
Pacific Gas & Electric Co.
Patagonia
Quantum Corp.
Seventh Generation
Starbucks Coffee Co.
United Stationers Supply Co.
Utne Reader
2. Companies that have agreed to halt or
suspend all new orders for wood, pulp,
paper or cellulose products derived from
the logging companies Interfor or Doman:
3M (International)
Arjo Wiggins Appleton (U.K., US, France)
BBC Worldwide Publishing (U.K.)
Courtaulds (U.K.)
De Eendracht (Netherlands)
Great Mills (U.K.)
Harcros (part of Meyer Group)
Jewson (part of Meyer Group)
Larch-Lap (U.K.)
Lenzing (Austria)
Magnet (U.K.)Meyer International (U.K.)
Milne Fruit (US)
Rugby (U.K.)
Timbmet (U.K.)
Union Carbide (International)
VIBA (Netherlands)
Wickes (U.K.)
3. European companies that have stopped
buying from British Columbia altogether:
Belgium Association of Lumber Importers
(Belgium)
B&Q (U.K.)
Do It All (U.K.)
Sainsbury’s Homebase (U.K.)
4. German companies that have agreed not
to purchase any products from the Great
Bear Rainforest:
Beiersdorf
Haindl
KNAUF
MD Papier
OBI
Otto
Schwenk
Wybert
5. German companies committed to going
ancient-forest-free:
Otto (includes Eddie Bauer)
Hipp
OBI (6th largest DIY in the world)

32

33