# Archivo original: this-vinyl-house.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:40 -03 2025

HAZARDOUS ADDITIVES IN VINYL 
CONSUMER PRODUCTS
AND HOME FURNISHINGS
Mary-Elizabeth Harmon, PhDGreenpeace USA
Greenpeacewww.greenpeaceusa.org
May 2001

Acknowledgements
Many thanks go to Lisa Finaldi for direct-
ing this project. Thanks also to Dr. DavidSantillo and Rick Hind for their criticalreview of this work, and to David Barre,Rob King, and Anastasia Pfarr for the layout of this report and Laura Lombardifor the photography. I would also like tothank Technical Director Craig Chawla atSTAT Analysis in Chicago, IL for conduct-ing the phthalate tests, and to Dr. JurgenKuballa at GALAB in Geestacht, Germanyfor carrying out the organotin analyses.This Vinyl House     1

Contents
Summary ....................................................3
Introduction ..............................................5Findings......................................................9Discussion ................................................11Recommendations....................................15Table of Products Tested ........................17Appendix I 
Health Effects Associated withPhthalates and Organotins......................19
Appendix II 
Major U.S. Producers of PVC,Phthalates and Organotins......................20
Appendix III 
PVC in Your Home..................................23
Appendix IV 
Alternatives to PVC..................................27
Appendix V 
Materials and Methods ............................30
References................................................31Summary
Greenpeace tested a variety of common
polyvinyl chloride (PVC or vinyl) con-sumer products, with uses from childcareto home furnishing, for phthalate plasti-cizers and lead, cadmium and organotinstabilizers. In earlier investigations, wedetected the presence of hazardous levelsof phthalates and cadmium and lead intoys and other PVC products manufac-tured for children. Toys, however, repre-sent only a small part of the PVC market.On the other hand, construction materialsincluding home furnishings, from hard(e.g., window frames, pipes) to softened(e.g., floor and wall coverings, acces-sories) products, account for 76% of PVCuse. Although the most direct exposureof children to hazardous additives maybe expected from toys and childcareitems, the wide variety of other vinylproducts in the home may also act as sig-nificant sources of exposure. Greenpeacetherefore expanded its investigations toinclude materials in the home made ofvinyl, such as wallpaper and floor cover-ings, that children come into contact withon a daily basis.
In this study, we found that:
• All products tested contained
detectable levels of phthalates, with amaximum of 39% by weight in a drink-ing straw. Indeed, some of the highestlevels were found in products specifi-cally designed for children’s mouths.
• Virtually all of the products contained
significant amounts of organotins. Floortiles, on which children spend a lot oftime crawling and playing, and wallpa-This Vinyl House      3

per were the two products containing
the highest levels. 
• Vinyl products for everyday use, con-
taining larger amounts of hazardousadditives than any other plastic, can bereadily purchased at popular retailstores in the United States.
Greenpeace is concerned about this
widespread availability of vinyl productscontaining substantial levels of phthalatesand organotins since these additives leachfrom PVC and are untested and/or areassociated with a number of serioushealth effects in animals.
With respect to phthalate plasticizers, 
scientific studies have shown that:
• Humans have phthalates in our bodies.
A recent Centers for Disease Control(CDC) study confirmed the presence oftwo of the phthalates detected in thisstudy in a test population.
• The offspring of rats fed the three
phthalates detected in this study, name-ly diethyl hexyl-, diisononyl- and ben-zyl butyl phthalate (DEHP, DINP andBBP, respectively), do not follow nor-mal patterns of sexual development.
• There is reason for concern that DEHP
may impair male reproductive systemdevelopment in human infants and toddlers.
• DINP causes liver tumors and damages
the kidneys in rodents.
• The amount of DINP and other phtha-
lates that leach from a product doesnot always correlate with the amountthe product contains. • DEHP-exposed rats and mice have a
higher propensity for liver cancer thannon-exposed animals. Furthermore, theEnvironmental Protection Agency (EPA)and the Department of Health andHuman Services (DHHS) considerDEHP to be a probable human carcino-gen. That is to say, DEHP may reason-ably be considered a cancer causingsubstance in people.
In the case of metal stabilizers, it is scien-
tifically accepted that:
• Breathing or swallowing organotins can
interfere with the nervous system, andeven cause death at high levels ofexposure. 
• Organotins have adverse effects on
marine wildlife and rats, includingreduced reproduction and developmen-tal problems.
• Organotins build up in the fat of fish,
rats and mice.
Greenpeace considers the use of phtha-
late plasticizers and metal stabilizers incommon PVC consumer products unac-ceptable since it results in our needlessand avoidable exposure to hazardoussubstances - exposure about which mostpeople remain unaware. PVC requiresmore additives than any other plastic.Eighty-six percent of all phthalates madeare used as PVC additives, and that num-ber is expected to climb. It has also beenestimated that almost 70% of all organ-otins are devoted for use in PVC. Clearly,if we replaced PVC with alternate materi-als that already exist, our direct exposureto phthalates and organotins would dropdramatically. 4     This Vinyl House

PVC’s need for chemical additives is only
part of its hazard - its lifecycle has seri-ous, negative consequences. Dioxin is aconfirmed human carcinogen (cancer-causing substance), and one of the mostpotent toxins known to man. Together,PVC manufacture and disposal representone of the largest sources of dioxin. Forthese reasons, Greenpeace advocates thephase-out of all PVC plastics. Introduction
Reasons for conducting this study
The global production of vinyl (also
called PVC or polyvinyl chloride) was lastestimated at approximately 51 billionpounds per year. (Stringer 2001) PVCtakes many forms, being used to produceanything from food wrap, medicaldevices and children’s toys to construc-tion materials. To play all of these roleshowever, PVC must be mixed with addi-tives since it is a hard, brittle plastic if leftuntreated. Chemicals known as phthalatesare the most commonly used to plasticizePVC. (Bizarri 1996) These chemicals arecharacteristically oily liquids that soften,but do not bind to PVC when mixed.Because phthalates do not form tightbonds with PVC, they are able to leachout of vinyl products during normal useand after disposal. (Cadogan 1993) 
Fueled by the hazards of PVC additives,
Greenpeace undertook a study to deter-mine the amount of phthalates present invinyl products designed for a potentiallysensitive and vulnerable population,namely children. That 1997 investigationfound up to 40% by weight of phthalates,primarily diisononyl phthalate (DINP), intoys bought in 17 countries from aroundthe world. (Stringer 2000) Toys, however,represent only a small percentage of thePVC market. Construction materials onthe other hand, including vinyl siding,pipes, home furnishings and accessories,account for 76% of PVC use. (ChemicalEconomics Handbook 1997) Greenpeace,therefore, undertook this study of a widerassortment of vinyl products, includingThis Vinyl House     5
This Graco stroller raincover contains DEHP,
a phthalate that some manufacturers havevoluntarily removed from their products. 

wallpaper, floor coverings and childcare
items that children are likely to come intocontact with in their everyday lives. Thedescriptions of the products are shown inTable 1 (page 17). 
Phthalate plasticizers are only one class
of additives that PVC requires. Withoutadditives, PVC is not only brittle but it isalso relatively unstable. Stabilizers, oftenmetals, are added to PVC to keep it frombreaking down and to give it stabilityagainst heat. (DiGangi 1997) Lead andcadmium were widely used for these pur-poses, but regulations brought on bytheir known human health hazards haveforced manufacturers to replace themwith other metals in some products.Organotins have long been used in com-merce (Sadiki 1996) and as such, theymade attractive candidates for replace-ments of the known hazardous stabilizers.However, the increased use of organotinsas PVC stabilizers does not mean thatthey have a ‘clean bill of health.’ In fact,evidence is mounting against them. In theface of emerging reports that organotinsalso leach from PVC (Sadiki 1999) andare hazardous to humans (Boyer 1989,Champ 2000, ASTDR 1992), Greenpeacealso tested the products included in thisstudy for their organotin content. We didnot test the leaching of either phthalatesor organotins from PVC since it is alreadyestablished to occur. (Cadogan 1993,Sadiki 1999) Furthermore, leaching ratesare dependent upon a variety of factorssuch as heat, age of the product and fric-tion. (DiGangi 1997)Routes of human intake of phthalates
A recent study released by the CDC con-
firmed that humans have certain phtha-lates in our bodies. (U.S. CDC 2001)Eating, breathing and skin contact, aswell as transfusion, are all ways, eithertogether or alone, that different phtha-lates make their way into our systems.According to the EPA, eating is probablythe main route by which humans arecontaminated with diethylhexyl phthalate(DEHP), the most widely used phthalateplasticizer. (U.S. ASTDR 1993) In thesame way, we are contaminated withother commonly used phthalates such asdiisononyl phthalate (DINP). (Opinion onPhthalate migration 1998, U.S. CPSC1998a) Children may take in higher than
6    This Vinyl House
This Gerber diaper cover and The First Years
changing mat contained significant levels ofone phthalate, DINP. In addition, the changingmat contained organotins and bisphenol A.

average amounts because their chew toys
are made of highly phthalate-softenedPVC (e.g., teethers). Indeed, the highestlevels of DINP released from teethers andtoys exceeded the acceptable daily intakelevel in studies, conducted in theNetherlands and Denmark, that simulatedchildren’s mouthing behavior. (Opinionon Phthalate migration 1998, U.S. CPSC1998b) Furthermore, a Dutch study con-firmed what most of us have observed -children suck or chew their fingers andother things that are not intended to gointo their mouths more than chew toys.(Groot 1998) This unintended chewingundoubtedly adds to their overall intakeof phthalates. 
Transfusion is another route of human
phthalate exposure. Phthalates leach fromPVC medical devices into solutions thatare then fed into the patient. (Rossi 2000,Tickner 1999) People who are ill, espe-cially children whose systems are stilldeveloping, may be particularly sensitiveto this type of exposure. Concerns havein fact been raised that the developing,but not mature, male genital tract inhumans may be adversely affected byhigh levels of DEHP. (U.S. NationalToxicology Program 2001)
Breathing in air and dust containing
phthalates that have off-gassed from PVCflooring also adds to the amount ofphthalates in our systems. (Cadogan 1993,Rossi 2000) Again, this is of particularconcern with respect to children sincethey spend a lot of time indoors with abreathing range close to the floor. 
Although uptake of phthalates throughskin contact with PVC would not be
expected to play a large role in humancontamination, it should be consideredwhen thinking about our cumulativephthalate intake. This is particularly truefor children who touch PVC products andthen put their fingers into their mouths.
Regulations on phthalate usePrompted by the potential of babies to
intake dangerous amounts of phthalatesand the serious, negative health effectsthey cause in animal studies, theEuropean Union placed an emergencyban on the use of certain phthalates intoys made for children under the age ofthree in 1999. (Official Journal ofEuropean Communities 1999)  This emer-gency ban was recently renewed for thefifth time. (European Commission 2001)In the United States, the ConsumerProduct Safety Commission (CPSC) andthe Toy Manufacturers of America (TMA)agreed upon a voluntary limit of DEHP at3% in pacifiers and teethers in 1986.(TMA 1986) Later in 1998, the CPSCresponded to Greenpeace calls and askedtoy manufacturers to voluntarily withdrawPVC teething rings and rattles containingDINP from the market. (U.S. CPSC 1998c)However, such agreements do not stopthe use of, and children’s exposure tohazardous or untested additives. DINP isa poorly defined mix of as many 100chemical variants, and the CPSC statesthat the composition of DINP in chil-dren’s products is unknown and wasunknown in 1986 when the toy industrybegan using it after concerns about DEHPcame to light. (U.S. CPSC 1998b) In addi-tion, the CPSC states that, "It is conceiv-
This Vinyl House     7

able that one or more existing types of
DINP for which data are unavailablecould also be more toxic and/or carcino-genic," than the types of DINP that havebeen tested. (U.S. CPSC 1998b)
Regulations are also in place for phtha-
lates in plastics that come into contactwith food such as during its processing,transportation and storage. The Food andDrug Administration (FDA) states thatbutyl benzyl phthalate (BBP) anddiisononyl phthalate (DINP) "may besafely used" at levels up to 1% and 43%,respectively. (U.S. FDA 21CFR178.37402000) Closer inspection reveals legislativeprovisions that are very likely to be bro-ken. For example, the regulation statesthat the plastics should be used "at tem-peratures not exceeding room tempera-ture." (U.S. FDA 21CFR178.3740 2000)That suggests that eating food from aplastic container at a summer picnic, orwarming food wrapped in plastic in amicrowave may be considered unsafe.Worse still is that plastic products areoften unmarked, leaving consumersunable to make informed decisions. 
Routes of human intake of 
organotins
Ingestion and inhalation represent the
major ways by which we take in organ-otins, although skin contact may also bea route of contamination. (U.S. ASTDR1992) 
Canadian studies have shown organotins
in water from PVC pipes containingorganotin stabilizers. (Sadiki 1999)Clearly, drinking tainted water is a routethat organotins can make their way into
our bodies. In addition, organotins in theenvironment build up in the fat of fish.(Boyer 1989, U.S. EPA 2001) By eatingthese fish, we again introduce organotinsinto our systems.
Because organotins are found in dust
(Santillo 2001), perhaps due to theirrelease from plastics and other textiles,breathing is another way that humans arecontaminated by organotins. This andprevious research conducted byGreenpeace and the Healthy FlooringNetwork in the United Kingdom con-firmed the presence of organotins in vinylflooring, carpets and wallpaper. (Allsopp2001, Allsopp 2000)
Although it is not clear whether skin con-
tact with PVC containing organotinsadversely effects our health, workersexposed to paint containing tributyltin, orTBT, developed skin inflammation amongother symptoms. (Boyer 1989, Champ2000, U.S. ASTDR 1992)
Regulations on organotin useTraditionally, organotins are used as anti-
fouling agents in paint applied to ships tokeep the growth of algae and othermarine life to a minimum. (Champ 2000)Although organotins are very effective atthis task, marine life has unfortunatelysuffered as a result. In response to thisthreat, the U.S. Congress made organotinsthe only chemicals to have exclusiveenvironmental legislation. (Champ 2000)The Organotin Antifouling Paint Act of1988 prohibits the use of paint containingorganotins on water vessels shorter than
8     This Vinyl House

twenty-five meters. The Act also prohibits
the sale of paint containing organotinsnot certified by the EPA. (Champ 2000)Other countries have even more stringentregulations in effect. Both Austria andSwitzerland have banned all use of TBTpaints on vessels in freshwater. (Champ2000) Germany, in addition to havingsimilar restrictions to those in the UnitedStates, has regulations that limit TBT to3.8% in paint and that require organotin-containing paint to be safely disposed.(Champ 2000)
The threat of organotins in products
besides paint has also been recognized.In the United States, the FDA limits cer-tain organotins to 3% in plastics that con-tact food (U.S. FDA 21CFR178.2650 2000).The organotin air limit set by theOccupational Safety and HealthAdministration (OSHA) is 0.1 milligrams/cubic meter. (U.S. ASTDR1992) Depending upon the organotin, thisnumber translates to 0.000002% at thevery most.
Findings
All PVC products tested containdetectable levels of phthalates
Twenty common, vinyl consumer prod-
ucts were tested for phthalate plasticizers,and the results of the tests are summa-rized in Table 1 (page 17). They showthat diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP),diisononyl phthalate (DINP) and butylbenzyl phthalate (BBP) are found inchildcare products and vinyl home fur-nishings that children come into contactwith in their daily lives. Taken together,the results reveal that: 
• All products tested contained
detectable levels of phthalates, with amaximum of 39% by weight in a strawfrom a child’s drinking cup. Indeed,some of the highest levels were foundin products specifically designed for
children’s mouths.
• Seven out of 20 products contained
DEHP above a 3% voluntary cap set forpacifiers and teethers. Some of theseproducts, although not intended forchildren’s mouths, are very likely to bechewed by children.
• Two teethers contained over 20% by
weight DINP. 
• BBP is found in home furnishings at
concentrations up to 1.7% by weight. A 1% limit on BBP in plastic that con-tacts food is currently in effect in theU.S.
• Vinyl products for everyday children’s
use containing hazardous levels ofphthalates can be readily purchased atpopular retail stores throughout theUnited States.
In 1999, the European Union approved
an emergency ban on the use of sixphthalates in toys made for childrenunder the age of three. (Official Journalof European Communities 1999) Thatemergency ban was recently extended forthe fifth time. (European Commission2001) In the United States however, avoluntary limit of 3% DEHP is the onlyrecommendation on phthalate use inpacifiers and teethers. This inadequateregulation does not stop the use of highlevels of phthalates besides DEHP inThis Vinyl House      9

teethers, as illustrated by the over 20%
DINP content that we found in teetherstested in this study. 
The home furnishings we tested had an
overall lower phthalate content than thechildren’s products, although a carpetprotector did contain phthalates up to24.7% by weight. This result should notbe taken to suggest that products for thehome do not act as significant sources ofchemical exposure to children. Becausewallpaper and floor tiles are not designedto be as soft and flexible as chewabletoys, they do not require as largeamounts of phthalates. However, theyhave other requirements that products
such as teethers do not, namely consider-able stability against heat and decomposi-tion. For these reasons, they would beexpected to contain high levels of metalstabilizers, and the results of this studyconfirm that to be the case.
Although the chemical additive bisphenol
A was not a focus of this study, it wasalso detected in two of the 20 items wetested. Bisphenol A is used in glue pro-duction, and can be found in a wide vari-ety of products ranging from car parts todrinking bottles. (WWF 2000) It is alsoused in PVC production and processing,and similar to phthalates, bisphenol A isknown to leach from plastic and othermaterials and subsequently contaminatehumans. (ADA 1998, WWF 2000)Leaching of bisphenol A from dentalsealants at 5 ppb (parts per billion)prompted the American DentalAssociation to contact the manufacturerof the sealant to change its manufacturingprocess. (ADA 1998) In this study,bisphenol A was detected at 139,000 ppbin a Safety 1st Deluxe RollerShade sun-screen carblind from Toys R Us, and at142,000 ppb in a changing pad made byThe First Years bought at Target. This isof concern since bisphenol A affects thehormone system, and causes toxic effectssuch as reduced sperm production andincreased prostate, kidney and liverweights in some animals. (U.S. NationalToxicology Program 2000, WWF 2000)
(See Table, page 17)10     This Vinyl House
Clothing for children, such as these sandals
and winter hat tested by Greenpeace, is oftenmade of vinyl.

Metal stabilizers detected in all but
one product tested
All 20 PVC items in this study were tested
for lead and cadmium stabilizers, whereasjust 15 were tested for organotins. Fiveitems were eliminated from the organotintests based upon the high cost of the pro-cedure and the fact that a similar itemwas being tested. The results of the metaltests are shown in Table 1 (page 17).They reveal that:
• Fourteen out of 15 products contained
detectable amounts of organotins. Floortiles, on which children spend a lot oftime crawling and playing, and wallpa-per were the two products containingthe highest levels. 
• Two of the products tested contained
cadmium in amounts exceeding theCalifornia Proposition 65 regulatedlevel.
• Eleven of the products tested contained
lead above the detection limit, althoughnone at levels exceeding the regulatedlimit for vinyl. (DiGangi 1997)
Current limits of organotins in air set by
OSHA do not exceed 20 ppb (parts perbillion). (U.S. ASTDR 1992) Our resultsshow that a wallpaper sample contained776,508 ppb total organotins. It is alarm-ing that a product containing that amountof organotins is readily available giventhe lack of information about organotinsbeing released from PVC products by off-gassing and normal wear and tear. In 1988, the Washington State Departmentof Health issued an advisory against theuse of tributyltin (TBT) in interior paintsince it released into the air and causedillness in humans. (Epidemiologic Notes
and Reports 1991) In addition, organotinswere found in the dusts from parliamentbuildings in Europe, a clear demonstra-tion that organotins are found in ourdaily environment. (Santillo 2001) Thisstudy confirmed the presence of organ-otins in vinyl floor tiles and wallpaper.Earlier work by Greenpeace also foundsignificant quantities of organotins invinyl flooring in addition to carpets.(Allsopp 2001, Allsopp 2000) A possibleroute by which they make their way intothe air we breathe is through off-gassingfrom PVC building materials and otherorganotin-containing textiles. 
Discussion
In this report, we have demonstrated thatwidely used PVC products, including chil-dren’s items, wallpaper and floor cover-ings, contain high levels of hazardousadditives. These additives, namely phtha-late plasticizers and metal stabilizers, areneeded to soften PVC and to keep it fromdegrading. (Bizarri 1996, DiGangi 1997)Diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP), diisnonylphthalate (DINP) and butyl benzyl phtha-late (BBP), were detected in the productstested in this study at combined levels upto 39% by weight of the product. Themetal stabilizers lead and cadmium werealso found in some of the products, butorganotins were present in all but one ofthe items, often at high concentrations.Concerns surrounding the use of phtha-late and organotin additives in commonlyused PVC products are discussed below.This Vinyl House      11

Humans are contaminated with
phthalates
A recent study conducted by the CDC
confirmed that we have phthalates in ourbodies. (U.S. CDC 2001) Levels of themetabolites, or breakdown products, ofseven phthalates were found in the urineof at least 1,020 people ages six andabove. With respect to the phthalatesdetected in our work, the CDC studyconfirmed the presence of DEHP andBBP metabolites in human urine.Conversely, DINP metabolites were notfound in that study. This may simplyreflect, however, the difficulty in identify-ing DINP breakdown products sinceDINP is a complex mixture of as many as100 isomers, or chemical variants.
The observation that the metabolites of
BBP and diethyl-, and dibutyl phthalate(DEP and DBP) were detected in urine at a higher concentration than DEHPmetabolites does not necessarily meanthat human contamination by DEHP islower than that of BBP, DBP or DEP.Alternatively, the results may reflect dif-ferences in the efficiency with which dif-ferent phthalates are metabolized. In astudy comparing the metabolism of thesame amount of DEHP and DBP, 80% ofDBP was metabolized versus only 20% ofDEHP under the same conditions. (Kluwe1982) However the results are interpret-ed, they clearly show that humans arecontaminated with DEHP, BBP, DBP andDEP.Routes of human intake of phthalates
As discussed earlier, children may take in
particularly high levels of phthalates fromteethers and other childcare items madeof highly phthalate-softened PVC. In thisstudy, a Prince Lionheart crib rail teetherpurchased at Babies R Us, and a hand-held General Mills Cheerios teether fromthe Burlington Coat Factory containing20.8% and 21.7% DEHP by weight,respectively serve as good examples.Other items in this study that could verylikely be chewed by youngsters include achild’s hat and a Liz Claiborne handbag.These products are made up of over 20%DEHP.
Children may also intake more phthalates
than adults through breathing. An initialstudy conducted in Norway reported ahigher incidence of bronchial obstructionin children living in houses with PVC, asopposed to wooden, floors. (Allsopp2000, Jaakola 1999) Phthalates beingreleased into the air could provide a pos-sible link between these two observationssince phthalates are known to leach fromPVC into the surrounding air. (Cadogan1993, Rossi 2000) Off-gassing of DEHPfrom vinyl flooring can result in exposurelevels that exceed the highest estimates ofour daily intake by almost three times.(Rossi 2000) In this study, a Tenex carpetprotector was determined to be 24.7% byweight DEHP, indicating that we can beexposed to phthalates in our homes andoffices through everyday activity. This isof more concern with respect to childrensince they spend a lot of time indoorswith a breathing range closer to the floorthan adults. In addition, children may
12     This Vinyl House

ingest phthalates by coming into contact
with home furnishings since they are verylikely to crawl on PVC flooring, for exam-ple, and then put their fingers into theirmouths.
Toxic effects associated with 
phthalates
The offspring of rats fed the three phtha-
lates detected in the productsGreenpeace tested here, namely DEHP,DINP and BBP do not follow normal pat-terns of sexual development. (Gray 2000)In the case of DEHP-fed and BBP-fedrats, the weight of the offspring was alsoreduced. Other studies also report subtleeffects of DEHP in the testes of youngrats at levels below the accepted no-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL).(Gray 2000) Recently, the NationalToxicology Program (NTP) expressedconcern over the adverse development ofbabies born to pregnant women whotake in DEHP at the exposure levels esti-mated for an adult. (U.S. NationalToxicology Program 2001) They alsoexpressed concern that male infants andtoddlers who substantially exceed adultDEHP exposure estimates could sufferproblems in their reproductive systemdevelopment. 
Rats and mice fed DEHP and DINP also
showed an increase in liver cancers overanimals that had not been fed DEHP.(U.S. ASTDR 1993, U.S. CPSC 1998c)Furthermore, DEHP has been classified asa "probable human carcinogen" by theEPA. The Department of Health andHuman Services has also classified DEHPas a potential carcinogen. (U.S. ASTDR1993) That is to say, DEHP may reason-
ably be considered a cancer causing sub-stance in humans. A retrospective studyconducted in Sweden found an increasein testicular cancer in workers who wereexposed to PVC (Ohlson 2000), althoughadditional studies are needed to deter-mine whether phthalates are responsible.
This Vinyl House      13
Small children chew on everything. It is
part of their learning process!

Routes of human intake of 
organotins
Ingestion of organotin-tainted foods and
drink, and inhalation of organotin-ladendust are the main ways that humansbecome contaminated with these metalstabilizers. (U.S. ASTDR 1992) Tests ofdrinking water found organotins in waterfrom PVC pipes, but not in water frompolyethylene pipes. (Sadiki 1999, Sadiki1996) This finding demonstrates thatorganotins leach from PVC, and pointsout a source of our exposure. Organotinsare also used as stabilizers in PVC plasticsused to protect food. (Kawamura 2000)Similar to the phthalate plasticizers, it isconceivable that they make their way from plastic containers and wraps into
food we subsequently eat. 
Although not from a PVC source, yet
another way organotins make their wayinto our diets is through leaching frompaint on marine vessels and building upin the fat of fish that we eat. (Boyer 1989,Champ 2000, Jacobson 2000, U.S. EPA2001)
A recent study found organotins in dusts
collected from parliament buildings inEurope. (Santillo 2001) This finding pro-vides us with clear evidence that organ-otins have made their way into our envi-ronment, perhaps from organotin-contain-ing textiles, and also a better understand-ing of where we might be exposed.  
14    This Vinyl House
This Prince Lionheart crib rail teether contained over20% phthalates.


Concerns about organotin stabilizers
Organotins, especially tributyltin (TBT),
are most widely recognized for their useas anti-foulants in the paint on marinevessels. (Champ 2000, Jacobson 2000)Fouling is the growth of marine lifeincluding bacteria, fungus, barnacles andalgae on boats. While organotins are veryeffective as anti-fouling agents, theycause adverse effects on the environmentby leaching from ships into the waterwhere they can remain for severalmonths. Organotins also concentrate insediments where they have a half-life ofover 20 months. (Jacobson 2000, U.S. EPA2001) Concentrations of TBT as low as 1parts per trillion (ppt), or 0.0000000001%, have been associatedwith reduced reproduction in snails (U.S.EPA 2001), and TBT at 7 ppt causes mal-formations in oysters (Jacobson 2000).Organotins also cause rats and mice tohave problems with reproduction and thebirth of normal offspring. (Kergosian1998, U.S. ASTDR 1992) In humans, ship-yard workers exposed to TBT-containingpaint developed symptoms such asbreathing problems, chronic skin inflam-mation, dizziness and a weakened abilityto ward off colds and flu. (Champ 2000)
Recommendations
In this study, we have shown the pres-ence of hazardous phthalate plasticizersand organotin stabilizers in common PVCconsumer products. Earlier Greenpeaceinvestigations of phthalates (Stringer2000) and cadmium and lead (DiGangi1997) in toys and other children’s itemsidentified products that expose childrento hazardous PVC additives. In this study,
we have extended the list to includechildcare products and other materialsused for decorating around the home.
Although debate still remains surrounding
the hazards that PVC additives pose tohuman health, we advocate using precau-tion in assessing chemicals for their usein commerce especially where safe alter-natives that do not require additives exist.Unequivocal scientific proof that a givenchemical causes a particular effect shouldnot be necessary to start the regulatoryprocess to remove hazardous chemicalsfrom consumer products in order toavoid long-term or irreversible harm.
Inadequate regulations on only some
PVC plasticizers and stabilizers have ledto the use other hazardous substitutes.Policy loopholes that allow ‘guilty’ chemi-cals to be replaced with untested orinsufficiently tested ones are unaccept-able. This is particularly true in the caseof phthalate plasticizers and organotinstabilizers since PVC accounts for thebulk of their use in industry, and since itrequires more hazardous additives thanany other plastic. 
Hazardous additives are only part of the
threat that we face from using commonPVC products. The bulk of PVC waste isnot recycled, but ends up in landfills andincinerators. PVC in landfills is of greatconcern because its hazardous additivesleach from the plastic and cannot be contained. (Van der Naald 1998)Furthermore, the burning of PVC in acci-dental landfill fires adds to the globalburden of dioxin, a potent toxin and can-This Vinyl House      15

cer-causing substance. (Costner 2000)
Dioxin formation is also the main causeof concern around burning PVC in incin-erators.
In order to stop the needless exposure of
people, especially children, to the haz-ards of PVC, Greenpeace recommendsthat:
• The Consumer Product Safety
Commission (CPSC) should regulatevinyl as a material. It should furtherprohibit the use of phthalates, lead,cadmium, organotins and other toxic oruntested additives in consumer prod-ucts. If necessary, the CPSC shouldseek new legislation in Congress togive them the authority to do this.
• Manufacturers of products designed for
children or the home should discloseall of the chemical ingredients in theirproducts.
• Manufacturers should commit to imme-
diately eliminating soft vinyl from theirproducts and establish a rigorousschedule for the elimination of hardvinyl.
• Retailers and distributors should
remove vinyl products from the market.
• Parents should not purchase vinyl
products to which children might beexposed such as toys, childcare items,clothing, school supplies, handbags,sports equipment or items for thehome. Vinyl products should bereturned to the manufacturer or retailerfor a full refund.16     This Vinyl House

This Vinyl House      17Product Prince Lionheart 
crib rail teether Graco stroller rain 
cover Goldbug sandles, 
size 2 General Mills 
Cheerios teether Gerber 
pull-on vinyl 
pants, XL CarterÕs 
waterproof 
mattress pad Basics 
magnetic 
shower curtain 
liner Babycare 
changing mat Liz Claiborne 
handbag Babyplace ÒfurÓ 
lined hat 
Store  
Babies R Us  
Babies R Us  
Babies R Us Burlington Coat 
Factory Burlington Coat 
Factory Burlington Coat 
Factory  
Walmart  
Walmart  
MacyÕs ChildrenÕs 
Place 
State Massachusetts Massachusetts Massachusetts Michigan Michigan Michigan Louisiana Louisiana DC DC 
           
DEHP 0.026% 18.70% 0% 0.02% 0.31% 0.02% 22.10% 0.66% 21.70% 20.30% 
DINP 20.80% 0.90% 14.90% 28.7% 21.70% 6.88% 0% 6.72% 0% 0% 
BBP 0% 0.02% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0.03% 0% 0% 
Phthalate 
Total  
20.83%  
19.62%  
14.90%  
28.72%  
22.01%  
6.90%  
22.10%  
7.41%  
21.70%  
20.30% 
           
Bisphenol A <100 ppm <100 ppm <100 ppm <100 ppm <100 ppm <100 ppm <100 ppm <100 ppm  <100 ppm <100 ppm 
           
MBT <0.3 ppb 2.1 ppb 13.1 ppb NT NT NT NT 173 ppb 102 ppb 6.4 ppb 
DBT <0.3 ppb 2.2 ppb 64.4 ppb NT NT NT NT 73.3 ppb 2,250 ppb 55.4 ppb 
TBT <0.3 ppb 0.4 ppb 0.6 ppb NT NT NT NT 4,120 ppb 5.6 ppb 2.6 ppb 
TeBT <0.4 ppb <0.3 ppb 0.8 ppb NT NT NT NT 6.4 ppb <0.3 ppb <0.3 ppb 
MOT <0.4 ppb 1.9 ppb 2,860 ppb NT NT NT NT <0.4 ppb 278 ppb 5.1 ppb 
DOT <0.4 ppb 1.6 ppb 5,860 ppb NT NT NT NT <0.4 ppb 410 ppb 16.6 ppb 
Organotin 
Total  
<0.3 ppb  
8.2 ppb  
8778.9 ppb  
NT  
NT  
NT  
NT  
4372.7 ppb  
2945.6 ppb  
86.1 ppb 
           
Cadmium <0.5 ppm 1.09 ppm 0.7 ppm <0.5 ppm <0.5 ppm 83.3 ppm 3.7 ppm <0.5 ppm 32.9 ppm 0.8 ppm 
Lead <0.5 ppm 1.03 ppm 9.8 ppm <0.5 ppm <0.5 ppm <0.5 ppm 17.4 ppm <0.5 ppm 5.57 ppm 3.6 ppm 
 

18 This Vinyl House
 
Product Tenex Corp. 
deep pile carpet 
cover K.C Products 
Inc. drawer liner Mannington 
floor tile;
black, mottled Safety 1st Deluxe 
RollerShade sun 
screen car blind The 1st Years 
changing pad; 3-in-1 
changing kit #4087 Podee; straw 
to hands-free 
cup Graham & Brown 
Blackburn vinyl 
border wallpaper 
#97264 FSC Wallcoverings, 
village solid vinyl 
wallpaper 
#58125 Armstrong, 
Themes 
Collection self-
stick urethane 
tile #21126 Armstrong, Self 
Stik II vinyl tile 
#26225 
Store Bed, Bath and 
Beyond Bed, Bath and 
Beyond  
Floorcraft  
Toys R Us  
Target  
Toys R Us  
Home Depot  
Home Depot  
Home Depot  
Home Depot 
State New York New York California Illinois Illinois Illinois Illinois Illinois Illinois Illinois 
           
DEHP 24.70% 2.24% 1.66% 0.20% 0% 6.00% 8.24% 0.05% 0.04% 0.06% 
DINP 0% 9.72% 1.23% 20.00% 25.00% 33.00% 0% 12.00% 3.37% 3.55% 
BBP 0% 0.04% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 1.13% 1.56% 
Phthalate 
Total  
24.70%  
12.00%  
2.89%  
20.20%  
25.00%  
39.00%  
8.24%  
12.05%  
4.54%  
5.17% 
           
Bisphenol A < 100 ppm <100 ppm <100 ppm 139 ppm 142 ppm <100 ppm <100 ppm <100 ppm <100 ppm <100 ppm 
           
MBT 3.2 ppb NT 440 ppb 56.5 ppb 258 ppb 9.1 ppb 56,500 ppb 4.3 ppb 16,600 ppb 11.8 ppb 
DBT 0.8 ppb NT 3,160 ppb 143 ppb 3,230 ppb 134 ppb 719,000 ppb 38.5 ppb 46,800 ppb 32.6 ppb 
TBT 1.1 ppb NT 27.4 ppb 38.3 ppb 196 ppb 30.7 ppb 300 ppb 96.9 ppb 679 ppb <0.3 ppb 
TeBT <0.3 ppb NT 7.3 ppb <0.3 ppb <0.3 ppb <0.3 ppb <0.3 ppb <0.3 ppb <0.3 ppb <0.3 ppb 
MOT 2.8 ppb NT 8.1 ppb 4.3 ppb 12 ppb <0.4 ppb 76.6 ppb <0.4 ppb 10,800 ppb 7,300 ppb 
DOT 9.2 ppb NT 34.8 ppb 2.8 ppb 11.4 ppb <0.4 ppb 632 ppb <0.4 ppb 43,400 ppb 25,800 ppb 
Organotin 
Total  
17.1 ppb  
NT  
3,677.6 ppb  
244.9 ppb   
3,707.4 ppb  
173.8 ppb  
776,508.6 ppb  
139.7 ppb  
118,179 ppb  
33,144.4 ppb 
           
Cadmium <0.5 ppm 230 ppm <0.5 ppm <0.5 ppm <0.5 ppm <0.5 ppm <0.5 ppm <0.5 ppm <0.5 ppm <0.5 ppm 
Lead <0.5 ppm 15.1 ppm 0.77 ppm <0.5 ppm <0.5 ppm <0.5 ppm 3.89 ppm 73.82 ppm 3.82 ppm 0.67 ppm 
 

This Vinyl House      19
Appendix I
Health Effects Associated with Phthalates and Organotins
Chemical Health Effects
Diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) Probable human carcinogen, and potentially 
detrimental to immature male reproductive system.  Animal studies show liver cancer and altered pat-terns of sexual development.
Diisononyl phthalate (DINP) Causes liver tumors and damages the kidneys in 
rodents.  Alters sexual development in rats.
Benzyl butyl phthalate (BBP) Alters sexual development in rats.Tributyltin (TBT) Interferes with nervous system and causes death at 
high levels in humans.  Causes reduced reproduc-tion and developmental problems in marine wildlifeand rats.

20 This Vinyl House
Appendix II
Major U.S. Producers of PVC, Phthalates and Organotins
Company Name and Location ChemicalBorden Chemicals and Plastics PVC
Operating Limited PartnershipAddis, LouisianaGeismar, LouisianaIlliopolis, Illinois
Certain Teed Corporation PVC
Lake Charles, Louisiana
Colorite Polymers PVC
Burlington, New Jersey
Formosa Plastics Corporation, U.S.A. PVC
Baton Rouge, LouisianaDelaware City, DelawarePoint Comfort, Texas
The Geon Company PVC
Henry, Illinois
Georgia Gulf Corporation PVC
Aberdeen, MississippiOklahoma City, OklahomaPlaquemine, Louisiana
Kaneka Delaware Corp. PVC
Delaware City, Delaware
Keysor-Century Corporation PVC
Saugus, California

This Vinyl House      21
Company Name and Location Chemical
OxyVinyls LP PVC
Deer Park, TexasLouisville, KentuckyPasadena, TexasPedricktown, New JerseyPottstown, Pennsylvania
Shintech Incorporated PVC
Freeport, Texas
Union Carbide Corporation PVC
Texas City, Texas
Westlake PVC Corporation PVC
Calvert City, Kentucky
Solutia Inc. BBP
Bridgeport, New Jersey
Aristech Chemical Corporation DEHP, DINP
Chemicals DivisionNeville Island, Pennsylvania
Eastman Chemical Company DEHP
Tennessee Eastman DivisionKingsport, Tennessee
Velsicol Chemical Corporation DEHP
Chestertown, Maryland
ExxonMobil Chemical Company DINP
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Elf Atochem North America, Inc. DBT, TBT compounds
Specialty Chemicals DivisionCarrollton, KentuckyAxis, Alabama

22 This Vinyl House
Company Name and Location Chemical 
Gelest, Inc. DBT compounds
Tullytown, Pennsylvania
Cardinal Companies, L.P. DBT compounds
Columbia, South Carolina
Ferro Corporation DBT compounds
Performance and Fine Chemicals GroupPolymer Additives DivisionWalton Hills, Ohio
Atotech USA Inc. DBT compounds
Rock Hill, South Carolina
Johnson Matthey, Inc. DBT, TBT compounds
Alfa AesarWard Hill, Massachusetts
Aldrich Chemical Company, Inc. TBT compounds
(Location not specified)
Abbreviations: PVC, polyvinyl chloride; BBP, benzyl butyl phthalate; DEHP, diethylhexyl
phthalate; DINP, diisononyl phthalate; DBT, dibutyltin; TBT, tributyltin.
Source: Directory of Chemical Producers: United States. 2000. SRI International.

This Vinyl House      23
Appendix III
PVC in Your Home
Consumers should beware of PVC products available for the home. Here’s a list of the
most common products on the market today. Go to the Greenpeace website for a virtualhouse that will show you how to find products not made from PVC. We also offer anonline searchable database of alternatives for PVC used in construction. Over 200 compa-nies are featured on the database.
Visit the virtual home at: http://www.greenpeaceusa.org/toxics/house.htmSearch the online database for alternatives to PVC in construction: 
www.greenpeace.org.au/pvc/
Some other tips to be a PVC detective include:  
• Look for packaging with the #3 recycling symbol on it.  That means it is PVC and
rarely recycled.
• Often, PVC products are labeled "non-toxic vinyl," or "washable vinyl." The words
vinyl and PVC are used synonymously.
• Plastic products that are soft and flexible and have a distinct odor are often PVC. If
you are not sure, don’t buy it. When you get home, call the product manufacturer anddemand information about materials used in the product.
APPLIANCES:Electronics - TV, Video, Hi-Fi. In electrical and electronic products, plastics are mainly
found in casings and cable sheathings. They are also found in circuit cards, componentcapsules, mechanical bearing parts and moving mechanical components, such as wheelsand stub shafts.
White Goods - These include washing machines, dishwashers, refrigerators, and 
freezers. PVC is commonly found in cables, shelving and door gaskets.
BUILDING MATERIALS:Home Siding - PVC siding is widely used in the USA as a replacement for timber.
Insulation - The use of PVC profiles in cavity closure is increasing.

24 This Vinyl House
Roofing Membranes - Roofing film made of soft PVC is used on the insides of roofs as
shielding and flashing against water. 
Pipes - Rainwater guttering and drainpipes, water supply pipes, sewage and drainage
pipes, protective pipes for cables.
Electrical Cables and Wires – Electricity cables, telephone and data cables, lighting
cables and fittings – PVC coating is commonly used on cables and lines for the transfer ofelectricity and information. 
Door and Window Frames – Door and window frames made from PVC-u (which stands
for unplasticized PVC) are being heavily promoted by the industry as replacementwindows and doors.
CARS:Interiors – Some cars still contain PVC interiors, including seat upholstery and 
dashboards, although many companies are eliminating PVC.
Undersealing – Soft PVC is used in undersealing to prevent rust, and some car 
manufacturers have already eliminated its use.
CHILDCARE PRODUCTS:Mattress Covers – Crib and bed mattress covers with a waterproof coating of PVC are
commonly sold. 
Diaper Covers for Cloth Diapers – Diaper covers are available in vinyl, and also in
nylon and rubber.
Bibs– Many bibs are cotton or polyester coated with vinyl for waterproofing.
Car Seats and Strollers – Clear PVC is used for transparent covers to protect strollers
from rain. The linings of some car seats are also made of vinyl.
Toys – Teethers, squeeze toys, inflatable toys and dolls are often made from PVC to
make them soft and more marketable.
CLOTHING:Aprons – PVC laminated textile is often used as a water-resistant material for aprons.

This Vinyl House      25
Shoes – Soft PVC is used in shoes and parts of shoes, such as soles, labels for logo
imprints, upper parts made from vinyl imitation leather of PVC coatings.
Boots and Waders – 'Rubber' boots are sometimes made from PVC.
Carrying Bags – Sports bags, school bags, etc. are often made from nylon with a PVC
coating as waterproofing.
Luggage – Soft PVC is often used as a surface coating, inner coating or for parts of 
products in bags, suitcases and other luggage.
Clothes – T-shirts with PVC prints (usually shiny), pants and raincoats (for 
waterproofing). 
HOME FURNISHINGS: Vinyl Floor and Vinyl Wall Coverings – Vinyl flooring is made of soft PVC, and other
materials such as cork tiles may have a PVC coating. Cushion vinyl, sheet vinyl and vinyltiles all represent types of vinyl flooring.
Furniture – Imitation leather and furniture film are made from soft PVC.
Inflatable Furniture and Water Beds – This furniture, which is often designed for a
short life, is made of soft PVC.
Venetian Blinds – Venetian blinds are sometimes made of unplasticized PVC (PVC-u).
Dish and Clothes Racks – PVC is used to coat metal dish and clothes racks against 
rusting.
Tablecloths – Tablecloths are often vinyl, but also available in cotton, linen or polyester.
Shower Curtains – Shower curtains are often made of soft PVC, but are also available in
nylon, cotton and polyester or a blend.
GARDEN FURNITURE AND PRODUCTS:Hoses – Garden hoses are sometimes made of PVC though you can find some made of
rubber.
Tables and Chairs – The least expensive garden furniture is usually u-PVC. 

26 This Vinyl House
Tarps – Tarps are used for covering purposes, for example, over garden furniture and
within the building sector, for trucks and storage tents. They are made from nylon orpolyester, with a soft PVC coating.
Swimming Pools – Inflatable and non-inflatable children’s pools are made of soft PVC,
as well as swimming wings and rings. 
Lawnmower – PVC will be found in cables for lawnmowers and other garden 
machinery.
Greenhouses and Cold frames - Corrugated PVC sheeting is often used as a cheaper
alternative to glass for greenhouses and cold frames. 
Membrane pond liners – PVC is sometimes used as a pond liner.
MEDICAL PRODUCTS:Medical Devices – This product group is made up of products that are used directly in
the treatment of patients. Soft PVC products include colostomy bags, catheters, urinebags, infusion sets and bloodbags. Other medical products include certain gloves, curtains, sheets, and shoe covers made from soft PVC.
OFFICE EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES:Equipment - In items such as computers and fax/printers PVC is usually found in the
cabling. 
Supplies – Ring binders, folders, letter organizers, writing pads, clipboards, tape and 
calendars are often made of soft PVC.
PACKAGING:Packaging - PVC in packaging includes disposable bottles (for oil, mineral water, vinegar
etc.), food wrap, trays and boxes, bottles and jars, blister packaging and transportationpackaging. 
SPORTS EQUIPMENT:Weights – Hand weights are often covered with brightly colored PVC coatings.
Balls – Many inexpensive balls, such as those used for soccer, are often vinyl, but leather
and other types of plastic balls are also available.

This Vinyl House      27
Appendix IV
Alternatives to PVC
For virtually all PVC applications, safer alternatives exist, using more sustainable, tradi-
tional materials - such as paper, wood or local materials. PVC can also be replaced by avariety of other, less environmentally damaging plastics, although most plastics pose somerisk to the environment and contribute to the global waste crisis. 
Greenpeace has developed a pyramid of plastics to assist those making material selection
to avoid PVC use. The guidance focuses on the toxic characteristics of the potential alter-native materials. It provides a qualitative ranking based on environmental and healthproblems of PVC, addressing the production, additives and product emissions during use,disposal and recycling.
It does not include raw materials and energy inputs and therefore does not address all
criteria of a life cycle analysis. It provides guidance for interim steps on the route to cleanproduction. Ultimately, we should ask why we are using these materials and whether ornot they are necessary. 
Pyramid of Plastics
The pyramid of plastics is a ranking of plastics according to their hazardous characteris-tics. PVC, the most problematic plastic, is at the top of the pyramid, and bio-based plas-tics, the least polluting of the plastics, are at the pyramid’s base. It represents an ongoingprocess to qualify the main plastics in the economy. More plastics can be added as neces-sary, and qualifications may change depending upon new information on the material,such as in production processes or the use of toxic additives.
1) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and other halogenated plastics 2) Polyurethane (PU), Polystyrene (PS), Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS),  Polycarbonate (PC)3) Polyethylene-terephthalate (PET)4) Polyolefins (PE, PP, etc.)5) Bio-based plastics


28 This Vinyl House
Notes:
• Metallocene technology is a new way to widen the range of properties and applications of polyolefins. This
will in turn help replace many rigid and soft PVC applications. 
• TPE’s are thermoplastic elastomers that can be made from many different mixes of different plastic
monomers/short polymer chains.  Currently most of the building blocks are polyolefins, but can also con-tain other polymers such as polyurethane. Therefore, TPE’s can not be generally ranked in the pyramid of
plastics.
Additives
The addition of toxic additives can significantly change the environmental impacts of aplastic. For example, chloroparaffins or brominated flame retardants in polyolefins or bio-based plastic products with heavy metal stabilizers would significantly increase the hazardlevel of the plastic, and therefore change its position on the pyramid of plastics.Furthermore, many additives are persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and can cause seriousenvironmental damage.
Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs)
It is essential that the production of bio-based plastics does not involve the use of geneti-cally modified organisms (GMOs) or allow the patenting of life.
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is unique in its high chlorine and additives content, which
makes it an environmental poison throughout its life cycle. Vinyl chloride is a knownhuman carcinogen. PVC releases dioxin and other persistent organic pollutants during itsmanufacture and disposal and cannot be readily recycled due to its chlorine and additivecontent. Furthermore, additives are not bound to the plastic and leach out.
Polyurethane (PU) is mainly used in insulation and soft/foamed products like carpet
underlay. It uses several hazardous intermediates and creates numerous hazardous byprod-ucts. These include phosgene, isocyanates, toluene, diamines, and the ozone-depletinggases methylene chloride and CFCs, as well as halogenated flame retardants and pigments.The burning of PU releases numerous hazardous chemicals such as isocyanates, carbondioxide, hydrogen cyanide, PAHs and dioxins. 
Polystyrene (PS) is widely used for foam insulation and also for hard applications like
cups and toys. Its production involves the use of known (benzene) and suspected humancarcinogenic substances, such as styrene and 1,3-butadiene. Styrene is also known to betoxic to the reproductive system.  PS can be technically recycled, but recycling rates arelow, although still higher than for PVC. 
Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene (ABS) is used as a hard plastic in many applications like
pipes, car bumpers and toys (hard building blocks). ABS uses a number of hazardouschemicals. These include butadiene and styrene (see above )and acrylonitrile. Acrylonitrile 

This Vinyl House      29
is highly toxic and readily absorbed by humans by inhalation and directly through the skin.
Both the liquid and its vapor are highly toxic. Acrylonitrile is classified as a probablehuman carcinogen as are styrene and butadiene.
Polycarbonate (PC) is used for products like CDs and refillable milk bottles and is 
usually made with the highly toxic phosgene, which is derived from chlorine gas. PC doesnot need additives but does need solvents for its production, such as methylene chloride, acarcinogen. Other solvents used may include chloroform, 1,2-dichloroethylene, tetra-chloroethane and chlorobenzene. A number of processes have been developed to reclaimpolycarbonate from compact discs and PC milk and water bottles, for downcycling intolower quality products such as crates or building applications, or for mixing in small quan-tities with virgin material for higher grade products such as bottles.
Polyethylene-Terephthalate (PET) is made from ethylene glycol and dimethyl terephtha-
late. PET is generally used in packaging (e.g. bottles) and often contains additives such asUV stabilizers and flame retardants. PET recycling rates are high compared to other plas-tics.
Polyolefins such as Polyethylene (PE) and Polypropylene (PP) are simpler polymer
structures that do not need plasticizers, although they do use additives such as UV andheat stabilizers, antioxidants and in some applications, flame retardants. The polyolefinspose fewer risks and have the highest potential for mechanical recycling. Both PE and PPare versatile and cheap, and can be designed to replace almost all PVC applications. PEcan be made either hard, or very flexible, without the use of plasticizers. PP is easy tomold and can also be used in a wide range of applications.
In comparison with PVC, PE and PP contain fewer problematic additives, have reduced
leaching potential in landfills, reduced potential for dioxin formation during burning (provided that brominated/chlorinated flame retardants are not used), and reduced technical problems and costs during recycling.
Bio-based Polymers Biodegradable plastics from renewable sources (bio-based) are seen
as a promising alternative for plastic products which have a short life cycle or are impracti-cal to recycle, such as food packaging, agricultural plastics and other disposables.  Bio-based plastics can be made out of products obtained from raw materials produced by natu-ral living or growing systems, such as starch and cellulose. The advantage of bio-polymersis that they readily degrade and can be composted. Natural polymers include cellulose(from wood, cotton), horn (hardened protein) and raw rubber. Converted natural polymersinclude vulcanized rubber, vulcanized fiber, celluloid and casein protein. 

30 This Vinyl House
Appendix V
Materials and Methods
Tests for Phthalates
The PVC products described in Table 1 were sent to STAT Analysis (AIHA proficient,NIST/NVLAP accredited) in Chicago, Illinois to be tested for the following phthalates:diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP), benzyl butyl phthalate (BBP), dibutyl phthalate (DBP),diethyl phthalate (DEP), and diisononyl phthalate (DINP).  The items were also tested forbisphenol A.  All the samples were prepared and analyzed essentially according to EPAMethods 3550M and 8270M, respectively, as previously described. (DiGangi 1999)
Measurements of Metal Stabilizers
The levels of cadmium and lead contained in the PVC products studied here were alsodetermined at STAT Analysis in Chicago according to a procedure as detailed before.(DiGangi 1997)  Organotin analysis was conducted at GALAB laboratories in Geestacht,Germany by accredited methods after DIN EN 17025 to monitor the following organotins:mono-, di-, tri- and tetrabutyltin, mono- and di-octyltin, tricyclohexyltin and triphenyltin.

This Vinyl House      31
References
Allsopp, A., Santillo, D., Johnston, P. (2001). Poison Underfoot: Hazardous Chemicals in
PVC Flooring and Hazardous Chemicals in Carpets. Greenpeace International. 
Allsopp, M., Santillo, D., Johnston, P. (2000). Hazardous Chemicals in PVC Flooring.
Greenpeace Research Laboratories, University of Exeter.
American Dental Association. (1998). Estrogenic Effects of Bisphenol A Lacking in Dental
Sealants. Available at: http://www.ada.org/prof/prac/issues/statements/seal-est.html. 
Bizarri, S., Jaeckel, M., Yoshida, Y. (1996). Plasticizers. Chemical Economics Handbook
Marketing Research Report. SRI International.
Boyer, I. (1989). Toxicity of Dibutyltin, Tributyltin and other Organotin Compounds to
Humans and to Experimental Animals. Toxicology 55:253-298.
Cadogan, D., Papez, M., Poppe, A. Pugh, D., Scheubel, J. (1993). An assessment of the
release, occurrence and possible effects of plasticizers in the environment. PVC 93: TheFuture. The Institute of Materials, 260-274.
Champ, M. (2000). A review of organotin regulatory strategies, pending actions, related
costs and benefits. The Science of the Total Environment, 258:21-71.
Chemical Economics Handbook: Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Resins. (1997). SRI
International. Palo Alto, CA.
Costner, P. (2000). Dioxin Elimination – A Global Imperative. Greenpeace International,
The Netherlands.
DiGangi (1997). Lead and Cadmium in Vinyl Children’s Products – A Greenpeace Expose.DiGangi (1999). Phthalates in PVC Products from 12 Countries. Greenpeace USA.Epidemiologic Notes and Reports Acute Effect of Indoor Exposure to Paint Containing
Bis(tributyltin) oxide. MMWR Weekly 1991, 40(17):280-281.
European Commission. (2001). Commission Decision of March 5 2001 prolonging for the
fifth time the validity of Decision 1999/815/EC concerning measures prohibiting the plac-ing on the market of toys and childcare articles intended to be placed in the mouth bychildren under three years of age made of soft PVC containing certain phthalates (noti-fied under document number C(2001)501). Official Journal of the European CommunitiesL69/37.

32 This Vinyl House
Gray, L., Otsby, J., Furr, J., Price, M., Veeramachaneni, D., Parks, L. (2000). Perinatal
Exposure to the Phthalates DEHP, BBP, and DINP, but not DEP, DMP, or DOTP, AltersSexual Differentiation of the Male Rat. Toxicological Sciences 58:350-365.
Groot, M., Lekkerkerk, L., Steenbekkers, L. (1998). Mouthing behaviour of young children
- An observational study. Agricultural University Wageningen, Household ConsumerStudies.
Jaakola, J., Oie, L., Nafstad, P., Botten, G., Samuelson, S., Magnus, P. (1999). Interior sur-
face materials in the home and the development of bronchial obstruction in young chil-dren in Oslo, Norway. American Journal of Public Health 89 (2):188-191. 
Jacobson, A., Willingham, G. (2000). Sea-nine antifoulant: an environmentally acceptable
alternative to organotin antifoulants. The Science of the Total Environment 258:103-110.
Kawamura, Y., Machara, T., Suzuki, T., Yamada, T. (2000). Determination of organotin
compounds in kitchen utensils, food packages and toys by gas chromatography/atomicemission detection method. Journal of the Food Hygienic Society of Japan 41 (4):246-253.
Kergosian, D., Rice, C. (1998). Macrophage secretory function is enhanced by low doses
of tributyltin-oxide (TBTO), but not tributyltin-chloride (TBTCl). Arc. Environ.Contam.Toxicol. 34:223-228. 
Kluwe, W. (1982). Overview of Phthalate Ester Pharmakokinetics in Mammalian Species.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 45:3-10.
Official Journal of the European Communities. Commission Decision of December, 1999.
OJ L 315/46 9.12.1999.
Ohlson, C., Hardell, L. Testicular cancer and occupational exposures with a focus on
xenoestrogens in polyvinyl chloride plastics. (2000). Chemosphere, 40:1277-1282.
Opinion on Phthalate migration from soft PVC toys and child-care articles. (1998). 6th
CSTEE plenary meeting, Brussels, November 1998. Available at:http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/fs/sc/sct/out19_en.html  
Rossi, M. (2000). Neonatal Exposure to DEHP (di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate) and
Opportunities for Prevention. Falls Church, VA: Health Care Without Harm.
Sadiki, A., Williams, D. (1999). A study on organotin levels in Canadian drinking water
distributed through PVC pipes. Chemosphere, 38 (7) 1541-1548.

This Vinyl House      33
Sadiki, A., Williams, D., Carrier, R., Thomas, B. (1996). Pilot study on the contamination
of drinking water by organotin compounds. Chemosphere, 32:2389-2398.
Santillo, D., Johnston, P., Brigden, K. (2001). The presence of brominated flame retardants
and organotin compounds in dusts collected from Parliament buildings from eight coun-tries. Exeter, UK. Greenpeace Research Laboratories.
Stringer, R., Johnston, P. (2001). Chlorine and the Environment – An overview of the
chlorine industry. Kluwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands.
Stringer, R., Labunska, I., Santillo, D., Johnston, P., Siddorn, J., Stephenson, A. (2000).
Concentrations of Phthalate Esters and Identification of Other Additives in PVC Children’sToys.  Environmental Science and Pollution Research 7 (1):27-36.
Tickner, J. (1999). The Use of Di-2-Ethylhexyl Phthalate in PVC Medical Devices:
Exposure, Toxicity, and Alternatives. Lowell Center for Sustainable Production, Universityof Massachusetts, Lowell.
Toy Manufacturers of America. (1986). Report to the U.S. Consumer Product Safety
Commission by the Chronic Hazards Advisory Panel on Di(2-ethylhexyl) Phthalate,September, 1985.
U.S Centers for Disease Control. (2001). National Report on Human Exposure to
Environmental Chemicals. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/dls/report/results.
U.S. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. (1993). Toxicological profile for
Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate. Atlanta, GA. Excerpt available at: http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/facts9.html.
U.S. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. (1992). Excerpt: Toxicological
profile for tin. Available at: http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/tfacts55.html. Updated: September,1995.
U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission. (1998a). Migration of DINP from Polyvinyl
Chloride (PVC) Children’s Products. Available at:http://www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/prerel/prhtml199/99031.html.
U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission. (1998b). Preliminary Hazard Assessment of
Diisononyl Phthalate (DINP) in Children’s Products.

34 This Vinyl House
U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission. (1998c). Study on Phthalates in Teethers,
Rattles and Other Children’s Products. Available at:    http://www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/prerel/phtml199/99031.html.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (1996). Test methods for evaluating solid waste,
physical chemical methods SW846. 3rd Edition.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards.
Bioaccumulation Summary- Tributyltin. Available at:http://www.epa.gov/ttn/uatw/hlthef/eth-phth.html. Updated: April, 2001.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Office of Water. Excerpt: Toxicological profile for
Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate. U.S. Public Health Service, Atlanta, GA. (1993). Available at:http://www.epa.gov/watrhome/
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Code of Federal Regulations. Title 21, Volume 3,
Parts 170-199. Cite: 21CFR178.3740. Revised: April, 2000.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Code of Federal Regulations. Title 21, Volume 3,
Parts 170-199. Cite: 21CFR178.2650. Revised: April, 2000.
U.S. National Toxicology Program. (2001). Expert panel review of phthalates: NTP Center
for the Evaluation of Risks to Human Reproduction. Available at: http://cerhr.niehs.nih.gov.
U.S. National Toxicology Program.  Reproductive Toxicity: Bisphenol A, Study Number
RACB84080. Excerpt available at:http://ntp-server.niehs.nih.gov/htdocs/RT-studies/RACB84080.html. Updated January,2000.
Van der Naald, W., Thorpe, B. (1998). PVC Plastic: A Looming Crisis. Greenpeace
International. Available at: http://greenpeace.org/%7Ecomms/pvctoys/reports/loomingrecycling.html
WWF European Toxics Programme Report. (2000). Bisphenol A: A Known Endocrine
Disruptor.