# Archivo original: toxic-chemicals-in-computers-r.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:47 -03 2025

greenpeace.org
 Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Toxic Chemicals 
in Computers 
Reloaded
Kevin Brigden, Joe Webster, 
Iryna Labunska and David Santillo 

 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 
Contents
Executive Summary  ............................................................. 3
1. Introduction  ...................................................................... 8
. Materials and methods  ................................................ 12
 2.1	 Lead 	content 	in	electrical 	solder  .............................. 15
 2.2		 Hexavalent 	chromium 	(Cr	VI) .................................... 16
	 2.3 		 X-ray 	microanalysis 	(XRF)  ......................................... 17
 2.4		 Extractable 	BFR	quantification  ................................. 20
	 2.5 		 PVC	 	  ....................................................................... 21
	 2.6 		 Phthalates  ................................................................. 21
 3. Results and discussions  .............................................. 24
 3.1	 Lead 	content 	in	electrical 	solder  .............................. 25
 3.2	 Hexavalent 	chromium 	(Cr	VI) .................................... 25
 3.3	 X-ray 	microanalyses 	(XRF); 	bromine, 	cadmium,	
	 	 lead 	&	mercury  .......................................................... 26
  3.3.1  Copper within circuit boards can affect 
   analysis of other elements  ................................ 30
  3.3.2  Differences between laptops of the same 
   brand; occurrence and levels of bromine  .......... 30
 3.4	 Brominated 	flame 	retardants  .................................... 32
  3.4.1  Other BFRs  ...................................................... 35 
 3.5 PVC ............................................................................ 36
 3.6	 Phthalates  ................................................................. 40
  3.6.1  Phthalate composition and the presence 
   of PVC  ............................................................. 42 
4. Conclusions  .................................................................... 43
Appendix  ............................................................................... 48
	Appendix 	1.	Analytical 	methods  ...................................... 49
	Appendix 	2:	Composition 	of	electrical 	solder 	samples;	
	 	 	 concentrations 	of	all	metals 	quantified  .......50
	Appendix 	3:	 Data 	from 	X-ray 	microanalysis 	(XRF) 	for	
	 	 	 all 	laptops  .................................................... 56
Toxic Chemicals 
in Computers 
Reloaded
Kevin Brigden, Joe Webster, 
Iryna Labunska and David SantilloCover: Toshiba Uncovered - still intact 
view under keyboard. ©Greenpeace/Rose
Below: ©Greenpeace/Rizman

Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 3Executive Summary
There is growing concern over the use of hazardous chemicals in 
consumer goods, particularly with regard to electrical and electronic 
equipment.  Some of these products, including computers, 
can contain heavy metals and other hazardous chemicals as 
constituents of their various components.  The ongoing use of 
such chemicals has the potential to impact on the environment and 
human health as a result of the manufacture, use and disposal of 
these products.
In 2006, Greenpeace found a range of hazardous chemicals in 
laptop computers available for purchase in Europe, prior to the 
introduction of legislation, known as RoHS, regulating the use of 
certain hazardous chemicals in electrical and electronic products 
in the EU. More recently, similar legislation has been introduced 
in China.
This subsequent study was conducted by Greenpeace following the 
introduction of these laws,  to investigate the presence of certain 
hazardous substances in a range of laptop computers available for 
purchase within the EU and other countries in Europe, in North and 
South America and in Asia.
A total of 18 individual laptops, representing 6 popular brands, were 
purchased between July and September 2006.  Where possible, 
the same model of laptop for each brand was purchased in different 
Brand Model Countries of purchase
Dell Latitude D420 China, Germany*, USA
Sony Vaio TX Sweden*, Japan
Apple Macbook 1.83 Ghz Philippines, Russia, Netherlands*, USA
Acer Aspire 5562 WXMi
Aspire 5672 WLMiChina, Thailand, Poland*
Netherlands*
Hewlett Packerd (HP) Pavilion dv8375LA
Pavilion dv8275LA
Pavilion dv8365ea
Pavilion dv8000tMexico
Argentina
France*
USA
Toshiba Satellite U200 UK*countries, to determine whether place of sale had an influence on 
the presence of hazardous chemicals.  Where identical models 
were not available, the closest related models were purchased for 
this investigation.  The laptops included in this investigation are 
listed in the table below (* within the EU).
The presence of certain hazardous substances was investigated 
in a wide variety of equivalent internal and external materials and 
components from each laptop.  The range of substances were 
based in part on EU and Chinese legislations that regulate, in 
different ways, certain hazardous chemicals in electrical equipment, 
but also included additional chemicals of concern.  The specific 
substances investigated in this study were;
• Heavy metals (lead, mercury, cadmium and hexavalent 
chromium*)
• Bromine content, to indicate the presence of brominated flame 
retardants (BFRs)
• Four specific brominated flame retardants (BFRs)**
• PVC (polyvinyl chloride)
• Phthalates esters (phthalates)
    * Regulated under EU and Chinese legislation; ** certain of 
these BFRs regulated under EU and Chinese legislation

4 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 • Of all the brands analysed, the Sony laptops gave by far the 
lowest number of samples testing positive for bromine (4 per 
laptop).  For all other brands the number of bromine positive 
samples was higher (between 11 and 16 samples per laptop).  
There were only small difference between these brands for the 
frequency with which bromine was detected in components; 
The Dell models had the highest frequency (14-15 samples 
per laptop), the HP models had the lowest (11-12 samples per 
laptop).
• The actual levels of bromine in discrete types of samples (i.e. 
specific materials or components) tended to vary between 
laptops of the same brand, as well as between laptops of 
different brands.  
• There were no universal differences between the different brands 
for the presence and levels of bromine across all components 
and materials tested.  Although differences between brands 
were apparent for some individual components, these patterns 
were not consistent across all component types.  However, the 
Sony laptops did stand out from the other brands; bromine was 
not detected in many types of component that were found to 
contain bromine in some or all other brands, particularly for 
circuit boards.
• The elimination of brominated flame retardants from circuit 
boards is widely seen as a difficult challenge.  Bromine was 
very frequently found in the boards tested, with the exception 
of the Sony laptops (detected in only 1 of 6 types of board) and 
to a lesser extent Toshiba (detected in 2 of 5 types of board).  
For both brands the motherboards did not contain bromine 
at detectable levels.  These results indicate that the use of 
‘bromine-free’ circuit boards is possible across a wide range of 
applications.
• For all Dell, Apple, Acer and HP laptops, almost all of the tested 
boards contained bromine, including all the motherboards.  
Levels were generally high, and for equivalent circuit boards 
similar ranges of concentrations were seen across these four 
brands.For each laptop, approximately 30 materials and components 
were analysed by X-ray microanalysis (XRF) to determine the 
concentrations of bromine (Br), cadmium (Cd), mercury (Hg) and 
lead (Pb).  In addition, 10 samples of electrical solder were analysed 
for lead and other metals, and 8-10 metallic components were 
analysed for hexavalent chromium (VI), using other standardised 
techniques.  Furthermore, 8-10 plastic materials were tested for the 
plastic PVC (2-4 internal ribbon cables & the coating of 6 internal 
wires and external cables), and of these 2 materials (an internal 
ribbon cable and the plastic coating of an external cable) were 
further analysed for a range of phthalates.  For one laptop from 
each brand, between 1 and 3 bromine containing components 
were also analysed for a range of extractable BFRs, namely PBDEs, 
PBBs, HBCD and TBBPA.
The testing of the various components in these laptops found;
• Lead, cadmium  and mercury  were not detected in any of the 
samples from all laptops tested by XRF (with detection limits of 
0.01% for cadmium and 0.05% for lead and mercury).
• Lead  was not detected in any of the samples of electrical solder 
analysed from all laptops using other methods (with a detection 
limit of 0.1%).  These solders were composed of various different 
mixtures of other metals, with composition depending on where 
they were used within the computer.
• Hexavalent  chromium  was not detected in any of the 
metallic samples tested for all laptops (with a detection limit 
of 0.1%).
• Bromine , indicative of brominated flame retardants (BFRs), was 
present in a wide range of different materials and components.  
Over 40% of the 523 samples tested in total contained bromine 
(above a detection limit of 0.1%), at concentrations ranging 
from 0.3% to 10% by weight.
©Greenpeace/Rose

Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 5• XRF analysis  is a widely used technique to determine material 
composition, however the use of this technique is not always 
straight forward.  For some complex non-homogeneous 
materials, such as circuit boards, this study has demonstrated 
that XRF analysis inappropriately or incorrectly applied can 
produce false negative results, indicating the absence of an 
element such as bromine in a material that does actually contain 
a high concentration of that element.
• Brominated  flame  retardants  were analysed for and 
quantified in a relatively small number of samples in total (15, 
limited by the cost of the analyses), and from only one laptop 
from each brand, other than Apple (for which additional samples 
were analysed to investigate substantial variations in bromine 
content within the brand).  TBBPA and PBDEs were identified in 
4 of these 15 samples (with a limit of detection of 0.5 mg/kg); 
these compounds were found in three samples from the Apple 
laptops (two ribbon cables and a mouse touchpad) and in a 
single sample from the Dell laptop (in a ribbon cable).  These 
BFRs were present at concentrations far lower than could 
account for the total bromine concentrations found in these 
samples, indicative of the predominance of other bromine-
containing chemicals in these materials.  PBBs and HBCD were 
not identified in any of the 15 samples (with a limit of detection 
of 0.5 mg/kg).
• Other brominated compounds were also identified in some 
samples.  Though levels were not quantified for these, the data 
indicates that these were also present at relatively low levels.  
It seems likely, therefore, that the majority of the bromine in 
the samples quantified for specific BFRs is bound up in the 
polymeric material of the samples, or is present as high molecular 
weight oligomeric flame retardants, such as brominated epoxy 
oligomers (BEOs), and therefore not amendable to analysis by 
the methods used.• PVC was present in 44% of all plastic coatings of internal 
wires and external cables (48 of 108 samples in all laptops), 
most commonly in the outer coating of the external power 
cables.  For each brand the number of samples that contained 
PVC varied significantly between individual laptops; none of 
the brands stood out as clearly containing fewer or greater 
numbers of PVC containing materials of those tested.  PVC 
was not found in any of the 62 ribbon cables tested across all 
laptops.  Although PVC does not have direct toxicity, this plastic 
does presents its own waste management problems by acting 
as a source of organic-bound chlorine to the waste stream, as 
well as raising additional concerns at other points in its lifecycle.  
Furthermore, the use of PVC in certain applications requires the 
use of additive chemicals, such as phthalate esters (phthalates) 
commonly used as plasticisers (softeners).
• Phthalates  were found in the outer plastic coating of the 
external power cable of all laptops at moderate to very high 
concentrations (up to over a quarter of the total weight of the 
plastic coating).  For every sample, a mixture of two or more 
phthalates were identified.  The plastic coating from the power 
cables supplied with the Apple laptops, coatings which did not 
appear to be made of PVC, had by far the lowest total phthalate 
concentrations (0.2-0.3% by weight).  The highest levels were 
found in cables supplied with the Acer and HP laptops (18-
28%).  The phthalate mixtures were generally dominated by 
di isononylphthalate (DiNP) and di isodecylphthalate (DiDP), 
with lesser amounts of diethylhexylphthalate (DEHP).  These 
chemicals are able to migrate out of the plastic materials over 
time, and there is evidence for the toxicity of these phthalates, 
especially DEHP, which is classified as ‘toxic to reproduction’ 
within Europe.

 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Overall, these results provide some further evidence for the feasibility 
of the substitution of hazardous chemicals and materials within the 
electronics sector.  For almost every distinct type of material that 
was found to contain either bromine, a specific BFR, or the plastic 
PVC in one or more laptop, examples of equivalent materials that 
were free of these chemicals were found in other laptops.
There were no clear and consistent differences in either the 
prevalence of bromine, the presence of specific BFRs, or the 
level and composition of phthalates in the tested components  
according to country of purchase.  In other words, laptops that 
were purchased in countries with national regulations addressing 
the presence of hazardous chemicals in electronic products 
showed no systematic difference from those purchased in counties 
without such regulations.  In general, however, the data do suggest 
that actions to phase-out uses of lead, cadmium, mercury and 
hexavalent chromium, at least, have been implemented on a wide-
spread basis.
For some materials, the elimination of a particular hazardous chemical 
appears to be universal (for all samples tested), such as lead in 
electrical solders.  This, however, was not the case for all chemicals 
under investigation, and the results document the continued 
presence of halogenated  (i.e. brominated or chlorinated) materials 
and of other hazardous chemicals in these popular brands of laptop 
computers.  These include bromine, indicative of brominated flame 
retardants (BFRs), the use of PVC in plastic coatings for wires and 
cables, and the use of phthalates as plasticisers in external power 
cables.  Moreover, some alternative materials to those found to be 
widely used may be of similar concern; in the case of one cable 
(supplied with an Acer laptop), the apparent use of a material other 
than PVC was associated with a more hazardous mix of phthalate 
plasticisers, including DEHP .It is important to note that the data and conclusions relate only to 
those materials and components tested, which were a fraction of 
the very large number of materials and components within each 
laptop.  The absence of a certain chemical in all samples tested 
from a laptop does not indicate that the laptop is entirely free of that 
chemical.  Thus, it is not possible to state that any of the laptops 
tested are fully compliant with the EU RoHS legislation, or equivalent 
regulations in other countries.   Furthermore, this study applies to 
the specific models tested for each brand, and may not reflect the 
use of certain chemicals in the brand as a whole.  These issues 
highlight the great difficulties in verifying that any individual product, 
or brand as a whole, is entirely free of a specific chemical.
Although certain BFRs (including most PBDEs) which are regulated 
in particular countries and regions, as a result of their toxicity and 
chemical properties, were present at only low levels or not at all 
in the subset of samples investigated, the results indicate the 
continued use of other brominated compounds or other bromine-
containing materials in these samples.  In the context of disposal 
and/or recycling operations (especially incineration, smelting and 
open burning), the presence of organically-bound bromine and 
chlorine in any form is of concern as these can contribute to the 
formation of various hazardous products of combustion, including 
hydrogen bromide and brominated dioxins and furans.
It seems likely that the absence of certain hazardous chemicals 
from the laptops investigated results largely from the influence of 
legislation recently introduced in some countries, particularly the 
EU RoHS Directive, which has brought change on this globalised 
industry even outside the EU region.  All of the samples tested 
from all laptops of all brands were compliant with the EU RoHS 
directive, whether purchased within the EU or in non-EU countries.  
Furthermore, even though legislation in China came into force after 
the purchase date of these laptops, all samples from the laptops 
purchased in China would comply with the legislation once this 
type of product is listed as requiring the elimination of the regulated 
chemicals.  Current laws relevant to this sector, however, are only 

applicable in a fraction of countries where these products are sold.  
Though they have brought changes outside the EU and China, they 
do not prevent the sale in other countries of products that contain 
even the limited number of hazardous chemicals that they regulate, 
as has been recently demonstrated in other similar investigations.  
There remains a need for suitable regulation of these and other 
electrical and electronic products in all countries in which they are 
placed on the market in order to provide safeguards to consumers 
and enable safe and consistent recycling practices.
As they stand, even the laws in force in the EU and China do not 
regulate the use of all hazardous substances that can be present in 
electrical/electronic equipment.  As this study has demonstrated, 
such products can contain additional hazardous substances to 
those currently covered under these laws (e.g. other BFRs, PVC 
and phthalates).  Other recent studies have highlighted potential 
impacts that can arise from the use of BFRs that are currently not 
included in legislation within the EU or other countries, including the 
exposure of recycling workers to deca-BDE leading to the highest 
levels yet reported in humans13, and potential environmental 
impacts due to the recycling and disposal of products containing 
other currently unregulated BFRs11. Any legislation seeking to 
protect human health and the environment by restricting the use 
of hazardous chemicals in products must ultimately address all 
hazardous substances.
Elimination of all hazardous chemicals in laptops computers 
and other electrical and electronic equipment can be achieved 
through national legislation and/or self imposed commitments by 
manufacturers.  Experience in the EU relating to other hazardous 
chemicals has recognised that the implementation of voluntary or 
negotiated measures is most effective when driven by the promise 
of future regulation.  This has certainly been the case for the RoHS 
Directive, which had an over-riding influence on the use of materials 
in laptops well beyond the EU even before its formal entry into force 
in July 2006.
Toshiba CPU and Fan. 
©Greenpeace/Rose

 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Introduction
Toshiba exterior dismantling. 
©Greenpeace/Rose

The EU’s RoHS Directive 
and other equivalent 
legislation4
The European Directive on the restriction of the use of certain 
hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment, 
or the RoHS Directive (Directive 2002/95), entered into 
force on July 1st 2006.  The Directive prohibits, with certain 
exemption, the placing on the market within the EU of such 
equipment if it contains more than regulated amounts of lead, 
mercury, cadmium and hexavalent chromium (chromium 
(VI)), or of two types of brominated flame retardants, namely 
polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs) and polybrominated 
diphenyl ethers (PBDEs, other than the decabrominated 
congener BDE-209).  Maximum allowable limit values are 
set at 0.1% by mass of homogenous materials for all but 
cadmium, for which the limit is 0.01%.  The stated purpose of 
the Directive includes, inter alia “to contribute to the protection 
of human health and the environmentally sound recovery and 
disposal of waste electrical and electronic equipment”.
Closely related Chinese legislation, the ‘Administration on the 
control of pollution caused by electronic information products’ 
entered into force on March 1st 2007.  This legislation 
addresses the same chemicals controlled under the EU 
RoHS directive, but also includes ‘other toxic and hazardous 
substances or elements as specified by the State, though 
to date (May 2007) no additional substances or elements 
have been specifically listed under this law.  Currently, the 
legislation requires the labeling of products to describe 
the presence and quantities of the regulated chemicals.  
Over time the regulation will include a list of specific types 
of products that will be required to be entirely  free of the 
regulated chemicals.  Additional differences exist between the 
Chinese and EU legislations.  For example, under the Chinese 
legislation, maximum allowable limit values apply to individual 
components not to homogenous materials, and there are 
currently no exemptions under the Chinese legislation.
In Japan, legislation commonly referred to as ‘J-MOSS’ has 
required the labelling, since 1st July 2006, of certain electrical 
products that contain the same substances that are regulated 
under the EU RoHS Directive.
The national laws identified above do not currently regulate 
the use of all brominated flame retardants, nor the use of 
phthalates or PVC in electrical and electronic equipment.  In 
addition to these national regulations, other similar measures 
have been introduced in other jurisdictions around the world.There is growing awareness of the use of hazardous chemicals in 
consumer goods, particularly with regard to electrical and electronic 
equipment such as computers.  Concerns exist over the potential 
for exposure to hazardous chemicals, as well as impacts on the 
environment, during the manufacture, use and disposal of such 
products.  Unless the use of hazardous chemicals and materials is 
phased out, the potential for impacts from their use is likely to rise 
as worldwide the production of such goods continues to increase, 
and product lifespans decrease.  This is reflected in the already 
large, and rapidly increasing amounts of electronic waste (e-waste) 
arising from this sector.
Electronic products such as computers can contain heavy metals 
and other hazardous chemicals as constituents of their internal 
components, casings and external wiring.  Greenpeace has recently 
demonstrated1 workplace and environmental contamination arising 
from the recycling and disposal of old electrical/electronic equipment 
containing such chemicals, and also environmental impacts due to the 
use of hazardous chemicals in the manufacture of new equipment2.
In 2006, Greenpeace found a range of hazardous chemicals in laptop 
computers for sale in Europe.  In one model (a Hewlett Packard laptop), 
certain chemicals were found in three materials at levels that would not 
be allowed under legislation subsequently introduced in the EU3.  This 
investigation, however, was carried out prior to the recent introduction 
of this  legislation, the EU RoHS Directive4, which regulates the use 
of certain hazardous chemicals in electrical and electronic products.  
Closely related legislation has been recently introduced in other 
countries4.  These laws are discussed further to the right. 
Due to the global nature of the electronics manufacturing industry, 
it is to be expected that the introduction of legislation in one region, 
or possibly even one country, will have impacts on the nature of 
products sold in other countries.
1 Brigden, K., Labunska, I., Santillo, D. & Allsopp, M. (2005) Recycling of electronic wastes in China 
and India: Workplace and environmental contamination.  www.greenpeace.org/international/press/
reports/recycling-of-electronic-waste
 Brigden, K., Labunska, I., Santillo, D., Walters, A. (2007)  Cutting Edge Contamination - A Study 
of Environmental Pollution during the manufacture of Electronic Products.  www.greenpeace.org/
international/press/reports/cutting-edge-contamination-a
3 Brigden, K. & Santillo, D. (2006) Determining the presence of hazardous substances in five brands of 
laptop computers.  Greenpeace Research Laboratories Technical Note 05/2006;  www.greenpeace.
to/publications
4 EU: Directive 2002/95/EC of the European Parliament and the Council, 27 January 2003, on 
the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment. 
Official Journal L037, 13/02/2003: 19-23.  http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/weee_index.
htm.  Chinese legislation: Administration on the Control of Pollution Caused by Electronic Information 
Products.  www.mii.gov.cn/art/2006/03/02/art_524_7343.html (Chinese); www.chinarohs.com/docs.
html (unofficial English translation).  Japanese legislation; JISC 0950, The marking for presence of the 
specific chemical substances for electrical and electronic equipment.  Japanese Industrial Standard, 
Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Japan; www.meti.go.jp/policy/recycle/main/3r_policy/policy/
j-moss.html (Japanese)


This study was carried out to investigate the presence of certain 
hazardous chemicals in laptop computers sold both in EU countries, 
and other countries around the world, following the introduction of 
the EU regulations.  The presence of certain hazardous substances 
was investigated in a wide variety of internal and external 
components from each laptop.  The specific hazardous substances 
investigated in this study include;
• Heavy metals (lead, mercury, cadmium and hexavalent 
chromium)
• Bromine content, to indicate the use of brominated flame 
retardants (BFRs)
• Four specific brominated flame retardants (BFRs)
• PVC (polyvinyl chloride)
• Phthalates esters (phthalates)
The range of substances included in this study were based in part 
on substances controlled under recently introduced legislation in 
the EU and China which regulate specific hazardous chemicals in 
electrical equipment; the EU RoHS Directive and similar Chinese 
legislation (see Textbox on page 9).  In addition to the hazardous 
chemicals included in these laws, this study included a survey of 
plastic coatings of cables and wiring for the presence or absence 
of the plastic PVC.  Certain plastic materials were also analysed for 
phthalate esters (phthalates), chemicals widely used as plasticisers 
(softeners) in plastics, especially PVC.  
10©Greenpeace/Rose

The hazardous chemicals 
included in this study were;
PVC (Polyvinyl chloride)  is a plastic widely used in electrical 
products, particularly in coatings of wires and cables.  Although 
PVC does not have direct toxicity in the same way as lead or 
mercury, this plastic does present its own manufacturing and waste 
management problems due to its organic-bound chlorine content.  
Furthermore, the use of PVC in certain applications requires that 
other chemicals be added to the plastic, such as phthalates to 
plasticise (soften) the plastic.
Phthalates  are a group of chemicals possessing similar structures, 
many of which are widely used as plasticizers (softeners) in plastics, 
especially PVC. These chemicals are not chemically bound to the 
plastic, and so are able to migrate out of the material over time into 
the surrounding environment.  Many phthalates are toxic to wildlife 
and humans, often through their metabolites (chemicals to which 
they breakdown in the body).  Some widely used phthalates are 
known to be toxic to reproduction, capable of causing changes to 
both male and female reproductive systems in mammals12.Lead (Pb)  has been widely used as a major component of solders 
in electronic goods5 Lead is highly toxic to humans, as well as to 
animals and plants.  It can build up in the body through repeated 
exposure and have irreversible effects on the nervous system, 
particularly the developing nervous system in children.  Exposure 
can also have effects on the heart, kidneys and brain.  For many 
effects there is no known safe level of exposure6. 
Hexavalent chromium (Cr VI)  is one chemical form of the metal 
chromium which is far more reactive and mobile in the environment 
than other forms of chromium.  It has been used in electronics 
primarily for corrosion protection of metallic surfaces.  Hexavalent 
chromium is highly toxic even at low concentrations, and is a known 
human carcinogen under some circumstances7.
Mercury (Hg)  is a highly toxic metal that has been used in various 
applications in electrical products. Exposure can cause health 
effects including damage to the central nervous system and 
kidneys.  Once in the environment, mercury can be converted into 
compounds which are highly bioaccumulative as well as being 
toxic, even at very low levels of exposure8.
Cadmium (Cd)  has been used in a number of applications within 
electronics products, both as a metal and as cadmium compounds.  
This toxic metal can accumulate in the body over time, with long-
term exposure causing damage to the kidneys and bone structure.  
Cadmium and its compounds are also known human carcinogens9.
Brominated flame retardants (BFRs) ; there is potentially a very 
wide range of brominated chemicals that can be used as BFRs10.  
Commonly used examples include polybrominated diphenyl 
ethers (PBDEs)  and tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA) , as well 
as brominated polymeric and oligomeric materials.  Some BFRs, 
including certain PBDEs, have known toxic properties, and some 
are highly persistent in the environment and able to bioaccumulate 
(build up in animals and humans).  In whatever form the bromine is 
present, impacts can result at the product’s end of life as a result 
of the unintentional formation of toxic brominated byproducts 
(including dioxins) during some disposal or recycling operations11.
5 Geibig, J.R., Socolof, M.L. (2005) Solders in Electronics: A Life-Cycle Assessment. US EPA 744-R-
05-001.  Lau, J.H., Wong, C.P ., Lee, N.C. & Ricky Lee, S.W. (2003) Electronics Manufacturing with 
Lead-Free, Halogen-Free & Conductive-Adhesive materials. McGraw-Hill ISBN:0-07-138624-6
6 Spivey, A. (2007) The weight of lead, effects add up in adults.  Environmental Health Perspectives 
115(1): A30-A36
7 ATSDR (2000) Toxicological Profile for chromium. United States Public Health Service, Agency for 
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, September 2000.  International Agency for Research on 
Cancer, IARC (1990) Chromium. In International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) monograph; 
Chromium, Nickel and Welding. IARC  monograph, Vol. 49, 677pp. ISBN 9283212495
8 ATSDR (1999a) Toxicological Profile for mercury. United States Public Health Service, Agency for 
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, March 1999. UNEP (2002) Global Mercury Assessment, 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) Chemicals, Geneva, Switzerland.  Available at; www.
chem.unep.ch/mercury
9 ATSDR (1999b) Toxicological Profile for cadmium. United States Public Health Service, Agency for 
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, July 1999.  DHHS (2005) 11th Report on Carcinogens. U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, US Public Health Service, National Toxicology Program
10 Lassen, C., Lokke, S. & Hansen, L.I. (1999) Brominated Flame Retardants: substance flow analysis 
and substitution feasibility study.  Danish Environmental Protection Agency Environmental Project No. 
494, Copenhagen, ISBN 87-7909-415-5: 240 pp.
11 Stutz, M., Riess, M., Tungare, A.V., Hosseinpour, J., Waechter, G., Rottler, H. (2000) Combustion 
of Halogen-free Printed Wiring Boards and Analysis of Thermal Degradation Products.  Proceedings 
Electronic Goes Green 2000, 127-132.  Gullett, B.,K., Linak, W.P .,  Touati, A., Wasson, S.J., Gatica, 
S., King, C.J. (2007) Characterization of air emissions and residual ash from open burning of electronic 
wastes during simulated rudimentary recycling operations.  Journal of Material Cycles and Waste 
Management 9(1): 69–79
12 Park, J.D., Habeebu, S.S.M. & Klaassen, C.D. (2002)  Testicular toxicity of di-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate 
in young Sprague-Dawley rats.  Toxicology 171: 105-115. Gray, L.E., Ostby, J., Furr, J., Price, M., 
Veeramachaneni, D.N.R. & Parks, L. (2000)  Perinatal exposure to the phthalates DEHP , BBP and 
DINP , but not DEP , DMP or DOTP , alters sexual differentiation of the male rat.  Toxicological Sciences 
58(2): 350-365
11

1 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Materials and methods
 ©Greenpeace/Rizman

Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 13available in all countries where the purchases were made.  The 
Acer model purchased in the Netherlands (Aspire 5672 WLMi) 
was different from, but closely related to, those purchased in other 
countries (Aspire 5562 WXMi).  For the same reason, the four HP 
laptops were all slightly different, but closely related models.  The 
laptops included in this study, including their models and countries 
of purchase, are presented in Table 1.  For laboratory purposes, 
the laptops were assigned individual sample codes from LTOP01 
to LTOP18.
Laptop  code Manufacturer Model Country of purchase
LTOP01 Dell Latitude D420 China
LTOP02 Dell Latitude D420 Germany *
LTOP03 Dell Latitude D420 USA
LTOP04 Sony Vaio TX Sweden *
LTOP05 Sony Vaio TX Japan
LTOP06 Apple Macbook 1.83 Ghz Philippines
LTOP07 Apple Macbook 1.83 Ghz Russia
LTOP08 Apple Macbook 1.83 Ghz Netherlands *
LTOP09 Apple Macbook 1.83 Ghz USA
LTOP10 Acer Aspire 5562 WXMi China
LTOP11 Acer Aspire 5562 WXMi Thailand
LTOP12 Acer Aspire 5562 WXMi Poland *
LTOP13 Acer Aspire 5672 WLMi Netherlands *
LTOP14 HP Pavilion dv8375LA Mexico
LTOP15 HP Pavilion dv8275LA Argentina
LTOP16 HP Pavilion dv8365ea France *
LTOP17 HP Pavilion dv8000t USA
LTOP18 Toshiba Satellite U200 UK *
Table 1.  Laptops investigated in the study, their manufacturer (brand), model and country of purchase; * EU member stateEighteen laptops were purchased by Greenpeace from outlets in a 
number of countries, between July and September 2006.  To enable 
comparison between equivalent laptops sold by major brands, 
this study included laptops sold by six manufacturers; Dell, Sony, 
Apple, Acer, Hewlett Packard (HP) and Toshiba.  For each brand, 
the same model of laptop was purchased in a number of different 
countries, with certain exceptions.  This was carried out in order to 
determine whether the presence of hazardous materials varied with 
the country of sale.  For Toshiba, only one laptop was purchased, 
in the UK.  For Acer and HP , the same model was not universally 

14 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 The laptops were dismantled at the Greenpeace Research 
Laboratories in the UK, taking all possible steps to avoid 
contamination of materials (including the use of analyte-free materials 
and antistatic devices in a controlled laboratory environment).  A 
range of different analyses were thereafter carried out on individual 
components and materials from each laptop.  The presence or 
absence of specific substances was investigated in a wide variety 
of internal and external components (casing, touch mouse pads, 
cables, circuit boards, chips, connectors, insulators, etc.).  The 
specific analyses carried out in this study include;
• Lead in solder:  10 individual samples of electrical solder 
were separated from different components within each laptop 
(e.g. motherboard, DVD drive circuit board) and subsequently 
analysed for their lead content, as well as the content of other 
metals reportedly used in electrical solders5.
• Hexavalent chromium (VI):  Between 8 and 10 distinct 
internal metallic components from each laptop were analysed 
for the presence of hexavalent chromium (VI).
• Micro-XRF:   Between 28 and 30 individual materials and 
components were selected from each laptop for X-ray 
microanalysis (micro-XRF), an analytical technique that allows 
the detection and quantification (as percent by mass) of major 
elements in the surface layer of the material analysed.  This 
technique was used to quantify the surface concentrations 
of the metals cadmium (Cd), mercury (Hg) and lead (Pb), 
as well as the element bromine (Br) to give an indication of 
the presence of organobromine compounds used as flame 
retardants (including brominated polymeric materials).  
• BFR quantification:   For one laptop from each brand, 
between 1 and 3 individual components were selected for 
quantification of a range of extractable BFRs; PBDEs, PBBs, 
HBCD and TBBPA.  The selection of components was based 
on the results of the XRF analyses for the levels of bromine.• PVC:  Between 8 and 10 plastic components from each laptop 
were analysed to determine whether they contained the plastic 
PVC; these consisted of between 2 and 4 materials analysed 
by XRF (internal ribbon cables), and a further 6 additional 
materials (coating of internal wires and external cables)
• Phthalates:  2 of the materials from each laptop that were 
tested for PVC content were further analysed for a range of 
phthalates.  These materials were the plastic coating of an 
external cable and an internal ribbon cable.
In making the sample selections, every effort was made to include 
examples of as many as possible of the diverse materials and 
components present within the laptops.  As it was not possible to 
purchase identical models in all countries for Acer and HP laptops, 
there were some differences in individual components between 
models of the same brand.  In these cases, the materials and 
components selected for each brand were chosen to be as similar 
as possible across all models.  A schematic of the components 
separated and the analyses carried out is presented in Figure 1.  
A full list of the materials and components tested, along with the 
results of their analyses, is provided in Tables 2 to 5.  
The analysis of the solder samples for their lead content, and 
analysis of the metallic components for the presence of hexavalent 
chromium (VI) was carried out at the Greenpeace Research 
Laboratories.  Those materials for analysis by XRF, and those for 
PVC and phthalate content, were forwarded to the laboratories of 
Eurofins Environmental A/S in Galten, Denmark, for analysis.  
Brief descriptions of each of the individual analytical methods 
employed are given below, along with the various materials and 
components tested.  Further details of the analytical methods 
employed are given in Appendix 1. 
Macbook Macro - Motherboard. 
©Greenpeace/Rose

Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 15.1 Lead content in electrical solder
Samples of electrical solder were removed from components within 
the laptops.  Each sample was fully dissolved in a hydrochloric/nitric 
acid solution and subsequently analysed by ICP atomic emission spectrometry (AES) for the concentration of lead and other metals 
reportedly used in solders5.  The individual solder samples analysed 
for each laptop and brand are given in Table 2.
Sample   Component
S01 circuit board of DVD drive; solder pad (a)
S02 circuit board of DVD drive; to small component (a)
S03 circuit board of DVD drive to larger component (a)(b)
S04 motherboard; connector to USB socket
S05 motherboard; solder pad
S06 circuit board below mouse touchpad; solder pad (c)(d)
S07 circuit board below mouse touchpad (e)
S08 small circuit board to component (f)
S09 hard drive circuit board to small component
S10 motherboard; to pins of small chip
Table 2.  Electrical solder samples, from all laptops, analysed for their concentrations of lead, and other metals. (a) Dell has external DVD drive; (b) Dell-
component on PWB; Apple-to ribbon cable socket; Acer-to connector to motherboard; HP & Toshiba-to connector socket; (c) One Acer laptop (LTOP13) 
had a different circuit board to the other Acer laptops (LTOP10-12); (d) HP-connections to mouse button sensors; (e) Dell & Toshiba-to connector to 
mouse button PWB; Sony, Acer & HP-to socket for ribbon cable; Apple-to small component; (f) Dell-PWB for slot in memory card; Sony & HP-PWB with 
headphone socket; Apple-PWB by USB sockets; Acer-to LED; Toshiba-solder pads

Sample Component
Cr01 keyboard metal plate 
Cr02 mouse touchpad; plate below circuit board (a)(b)
Cr03 removable plate on back casing (c)
Cr04 hard drive case (back plate)
Cr05 hard drive case (main body)
Cr06 case of internal fan (d)
Cr07 plate adjacent to DVD drive (e)(f)
Cr08 DVD drive; external case (e)
Cr09 plate inside rear casing (g)
Cr10 heat sink for fan
Table 3.  metallic materials, from all laptops, analysed for the presence of hexavalent chromium (VI). (a) Sony & Toshiba- plastic component so not tested; 
(b) Acer- LTOP13 different shape plate to other Acer models; (c) Dell & Sony- cover for memory chips; Apple- no such plate, alternative component tested 
(structural metal around battery); Acer- one laptop (LTOP13) not tested as plastic component; HP- plastic plate, so alternative component tested (PCMCIA 
slot); (d) Acer- plastic component so not tested; (e) Dell- external DVD drive; (f) Sony- plate attached to circuit board with headphone socket; Acer- no such 
component for one model (LTOP13); (g) Apple & Acer- plate attached to internal fanindividual materials analysed for each laptop and brand are given 
in Table 3.. Hexavalent chromium (Cr VI)
Metallic materials were analysed for the presence of hexavalent 
chromium (VI) using a diphenylcarbazide colorimetric method.  The 
1 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical Note l September 2007 

.3 X-ray microanalysis (XRF)
Each sample for analysis was placed in an EDAX Energy Dispersive 
X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) instrument at room temperature, and 
analysed for the surface concentrations of bromine (Br), cadmium 
(Cd), lead (Pb) and mercury (Hg).  The instrumentation employed 
offers greater accuracy and precision than use of related hand-held 
XRF instruments.  
XRF analysis determines the concentration of bromine, and other 
elements, in the surface layer of a material.  The thickness of the 
surface that is analysed by this method depends on the nature 
of the material being tested.  For some materials (e.g. metallic 
surfaces) only a very thin surface layer will be analysed, while for 
other materials, including many plastics, the analysis will penetrate 
to a greater depth.  For some non-homogeneous materials, such 
as circuit boards with multiple different layers, it is possible that 
metallic components within the material can block the analysis of 
other materials below.  For each circuit board sample, XRF analysis 
was carried out at a site that did not contain copper, which might 
block the analysis of material below.
For circuit boards, an additional investigation was carried out into 
the potential for copper at the XRF test site to inhibit analysis of the 
bromine concentration in the material.  Four circuit board samples 
were analysed by both surface XRF testing and also by analysis of 
the ground and homogenized material (each sample was ground 
to a fine powder which was thoroughly mixed and then subjected 
to XRF analysis).  This analysis was carried out on 2 circuit boards 
at sites where copper was present (confirmed by surface XRF 
analysis), and 2 circuit boards at sites where copper was not 
present (confirmed by surface XRF analysis).
1Toshiba Circuit Board being dismantled. 
©Greenpeace/Rose

1 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 1Table 4. Samples analysed by X-ray microanalysis (XRF), as well as those 
samples analysed for the presence of PVC, and those samples analysed 
for phthalate composition; y – sample analysed; - sample not present 
or not analysed. For two Brands (Acer, HP), some laptops were slightly 
different models of, and therefore some individual components differ 
between laptop models of the same make. (a) Apple models-large rear 
plastic casing (battery compartment is metal); (b) no such material for Sony 
and Apple models; (c) Apple models-sheet attached to rear plastic casing 
(#9); Acer models-black sheet inside front casing; (d) no universal material; 
tested similar materials within different laptop makes & models; (e) no such 
material for 2 Dell (LTOP01, LTOP03) and 1 Sony (LTOP05) models; (f) Dell; 
flexible PWB motherboard to HDD; Sony flexible PWB motherboard to small 
PWB; Apple flexible PWB motherboard-DVD drive; Acer thin white ribbon 
on motherboard; HP thin white ribbon on motherboard; Toshiba white 
ribbon motherboard to small PWB; (g) Apple; different hard drives used 
(LTOP07-Seagate; LTOP08-09-Toshiba); Acer LTOP12 has different hard 
drive to other Acers tested; (h) not analysed for LTOP01 (i) Sony-PWB with 
USB sockets; Apple-small PWB linked to motherboard; HP- PWB linking 
DVD drive to motherboard; (j) Dell-PWB for flash memory card; Sony-PWB 
for ethernet socket; Apple-small PWB linked to motherboard; Acer-small 
PWB with LEDs; HP-PWB with USB sockets; Toshiba-small PWB linked 
to motherboard (via #16); (k) to mouse touchpad PWB (Sony, Apple, HP , 
Toshiba); PWB sample #20 (Dell, Acer); (l) Dell-to PCMCIA card slot; Sony-
to headphone socket PWB; Acer-to motherboard; HP-to PWB attached to 
keyboard plate; Toshiba - to small separate  PWB; (m) Dell-LTOP01 black 
plastic, LTOP02-03 white plastic; HP-LTOPO14 white plastic, LTOP15-17 
black plastic; (n) Dell and Sony models; plastic connector socket for WLAN 
CARD; (o) Sony-no pin connector to #25 (direct cable input), different pin 
connector tested; (p) not tested for LTOP01 (Dell), LTOP06, 09 (Apple), 
LTOP13 (Acer), LTOP14 (HP), LTOP18 (Toshiba); (q) no such material for 
all Apple laptops LTOP06-09; (r) Dell-wire to internal on switch; Acer-wire 
to WiFi PWB; (s) Sony & HP models - wire to speaker, as no wire to BIOS 
battery; (t) Phthalate analysis for all makes, with the exception of all Apple 
laptops (sample #23).Sample ComponentAnalysis XRF Analysis PVC Phthalate
Brand Dell Sony Apple Acer HP Toshiba All All
LTOP# 01-0  04-05 0-0 10-1  14-1  1 01-1  01-1 
1 Mouse touchpad y y y y y y - -
2 Mouse button (left) y y y y y y - -
3 Keyboard space bar y y y y y y - -
4 Screen surface y y y y y y - -
5 External casing: plastic casing surrounding mouse touchpad & buttons y y y y y y - -
6 Ribbon cable (internal); connected to keyboard y y y y y y y(p) y(t)
7 External casing: plastic casing surrounding screen y y y y y y - -
8 External casing: outside top casing (reverse of screen) y y y y y y - -
9 External casing: plastic casing inside battery compartment y y y(a) y y y - -
10 Cooling fan (internal) y y y y y y - -
11 External casing: casing immediately around keyboard y -(b) -(b) y y y - -
12 Electrical insulating sheet by cooling fan y y y(c) y(c) y y - -
13(d) Electrical insulation sheet y y y y y y - -
14 Circuit board, base board; motherboard y y/- y y y y - -
15 Circuit board, base board; memory chips -/y(e) -/y(e) y y y y - -
16(f) Ribbon cable between motherboard and component (flex. circuit board) y y y y y y y -
17 Circuit board, base board; hard drive y y y(g) y(g) y y - -
18 Circuit board, base board; under mouse touchpad y (h) y y y y - - -
19(i) Circuit board, base board; DVD drive y y y y y y - -
20(j) Circuit board, base board; laptop dependant y y y y y y - -
21 Socket on motherboard for external battery y y y y y y - -
22 External battery casing y y y y y y - -
23(k) Ribbon cable; connected to mouse touchpad PWB, or PWB sample #20 y y y y y y y -
24(l) Ribbon cable to component y y - y y y y -
25 Plastic socket for pin connector, on motherboard (see #28) y y y y y y - -
26 Plastic socket for memory chip circuit board y(m) y y y y (m) y - -
27 Plastic connector socket for DVD drive y(n) y(n) y y y y - -
28 Plastic pin connector, fitting into #25 Y y(o) y y y y - -
29 External power transformer plastic casing y y y y y y - -
30 Surface of main chip on motherboard y y y y y y - -
31 Plastic coating of internal power wire to screen - - - - - - y -
32 Plastic coating of internal wire to fan - - - - - - y -
33 Plastic coating of internal wire attached to dc input socket - - - - - - y (r) -
34 Plastic coating of internal wire to internal BIOS battery, else to speaker - - - - - - y (s) -
35 Outer plastic coating; external cable from dc power transformer to laptop - - - - - - y y
36 Inner plastic coating; external cable from dc power transformer to laptop - - - - - - y

0 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 .4 Extractable BFR quantification
For one laptop from each brand, between 1 and 3 individual 
components were analysed for a range of extractable BFRs.  The 
only exception was Apple, where samples were analysed from 2 
separate Apple laptops for reasons given below. The selection of 
components was based on the results of the XRF analyses for the 
levels of bromine.
Of all samples tested by XRF, three materials consistently 
contained high levels of bromine; the internal cooling fan (#10), 
the internal attachment for the detachable battery (#21), and a 
plastic pin connector socket on the motherboard (#25).  Due to 
limited resources it was only possible to analyse one of these three 
materials from one laptop of each brand.  Of the three, the pin 
connector socket (#25) was selected for detailed BFR analysis.
For laptops of all brands, with the exception of Sony, internal ribbon 
cables also commonly contained bromine at moderate to high 
levels.  Furthermore, these components were composed of visibly 
different material from the pin connectors.  One ribbon cable (#16) 
was common to all laptops, and XRF analysis demonstrated that 
this component very frequently contained bromine.  This ribbon 
cable was therefore selected for quantitative BFR analysis from one 
laptop of each brand, other than Sony.  
XRF analysis had also shown that, for two of the Apple laptops 
studied, this ribbon contained substantially higher levels of bromine 
(6.6-6.8%) than in the equivalent component from the other two 
Apple laptops studied (2.2-2.3%).  To investigate this difference, 
detailed BFR analysis was carried out on 1 sample (LTOP09/16) 
containing the higher level of bromine, and 1 sample (LTOP06/16) 
containing the lower level of bromine.In addition, one further material was analysed from Apple, Dell 
and Toshiba laptops for extractable BFRs, namely the mouse 
touchpad.  This component was selected for further study as it 
was the only component tested by XRF that had consistently high 
bromine levels in all laptops of only one brand (Apple).  In one of 
the three Dell laptops (LTOP01), and the Toshiba laptop (LTOP18), 
the mouse touchpads also contained bromine at a detectable level 
by XRF analysis, though at much lower levels than in the Apple 
components.  The touchpads from these two laptops were also 
analysed for comparison.
As noted above, due to resource limitations, it was not possible to 
analyse the selected samples from all laptops, and so one laptop 
was selected from each brand (with the one exception being the 
analysis of the ribbon cable in a second Apple laptop described 
above).  Individual laptops from each brand were selected based 
on their country of purchase, in order to give a wide geographical 
spread across all laptops analysed.
The BFRs quantified in each sample included PBDEs (tri- to 
deca-brominated congeners), PBBs (tetra- to deca-brominated 
congeners), HBCD (hexabromocyclododecane) and TBBPA 
(tetrabromobisphenol A).  The individual materials analysed are 
given below in Table 5.
In addition, the samples that were analysed for the specific 
BFRs listed above (PBDEs, PBBs, TBBPA and HBCD) were also 
screened for the presence of other brominated compounds using 
gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS, operated in 
SCAN mode).  This screening analysis method provides useful 
indications of the identity of other compounds present in each 
sample, but does not quantify the concentrations of individual 
compounds identified.
Macbook DVD Drive dismantling. 
©Greenpeace/Rose

Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 1.5 PVC
For each component analysed, the insulating plastic coating 
was analysed for the presence or absence of the plastic PVC by 
Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) analysis.  The individual materials 
analysed are given above in Table 4.Sample ComponentBrand Dell Sony Apple Apple Acer HP Toshiba
Laptop LTOP01 LTOP05 LTOP0  LTOP0  LTOP13 LTOP14 LTOP1 
1 Mouse touch pad y - - y - - y
16 Ribbon cable (flexible circuit 
board)y - y y y y y
25 Pin connector socket on 
motherboard y y - y y y y
Table 5.  Materials and components quantified for a range of extractable BFRs; y, sample analysed; - sample not present /  bromine not detected by XRF
. Phthalates
For each component tested (of either an external cable or an internal 
ribbon cable), the insulating plastic coating was analysed for the 
concentration of 9 phthalate esters; di-n-butylphthalate (DBP), 
butylbenzylphthalate (BBP), diethylhexylphthalate (DEHP), di-n-
octylphthalate (DOP), dimethylphthalate (DMP), diethylphthalate 
(DEP), di-iso-butylphthalate (DiBP), di-isononylphthalate isomers 
(DiNP), di-isodecylphthalate isomers (DiDP).  Unlike the other 
phthalates listed, both DiNP and DiDP are not individual chemicals 
but are groups of very closely related chemicals (isomers).  The 
individual component analysed are given above in Table 4.

 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l -10 metal 
components10 solders
Plastic-coated wires, ribbon cables and external cablesDISMANTLE
EDAX
Concentrations of bromine, lead, mercury and cadmium in surface layers
Concentrations of extractable BFRs;
PDBEs, PBBs, HBCD and TBBPAContent of  
phthalatesPresence of PVCLead content
Presence of hexavalent 
chromium (VI)
EDAX EDAX EDAX EDAXDISMANTLEAES analysis
Colorimetry with 
diphenylcarbazide
10 samples        FT-IR 2 samples        GC-MSDismantling  of the components from each laptop 
and their subsequent analyses
30   components
1-3 components    per brand
BFR quantify

4 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Results and discussion
Toshiba main motherboard macro - cables, 
ram, motherboard. ©Greenpeace/Rose

Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 5The results from the range of analyses carried out on the various 
components from the 18 laptops are discussed in the following 
sections.  It is important to note that these data relate only to those 
materials and components tested, which were a fraction of the very 
large number of materials and components within each laptop.  The 
absence of a certain chemical in all samples tested from a laptop 
does not indicate that the laptop is entirely free of that chemical.
None of the samples of electrical solder analysed contained lead 
at concentrations above 0.1 % (1000 mg/kg).  In addition to other 
quality control methods, the ability of the analytical method to 
quantify lead in such materials was verified by the analysis of similar 
metal alloys known to contain lead, tin and other metals.  The EU 
RoHS Directive and equivalent Chinese legislation4 set maximum 
concentration values of 0.1% lead in solder, with certain exceptions 
for the EU RoHS Directive.  Thus all samples tested for lead from all 
laptops were compliant with EU and Chinese regulations.
Lead based solders have historically been widely used in electrical 
solders (commonly an alloy of tin and lead; 63% tin to 37% lead), 
though these materials have increasingly been substituted in recent 
years with lead-free alternatives5.  To gain an understanding of 
3. Hexavalent chromium (Cr VI)3.1 Lead content in electrical solder
the various alternative materials in use, all samples of solder were 
also analysed for concentrations of other metals reportedly used 
in electrical solders5, namely antimony, bismuth, copper, indium, 
nickel, silver, tin and zinc.  The data from the quantification of these 
metals in all samples is given in Appendix 2.  These data show that 
the solders tested have a wide range of different compositions.  In 
many cases, solder from equivalent locations within each laptop 
have similar compositions to each other, though some differences 
do exist.  The presence of these metals in the solder alloy mixtures 
poses far less potential for impacts to human health and the 
environment than the presence of the highly toxic metal lead in 
traditional solders. 
Qualitative colorimetric analysis of between 8 and 10 internal 
metallic components from each laptop did not detect hexavalent 
chromium (VI) in any of the samples.  The analytical method 
employed is able to detect the presence of hexavalent chromium 
at levels significantly below 0.1% by weight.  All samples tested 
for hexavalent chromium from all laptops were therefore compliant 
with EU and Chinese regulations.

 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 3.3 X-ray microanalyses (XRF); 
bromine, cadmium, lead & mercury
The following XRF data relate to concentrations in the surface layer 
of each material tested, at the site of measurement.  The thickness 
of the surface layer analysed will vary between materials.  For 
each material, there may be some variation between the surface 
concentration of an element, and the average concentration for the 
bulk of the material.  
For the complex non-homogeneous circuit board samples, initial 
XRF analysis revealed the potential for copper within the surface 
layers to interfere with the analysis of other materials in the circuit 
board, including bromine containing materials, and thereby 
incorrectly indicate the absence of bromine where it was in fact 
present (See 3.3.1).  As XRF is able to determine the presence 
of copper at the site of analysis, for each sample it was possible 
to identify a site on the base board that was free of copper, and 
obtain a measurement of bromine in the polymeric material of the 
base board.  The data presented below for all circuit boards was 
measured at copper free sites.
None of the components tested by XRF contained cadmium, lead or 
mercury in surface layers at  concentrations above method detection 
limits of 0.01% for cadmium and 0.05% for lead and mercury.  Bromine was detected in just over 40% of all samples tested from 
all laptops, i.e. in 221 of the 523 samples (with a detection limit of 
0.1%).  With the exception of the Sony laptops, of the 30 samples 
tested from each laptop, bromine was detected in between 11 and 
16 samples.  Of these, there was little difference between brands 
for the frequency with which bromine was detected in components; 
the Dell models had the highest frequency (14-15 samples per 
laptop), the HP models had the lowest (11-12 samples per laptop).  
For the Sony laptops, bromine was detected in far fewer of the 
equivalent materials tested, in only 4 samples from each laptop.  
For all brands, a similar range of bromine concentrations was 
generally found in the various samples that tested positive, typically 
ranging from approximately 0.3% to 10% by weight.  A summary 
of the number of samples found to contain bromine in each brand, 
and the range of concentrations found, is presented in Table 6.  A 
breakdown of the data for different components is given in Table 
7, showing the range of concentrations for each brand, and the 
brand with the highest bromine level.  A complete list of data from 
the XRF analyses for all samples from each laptop is provided in 
Appendix 3.
Model Laptops No. of samples where bromine was 
detected for each laptop (a)Range of bromine surface 
concentrations
Dell LTOP01-03 14-16 0.30-10%
Sony LTOP04-05 4 0.38-9.4%
Apple LTOP06-09 13-15 0.15-9.9%
Acer LTOP10-13 12-15 0.18-10%
Hewlett Packard LTOP14-17 11-12 0.26-9.5%
Toshiba LTOP18 12 0.32-9.2%
Table 6.  Number of samples found to contain bromine above the detection limit of 0.1% by XRF analysis, and the range of surface concentrations in all 
laptop models; (a) the range of numbers containing bromine for a brand reflects the differences found between models of the same brand.

Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l For some components, a very similar pattern was found for all 
laptops irrespective of the brand.  For example, bromine was 
consistently present in the cooling fan (#10), with high surface 
concentrations in the range 4.4-6.6%.  Somewhat lower levels 
were commonly found for the surface of the main chip (#30), in 
the range 0.28-0.42% (with one exception, as bromine was not 
detected in a Sony laptop purchased in Japan; LTOP05).  A pin connector socket (#25) on the motherboard consistently contained 
high bromine levels in the range 6.0-10% (though with two 
exceptions in which bromine was not detected; one Sony laptop 
purchased in Sweden; LTOP04, and one Dell laptop purchased 
in the USA, LTOP03).  For two other pin connector sockets (#26, 
#27), bromine was not detectable in any of the laptops, other than 
at relatively low levels in one Apple and one HP laptop.
Component or 
material typeHighest 
valueaNumber of samples with bromine (total number of samples analysed) 
concentration range (%) b
Dell Sony Apple Acer HP Toshiba
Circuit boards Acer
8.2%15		(15)	
1.8-6.2%1		(10)
6.0%22		(24)
0.15-7.4%20		(24)
2.0-8.2%21		(24)
1.9-7.5%2		(5)
6.6-7.7%
Ribbon cablescHP
7.0%9		(12)
0.58-2.7%-		(8)
-8		(12)
1.1-6.8%11		(15)
0.2-3.0%7		(16)
2.2-7.0%3		(4)
1.7-2.2
Insulation sheets Dell
5.8%6		(6)
1.4-5.8%-		(4)
-4		(8)
2.8-2.9%1		(8)
1.9%-		(8)
--		(2)
-
Internal plastic pin 
connectorsDell/Acer
10%5		(12)
3.7-10%3		(8)
9.3-9.4%5		(16)
0.2-7.4%8		(16)
4.5-10%5		(16)
0.26-7.0%2		(4)
4.8-8.7%
Fans Apple
6.6%3		(3)
5.9-6.4%2		(2)
4.6-6.1%4		(4)
5.3-6.6%4		(4)
4.5-6.4%4		(4)
4.4-5.3%1		(1)
5.9%
Socket for external battery Apple
9.9%3		(3)
7.9-8.5%-		(2)
-4		(4)
6.9-9.9%4		(4)
8.4-8.8%4		(4)
8.1-9.5%1		(1)
9.2%
Main chip surface HP
0.42%3		(3)
0.30-0.38%1		(2)
0.38%4		(4)
0.30-0.38%4		(4)
0.28-0.36%4		(4)
0.29-0.42%1		(1)
0.36%
External battery casing Acer/HP
1.4%1		(3)
0.64%-		(2)
--		(4)
-1		(4)
1.4%1		(4)
1.4%-		(1)
-
Power transformer casing Sony
2.8%1		(3)
0.30-0.35%1		(2)
2.8%-		(4)
-1		(4)
0.18%-		(4)
-1		(1)
0.32%
Touch mouse pads Apple
5.0%1		(3)
2.2%-		(2)
-4		(4)
4.6-5.0%-		(4)	
--		(4)
-1		(1)
0.54%
Mouse button Dell
1.5%1		(3)
1.5%-		(2)
--		(4)
--		(4)
--		(4)
--		(1)
-
Plastic housing/casing Apple
0.68%-		(15)
--		(8)
-1		(16)
0.68%-		(20)
--		(20)
--		(5)
-
Table 7. Summary of bromine content in samples from all models from each brand, for key component groups analysed. (a) brand yielding the highest 
surface bromine concentration for each component type; (b) of all values above detection limit of 0.1%; (c) no surface bromine detected in sample 6 (ribbon 
cable connected to keyboard) for all laptops

 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 For all brands other than Sony, all laptops contained a number 
of other components with significant bromine contents, and with 
some similarities between models.  These components (and the 
range of surface bromine concentrations) were the attachment on 
the motherboard for the external battery (#21; 6.6-9.9%), and two 
different ribbon cables (#16; 1.8-3.5% and #24; 1.3-3.0%).  For 
one of the ribbon cables (#16), particularly high levels were seen 
in two of the Apple laptops (L08/L09; 6.6-6.8%).  The other ribbon 
cable tested (#24) was not present in any Apple laptop, nor in one 
Acer laptop (LTOP13) and there are therefore no data for these 
models. In the two Sony laptops, no bromine was detected in any 
of the above components.
Similarly, another ribbon cable (#23) contained bromine at surface 
concentrations similar across all brands, with the exception of the 
two Sony laptops and all four HP laptops for which bromine was not 
detected in the equivalent components.  In two of the Apple laptops 
(L07/L08) this material contained notably higher bromine levels than 
in the other two Apple laptops.  Differences that were found between 
laptops of the same brand are further discussed below. 
For circuit boards, the elimination of brominated flame retardants is 
widely seen as a difficult challenge.  For the circuit boards tested, 
bromine was widespread, being detected in all but a very few 
samples in laptops from all brands, with the exception of the Sony 
and Toshiba models.  Where present, bromine was generally found 
at high concentrations.
In the Sony laptops, only 1 of the 6 different types of circuit board 
that were tested was found to contain bromine; the memory 
chip board (6.0%).  No bromine was detected in all other circuit 
boards, including the large motherboard.  Similarly, for the one 
Toshiba laptop tested, bromine was detected in only 2 of the 5 
circuit board that were tested; in the memory chip board (6.6%) 
and also one other circuit board (from the DVD drive, 7.7%).  
No bromine was detected in the 3 other circuit boards tested, 
including the large motherboard.For the Dell, Apple, Acer and HP laptops, the presence of 
bromine in circuit boards was widespread, ranging from 20 out 
of the 24 samples tested in the 4 Acer laptops, to every sample 
tested in the 3 Dell laptops.  Similarities were seen for equivalent 
circuit boards across all four brands, though a small number 
of differences were seen between brands as well as between 
laptops of the same brand.
While not found in the motherboards of the Sony and Toshiba 
laptops, the motherboards (#14) from all other laptops (Dell, Apple, 
Acer and HP) contained bromine, with a similar range of levels 
across all brands (1.8-4.3%).  The same pattern was seen for other 
circuit boards (#20).  For the circuit board situated under the mouse 
touchpad (#18), all Apple laptops had far lower bromine levels 
(0.15-0.37%) compared to equivalent boards in all laptops from the 
Dell, Acer and HP models (3.9-7.5%).
The memory chip circuit board (#15) contained bromine across 
every brand including Sony and Toshiba, being detected in all 
laptops with the exception of 1 of the 4 Acer laptops and 2 of the 
4 HP laptops.  Again, where present, a similar range of levels was 
found across all brands (4.0-8.1%).  The Acer laptop (LTOP13) and 
HP laptops (LTOP15 & LTOP16) in which bromine was not detected 
were different models from those Acer and HP laptops in which 
bromine was found.  A similar pattern was seen for other circuit 
boards;  One (#19) contained bromine in all laptops other than the 
Sony models.  A similar range of levels was found across all brands 
(3.8-7.7%), with the exception of 1 Acer laptop (LTOP13, 2.2%) 
and 2 HP laptops (LTOP14 & LTOP15, 2.1-2.7%).  Again, the Acer 
and HP laptops with lower levels were different models from those 
laptops in which higher levels were found.
Unlike the other circuit boards discussed above, those within the 
hard drives (#17) had a far lower frequency of bromine detection, with 
bromine being present in only 6 of the 18 equivalent components 
tested; in 2 of 4 Apple laptops, 1 of 4 Acer laptops and 3 of 4 HP 
laptops.  No bromine was detected in this component from any of 
the Dell, Sony or Toshiba models.
Toshiba exterior dismantling. 
©Greenpeace/Rose

Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l There were other examples where components in all laptops of 
certain brands were found to contain bromine, while equivalent 
components from other brands did not contain detectable levels 
of bromine.  However, no universal differences were seen between 
brands for these components; the brands in which bromine was 
consistently detected in one component were different from the 
brands in which bromine was consistently detected in another 
component.  However, Apple and Dell laptops were commonly 
amongst those brands in which bromine was detected.
All Dell and Apple laptops contained electrical insulating sheeting 
with detectable levels of bromine.  In the Dell models, bromine 
was present in both such materials tested (1.8-5.8%), while in the 
Apple models, bromine was detected in only 1 of the 2 materials 
tested from each laptop (2.8-2.9%).  For the laptops from the other 
brands, no bromine was detected in these materials, with the 
exception of one sample from an Acer laptop (LTOP13) containing 
1.9% bromine. 
One component, a pin connector (#28), consistently contained 
high levels of bromine in all Dell, Sony, Acer and Toshiba laptops.  
For this component, the Sony laptops had the highest surface 
concentrations of bromine of all brands (9.3-9.4%).  This pattern 
contrasts that of many other components, where bromine was 
frequently detected in one or more brand but was not detected in 
the components from the Sony models (see above).
Finally, the mouse touchpad of all Apple laptops contained bromine, 
all at similar levels (4.6-5.0%).  This component in the one Toshiba 
model that was tested also contained bromine, though at a far lower 
level (0.54%).  Bromine was also detected in the mouse touchpad 
of 1 of the 3 Dell models tested (LTOP01; 2.2%), though not in the 
2 other Dell laptops, nor those of the other brands.A variety of other materials were found to contain bromine in 
individual laptops, though in no more than one laptop from each 
brand.  One such material was the casing of the laptop battery, 
which contained bromine at surface concentrations ranging from 
0.64 to 1.4% in one Dell (LTOP03), one Acer (LTOP10) and one HP 
laptop (LTOP15).  A second example was the casing of the external 
power supply transformer, with bromine surface concentrations 
ranging from 0.18 to 2.8% in one Dell (LTOP03), one Sony (LTOP05), 
one Acer (LTOP10) and the one Toshiba laptop tested (LTOP18).  In 
this latter sample, the level in the Sony laptop (2.8%) was far higher 
than those in the other 3 models (0.18-0.57%).
For two components, bromine was detected in only 1 of the 18 
laptops tested, namely the mouse button (Dell, LTOP02) and the 
laptops’ plastic housing (Apple, LTOP06).

30 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 3.3.2  Differences between laptops of the 
same brand; occurrence and levels of bromine 3.3.1  Copper within circuit boards 
can affect analysis of other elements
bromine concentrations in both materials.  For each sample, 
the difference in the data from the different testing methods 
more probably demonstrates the potential for variation between 
the measured surface bromine concentration and the average 
bromine concentration for the bulk of the material, particularly for 
heterogeneous multilayered components such as circuit boards.
Sample Copper at 
test siteSurface 
analysis 
(Br %)Ground 
sample 
(Br %)
LTOP001/14 No 2.2 3.0
LTOP002/14 No 1.8 3.0
LTOP010/14 Yes <0.1 2.7
LTOP012/14 Yes <0.1 4.3
Table 8.  Bromine concentrations in four circuit board samples. For each, the 
concentration was measured in the surface layer by surface XRF analysis, 
and separately in the bulk of the material by analysis of the ground sampleFor the 4 circuit boards that were tested by both XRF surface 
analysis and also by XRF analysis of the ground sample, the data 
revealed the ability of copper within the mixed material to block 
the analysis of bromine in the material, and give a false negative 
reading (Table 8).  The surface XRF analysis of the 2 samples 
that were measured at sites where copper was present did not 
detect bromine.  However, for these samples the analysis of the 
ground material showed that bromine was present, at 2.7% and 
4.3% in the 2 samples.  These data indicate that, for the testing 
of circuit boards and other heterogeneous materials, there is a 
need to verify the absence of copper or other materials that can 
affect the analysis.  Incorrectly applied XRF testing can incorrectly 
indicate that a component is bromine free even where it contains a 
significant concentration of bromine.
For the 2 circuit boards that were analysed at sites where copper 
was not present, the data from the surface XRF analysis (1.8% 
and 2.2%) did vary from the data from the ground sample (both 
3.0%).  However, both testing methods indicated significant 
For each brand, individual laptops were purchased in different 
countries and regions.  At the time of purchase, legislation had 
recently been introduced in the EU to regulate the use of certain 
hazardous chemicals in these products.  The range of laptops 
investigated in this study included examples in which a specific 
model sold within the EU could also be purchased in a country 
outside the EU.  In such cases, regulations that apply to the model 
sold within the EU do not apply to the laptop sold outside the EU.
For example, the three Dell laptops tested were all model Latitude 
D420.  One was purchased in Germany (LTOP02) where EU 
legislation applies.  The other two laptops were purchased in China 
(LTOP01) and the USA (LTOP03), and therefore their sale was not 
controlled under the EU regulations.For all brands, the data reveal differences between identical models 
that were purchased in different countries (with the exception of 
Toshiba, given that only 1 laptop was tested).  Some patterns are 
apparent between the country of purchase and the presence and/or 
levels of bromine in certain components, though the differences are 
by no means universal.  Likewise, while there are some differences 
between laptops purchased within EU countries compared to 
those purchased outside the EU, there are also cases where the 
differences do not follow these patterns.  Specifically for circuit 
boards, no consistent differences were seen between laptops 
purchased within the EU compared to those purchased outside the 
EU.  The same situation was seen between laptops purchased in 
China compared to those purchased in other countries.

Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 31Where patterns existed, the clearest examples were for the Acer 
brand.  For these laptops, two components from the model 
purchased in China (LTOP10) contained bromine; an external 
battery casing (#22; 1.4% bromine) and the casing of the external 
power supply transformer casing (#29; 0.18%), while equivalent 
components from the other three Acer laptops (purchased in 
Poland, the Netherlands and Thailand) did not.  Uniquely amongst 
the Acer laptops, a sample of electrical insulating sheet (#12) in the 
laptop purchased in the Netherlands (LTOP13) contained bromine at 
1.9%, though this model was different from the models purchased 
in other countries (Aspire 5672 WLMi versus Aspire 5562 WXMi).  
For the Dell and Apple laptops, the patterns are less clear.
For Dell, only the model purchased in China (LTOP01) had a mouse 
touchpad which contained a detectable level of bromine (#01; 
2.2%).  For another component, a pin connector socket (#25), 
bromine was detected in only the model from China (LTOP01) and 
the model from Germany (LTOP02).  Furthermore, the model from 
Germany was the only Dell laptop in which bromine was detected 
in the mouse button (#02; 1.5%).  An opposite trend was seen 
for other components; the model purchased in the USA (LTOP03) 
had an external battery casing (#22) and an external power 
supply transformer casing (#29) that contained detectable levels 
of bromine, at 0.64% and 0.57% respectively.  Bromine was not 
detected in these components in either the model purchased in 
China nor the model purchased in Germany.  An insulation sheet 
(#12) in the USA model also contained approximately twice the 
surface level of bromine compared to this same material in both the 
Chinese and German models.
For the Apple laptops, only the model purchased in the Philippines 
(LTOP06) contained a housing material (#08) with bromine at a 
detectable level (0.68%).  Significantly different levels of bromine 
were found in equivalent ribbon cables from models purchased 
in different countries.  For one ribbon cable (#16), the models 
purchased in the Netherlands and the USA contained surface 
bromine levels 3 times higher than in the models purchased in the Philippines and Russia.  However, for a different ribbon cable (#23), 
the models purchased in the Netherlands and Russia contained the 
higher levels (3-4 times those found in the other models).
For the HP laptops, differences also existed between individual 
laptops.  However, the four HP models tested were all different, 
though closely related, models from each other.  For the model 
purchased in Argentina (LTOP15), the casing of the battery (#22) 
contained bromine (1.4%), which was not seen for the other 
models.  For each model, however, the batteries had different part 
numbers.  Similarly the circuit board joining the motherboard to the 
DVD drive (#19) in the HP laptops, all with the same identification 
code, contained higher levels of bromine in the models purchased 
in France and the USA (6.4 & 4.8% respectively) compared to those 
purchased in Mexico and Argentina (2.1-2.7%).
Comparisons for the Sony laptops are less clear as the study 
included only 2 Sony laptops, while for other brands laptops 
purchased in up to 4 countries were tested.  For the Sony laptop 
purchased in Japan (LTOP05), two components contained bromine 
(a pin connector socket (#25; 9.3% bromine) and the external 
power supply transformer casing (#29; 2.8%), while bromine was 
not detected in these components from the other Sony laptop, 
purchased in Sweden (LTOP04).   

3.4 Brominated 
flame retardants
Although XRF can provide a reliable method for determining the 
bromine content of the surface layer of a material, it does not 
yield information on the chemical form in which the bromine is 
present.  High bromine content is likely to result from the use of 
a brominated flame retardant formulation, whether in additive or 
reactive (polymer-bound) forms.
There is potentially a very wide range of brominated chemicals that 
can be used as brominated flame retardants.  This investigation 
focussed on certain classes of brominated chemicals due to their 
common usage as flame retardants, namely PBDEs, PBBs, TBBPA 
and HBCD (see text box to the left).
Due to resource limitations, it was possible to only quantify these 
brominated flame retardants in a relatively small number of the 
materials that were found to contain bromine.  Where available, a 
ribbon cable (#16) and a pin connector socket from the motherboard 
(#25), were analysed from one laptop of each brand. These 
materials were selected in recognition of their consistently high 
bromine content across all brands.  Samples from two separate 
Apple laptops (LTOP06 and LTOP09) were analysed due to the 
very different levels of bromine that were found in the ribbon cables 
(sample 16) of the identical laptop models that had been purchased 
in different countries.
In addition, BFRs were quantified in three mouse touchpads.  This 
component was selected as it was the only component tested by 
XRF that had consistently high bromine levels in all laptops of only one 
of the brands investigated (Apple).  In one of the three Dell laptops 
(LTOP01), and the Toshiba laptop (LTOP18), this component also 
contained bromine at a detectable level by XRF analysis, though at 
much lower levels, particularly for the Toshiba laptop.
The samples that were quantified for extractable BFRs, and those 
samples in which extractable BFRs were found are presented in 
Table 9, along with the surface levels of bromine as determined 
by XRF analysis.  For those samples in which extractable BFRs 
were identified, a breakdown of the type of BFRs identified and their 
concentrations in the samples is given in Table 10. Brominated flame retardants (BFRs);  there is 
potentially a very wide range of brominated chemicals 
that can be used as BFRs10 Commonly used examples 
include polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs)  and 
tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA) , as well as brominated 
polymeric and oligomeric materials.  Historically, some 
electrical/electronic equipment contained polybrominated 
biphenyls (PBBs) , though these BFRs have now been widely 
phased out for some time.  Hexabromocyclododecane 
(HBCD)  is another commonly used additive brominated 
flame retardant, especially in expanded polystyrene, which 
can be readily extracted if present.  
PBDEs are a group of related chemicals differing in the 
amount and arrangement of bromine within each molecule.  
The most commonly used in modern electronics is deca-
BDE (BDE-209), often referred to as simply ‘deca’.  A recent 
study13 has demonstrated the potential for human exposure 
to deca-BDE and other PBDEs as a result of the recycling 
and disposal of electronic wastes, resulting in the highest 
levels of deca-BDE to be reported in humans.   PBBs are 
a similar group of chemicals based on a different molecular 
backbone.  HBCD is also a group of related chemicals, each 
with the same degree of bromination but arranged differently 
within the molecule.  TBBPA is a single individual chemical.
Some BFRs, including certain PBDEs and PBBs, have 
known toxic properties, and some are highly persistent 
in the environment and able to bioaccumulate (build up 
in animals and humans).  In whatever form the bromine is 
present, impacts can result at the product’s end of life as 
a result of the unintentional formation of toxic brominated 
byproducts (including dioxins) during some disposal or 
recycling operations11.
13  Bi, X., Thomas, G.O., Jones, K.C., Qu, W., Sheng, G., Martin, F.L., Fu, J. (2007) 
Exposure of Electronics Dismantling Workers to Polybrominated Diphenyl Ethers, 
Polychlorinated Biphenyls, and Organochlorine Pesticides in South China. Environmental 
Science and Technology 41: 5647-5653
3

Sample ComponentDell Sony Apple Apple Acer HP Toshiba
LTOP01 LTOP05 LTOP0  LTOP0  LTOP13 LTOP14 LTOP1 
01 Mouse touch padX
(2.2% Br)- -
(4.6% Br)BFR
(4.8% Br)- - X
16 Ribbon cable     
(flex. circuit board)BFR
(2.2% Br)- BFR
(2.2% Br)BFR
(6.8% Br)X
(2.4% Br)X
(2.3% Br)X
25 Pin connector 
socketX
(10% Br)X
(9.3% Br)-
(6.3% Br)X
(7.4% Br)X
(6.5% Br)X
(6.0% Br)X
(6.9% Br)
Table 9.  Components in which extractable BFRs were quantified; BFR=extractable BFRs identified; X=BFRs not present above method detection limits; 
- sample not quantified for BFRs. (%) indicates the surface level of bromine by XRF analysis, for those samples where bromine was detected
Sample type Mouse touch pad Ribbon cable  (flexible circuit board)
Sample # 01 01 01 1 1 1
Laptop LTOP01 
DELLLTOP0  
APPLELTOP1  
ToshibaLTOP01 
DELLLTOP0  
APPLELTOP0  
APPLE
Surface bromine by XRF (%) 2.2 4.8 0.54 2.2 2.2 6.8
Surface bromine by XRF (mg/kg)  22000 48000  5400 22000 22000 68000
Extractable BFR concentrations (mg/kg) of;
PBDEs;  
All tetra- to octa-BDEs - - - - - -
NonaBDEs - 1. - - - -
DecaBDE  (BDE-209) - 1. - - - -
TBBP-A - 15 - 4 13.1 .1
HBCD - - - - - -
PBBs (all) - - - - - -
Table 10. Summary of the groups of extractable BFRs, and their concentrations, in those samples in which extractable BFRs were identified; ‘-‘ indicates  
no BFRs identified above method detection limits
Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical Note l September 2007 l 33

Of the three mouse touchpads (#01) analysed, extractable BFRs 
were identified in only the component from the Apple laptop 
(LTOP09).  PBDEs were present at low levels in this sample, 
including deca-BDE (BDE-209) at 12.2 mg/kg and nona-BDEs 
at 1.87 mg/kg.  This component also contained the brominated 
chemical TBBPA at a higher concentration of 125 mg/kg.
Of the ribbon cables (#16) analysed, the compound TBBPA was 
identified in the Dell laptop (LTOP01) and both Apple laptops 
(LTOP06 & LTOP09).  No extractable BFRs were identified in this 
component for the Acer, HP or Toshiba laptops.  The highest level 
of TBBPA was found in this component from the Dell laptop, at 242 
mg/kg.  Of the two Apple laptops, a higher level of TBBPA was 
present in the laptop purchased in the USA (LTOP09) compared to 
that purchased in the Philippines (LTOP06).  The same pattern was 
seen for the total bromine levels in these materials as determined 
by XRF analysis; 6.8% and 2.2% respectively.
For all laptops tested, the pin connector socket (#25) did not contain 
detectable levels of the extractable BFRs quantified.
Deca-BDE and TBBPA are not included amongst the BFRs regulated 
under the EU RoHS directive.  This Directive does restrict the use of 
PBDEs, though deca-BDE is specifically exempted.  Other BDEs, 
including nona-BDEs, are regulated under this legislation.  However, 
a maximum allowable limit for BFRs, including nona-BDE, is set at 
1000 mg/kg (0.1%) in homogeneous materials, far higher than the 
levels detected in the mouse touchpad from the Apple laptop.
Where present in the components tested, the low concentrations of 
both PBDEs and TBBPA are highly unlikely to provide sufficient flame 
retardancy alone for the plastic material from which the components 
are constructed.  Furthermore, XRF analysis has demonstrated that 
these components contained far higher total surface bromine levels 
(between 0.54% and 6.8% , or 5400–68000 mg/kg) than could 
be explained by the concentrations of these extractable chemicals 
alone.  Therefore the bulk of the bromine content (assuming surface 
concentrations are indicative of concentrations throughout the 
material) must result from the presence of brominated chemicals 
other than those specifically quantified in this study.
34Macbook Ribbon. 
©Greenpeace/Rose

PBDEs are incorporated into polymers in ‘additive’ mode.  The 
PBDEs are simply mixed with the polymer during production, but 
are not chemically bound to the polymer.  When incorporated 
in this way, many BFRs can be extracted from the plastic 
and therefore are able to be identified by analysis.  A further 
consequence of the incorporation of PBDEs in additive mode 
is that these chemicals can migrate out of the material over 
time, and this can result in substantial losses during the lifetime 
of products, and also following disposal.  This has lead to their 
widespread presence in the environment.
TBBPA can also be incorporated into polymers in additive mode, 
though it is far more common for TBBPA to be used in reactive 
(polymer-bound) mode.  The use of TBBPA in reactive mode in 
brominated epoxy resin circuit boards represents one of the major 
uses of this compound worldwide.  In reactive mode, the majority 
of the TBBPA chemically reacts to become part of the polymer and 
is no longer present as the TBBPA monomer.  Even when used in 
this mode, however, a small proportion of the total TBBPA that has 
been used remains as unreacted TBBPA monomer, and this can be 
isolated by solvent extraction.  
As the use of TBBPA in reactive mode is a far more common 
process, it seems likely that the concentrations of extractable 
TBBPA in the three pin connector sockets and the Apple mouse 
touchpad are due to the inevitable presence of a small proportion 
of unreacted TBBPA resulting from its use in reactive mode.  In 
this case, the majority of the bromine would be bound up in the 
polymeric material and could not be extracted and quantified by 
the methods employed.  This alone could account for the large 
differences between the levels of extractable TBBPA and the total 
levels of bromine in these materials, though the possible presence 
of other oligomeric or polymeric forms of organic bromine cannot 
be ruled out. 3.4.1  Other BFRs
Those samples quantified for the specific BFRs discussed above 
(PBDEs, PBBs, TBBPA and HBCD) were also screened for the 
presence of other extractable brominated compounds.  Some 
additional compounds were identified in extracts from samples 
from the Acer, HP and Toshiba laptops. The samples that contained 
these additional brominated chemicals, were different to those 
samples that contained the BFRs discussed above (PBDEs, PBBs, 
TBBPA, HDCD).
Two brominated chemicals, pentabromotoluene and 3,4-
dibromostyrene, were identified in 3 samples, namely the pin 
connector sockets from the Acer, HP and Toshiba laptops (Samples 
#25 from LTOP13, LTOP14 & LTOP18).  Pentabromotoluene is 
known to be used as a flame retardant in some applications10.  
3,4 dibromostyrene is most likely to be present as a result of the 
use of brominated styrene polymer, a known flame retardant10.  
This polymer is manufactured from brominated styrene, and the 
residues of  3,4-dibromostyrene could arise as unreacted monomer 
or from the partial decomposition of the polymer over time. 
One sample, the ribbon cable from the Toshiba laptop (LTOP18), also 
contained tribromophenol.  Again, this compound may be present 
as a result of the use of brominated polymer10 which can contain 
trace amounts of the tribromophenol used in its manufacture.  
Some other samples contained brominated compounds, though it 
was not possible to identify these chemicals fully.
For all the above compounds, though the levels in the samples 
were not quantified, data indicate that they were present at relatively 
low concentrations, of a similar or lower magnitude to the levels 
of TBBPA and PBDEs identified in other samples.  It is unlikely, 
therefore, that they too could account for the majority of the bromine 
content detected in these samples by the XRF analyses.
Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical Note l September 2007 l 35

3.5 PVC
Indeed, it seems likely that the majority of the bromine in the 
samples that were analysed for individual BFRs is bound up in 
the polymeric material of the samples tested, and therefore not 
amenable to solvent extraction and analysis by the methods 
used.  These materials may also contain high molecular weight 
oligomeric flame retardants, such as brominated epoxy oligomers 
(BEOs), which are not amenable to solvent extraction and/or 
analysis by GC-MS. 
A number of such polymeric and oligomeric materials are available, 
and commercial information indicates that they are becoming 
widely used in electronics applications. However, it is not possible 
to obtain any further information on the exact chemical forms of 
the majority of the detectable bromine content of the materials 
analysed using the methods employed in this study.  To obtain such 
information by analysis is likely to remain very difficult, such that the 
only option may ultimately be to request such information from the 
component manufacturers themselves.The results of the analysis of certain plastic components from each 
laptop for the presence of the plastic PVC are presented in Table 
11.  Of these materials, between 2 and 4 samples from each laptop 
(#6, #16, #23, #24) were also analysed by XRF, as discussed 
above.  Furthermore, 2 of the samples (samples #6 & #35) were 
also analysed quantitatively for the presence of 9 phthalate esters.
Of the 170 materials from all laptops subject to PVC analysis, a total 
of 48 tested positive for the presence of PVC.  For all laptops of 
all brands, none on the 62 plastic materials of the different internal 
ribbon cables analysed tested positive for PVC.  In addition, the 
plastic coatings of the internal power wire to the screen (#31) tested 
negative for PVC in all cases.  Of the remaining 5 materials tested in 
each laptop (all plastic coatings of internal and external wires and 
cables), one or more tested positive for PVC in every laptop.  
Of all internal wires and external cables tested (#31 #36) for all 
laptops, 44% tested positive for PVC in the plastic coating (48 out 
of 108 materials).
For each brand, the average number of materials that tested 
positive for PVC per laptop was similar; between 2 and 3 materials 
for the Dell, Sony, Apple and Acer brands, while the HP and 
Toshiba brands had an average of 4 materials per laptop.  However, 
within each brand, the number of materials that tested positive 
varied between individual laptops, with the exception of the two 
Sony laptops.  For example, in one HP laptop (LTOP17) only two 
materials tested positive, while in another HP laptop (LTOP15) five 
materials tested positive.
There were generally no clear and consistent patterns in the 
number and type of materials that tested positive for PVC between 
different brands, or even between laptops of the same brand.  The 
only exception was the Sony brand; in both laptops the same two 
materials contained PVC (inner and outer coatings of the cable from 
the dc power transformer), while all other materials did not.
3 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical Note l September 2007 

The material that most commonly tested positive for PVC was the 
outer plastic coating of the cable from the DC power transformer 
(in all laptops other than the Apple laptops and one Acer laptop).  
However, for this Acer laptop and 3 of the 4 Apple laptops, the inner 
plastic coating of this cable did test positive for PVC.  This inner 
coating material also tested positive in many of the other laptops.
Individual laptops were purchased in different countries and regions.  
Considering all laptops of all brands together, there were no clear 
relationship between the country or region in which the laptop was 
purchased and the number / type of materials that tested positive 
for PVC.  For example, the Dell laptop purchased in Germany 
contained the most PVC positive results for all Dell laptops, while 
the Apple laptop also purchased in an EU country (the Netherlands) 
contained the least PVC positive results for all Apple laptops.
However, for each of the materials of which samples from some 
laptops showed the presence of PVC, equivalent samples from 
other laptops showed a non-PVC containing material being used. 
This illustrates that, for these applications, it is not essential for PVC 
to be used. 
Although PVC does not have direct toxicity, this plastic does 
presents its own manufacturing and waste management problems 
by acting as a source of organic-bound chlorine to the waste 
stream, as well as raising additional concerns at other points in 
its lifecycle.  Furthermore, the use of PVC in certain applications 
requires the use of additive chemicals, such as phthalate esters 
(phthalates) used as plasticisers (softeners). 
 3Macbook exterior. 
©Greenpeace/Rose

 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l Sample   ComponentDell Sony Apple Acer HP Toshiba
01 0 0 04 05 0 0 0 0 10 11 1 1 14 15 1 1 1
6(a)(b) Ribbon cable to keyboard nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd
16(a) Ribbon cable from motherboard - nd nd nd nd - nd nd - nd nd nd - - nd nd nd -
23(a) Ribbon cable to a PWB nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd
24(a) Ribbon cable to component nd nd nd nd nd - - - - nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd
31 internal power wire to screen nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd
32 internal wire to fan nd PVC nd nd nd nd PVC nd PVC PVC PVC PVC nd nd PVC PVC PVC PVC
33 internal wire to dc input socket nd PVC nd nd nd PVC PVC nd PVC nd nd nd nd PVC PVC nd nd nd
34 internal wire to BIOS battery/speaker PVC PVC nd nd nd nd nd nd nd nd PVC PVC nd PVC PVC PVC nd PVC
35(b) external cable to transformer (outer) PVC PVC PVC PVC PVC nd nd nd nd PVC PVC nd PVC PVC PVC PVC PVC PVC
36 external cable to transformer (inner) nd PVC PVC PVC PVC nd PVC PVC PVC nd PVC PVC nd nd PVC nd nd PVC
Table 11.  Results of the analysis of components for PVC content in all laptops (LTOP01-18); PVC, presence of PVC confirmed; nd, not detected; 
-, not analysed.  (a) also analysed by XRF;  (b) also analysed for phthalate content. 
Sample 5 Dell Sony Apple Acer HP Toshiba
L01 L0 L0 L04 L05 L0 L0 L0 L0 L10 L11 L1 L1 L14 L15 L1 L1 L1
Di-n-butylphthalate (DBP) < 20 22 < 20 < 10 < 10 30 < 10 < 20 20 < 20 < 10 < 10 < 10 < 9 < 10 < 10 < 20 < 20
Butylbenzylphthalate(BBP) < 20 < 20 < 20 < 10 < 10 < 20 < 10 < 20 < 20 < 20 < 10 < 10 < 10 < 9 < 10 < 10 < 20 < 20
Diethylhexylphthalate (DEHP) 450 630 130 750 330 340 47 72 86 2600 2800 200000 1300 100 11 1200 58 190
Di-n-octylphthalate (DOP) 190 25 < 20 < 10 < 10 < 20 < 10 < 20 < 20 < 20 < 10 < 10 < 10 < 9 < 10 < 10 < 20 < 20
Dimethylphthalate (DMP) < 20 < 20 < 20 < 10 < 10 < 20 < 10 < 20 < 20 < 20 < 10 < 10 < 10 < 9 < 10 < 10 < 20 < 20
Diethylphthalate (DEP) < 20 < 20 < 20 < 10 < 10 < 20 < 10 < 20 < 20 < 20 < 10 < 10 < 10 < 9 < 10 < 10 < 20 < 20
Diisononylphthalates (DiNP) <100 (d) 95000 55000 (d) 3100 2000 2000 2300 22000 180000 2800 180000 200000 260000 280000 190000 130000
Di-iso-butylphthalate (DiBP) <20 < 20 < 20 < 10 < 10 < 20 < 10 < 20 < 20 < 60 19 30 < 10 20 21 < 10 30 20
Di-isodecylphthalates (DiDP) 86000 33000  (n)  (n) 73000  (nd) < 50 < 90 < 90  (n)  (n) (nd)  (n)  (n)  (n)  (n) < 90  (nd)
TOTAL (mg/kg) 86640 33677 95130 55750 73330 3470 2047 2072 2406 24600 182819 202830 181300 200120 260032 281200 190088 130210
TOTAL (%) 8.7 3.4 9.5 5.6 7.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 2.5 18.3 20.3 18.1 20.0 26.0 28.1 19.0 13.0
Table 12.  Concentrations of nine phthalates in sample #35, the outer plastic coating of the cable from the power transformer, in mg/kg;  
* summed data for diisononylphthalates (DiNP) and diisodecylphthalates (DiDP);  (n) DiNP dominates, (d) DiDP dominates, (nd) Approximately equal 
contribution from DiNP & DiDP .  

40 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 3. Phthalates
The concentrations of the nine phthalates quantified in the two 
plastic materials from each laptop are given in Table 12 and 13.  
In addition to the two components analysed from each laptop 
(samples #6 and #35), two of the purposefully designed storage 
bags used to store and transport all samples was also analysed for phthalate content to determine whether the use of these bags 
could have contributed to the levels of phthalates in the materials 
tested.  Neither storage bag contained  phthalates above method 
detection limits, demonstrating that the use of these was not a 
potential source of phthalate contamination.
Sample   SONY
LTOP04All other
laptopsstorage bag
( samples)
Di-n-butylphthalate (DBP) < 20 <10 - <30 < 20
Butylbenzylphthalate(BBP) < 20 <10 - <30 < 20
Diethylhexylphthalate (DEHP) < 20 <10 - <30 < 20
Di-n-octylphthalate (DOP) < 20 <10 - <30 < 20
Dimethylphthalate (DMP) < 20 <10 - <30 < 20
Diethylphthalate (DEP) < 20 <10 - <30 < 20
Diisononylphthalate Isomers (DiNP) 100 <50 - <200 < 20
Di-iso-butylphthalate (DiBP) < 20 <10 - <30 < 80
Di isodecylphthalate Isomers (DiDP) < 90 <50 - <200 < 80
Table 13.  Concentrations of nine phthalates in samples of ribbon cable (#6)  from all laptops and from two sample storage bags, in mg/kg.
None of the internal ribbon cables (#6) analysed contained 
detectable levels of any of the nine phthalates (Table 13).  The 
only exception to this was the material in one of the Sony 
laptops (LTOP04) which contained DiNP at a relatively low level 
(100 mg/kg).  This is most likely to be a result of unintentional 
trace contamination, rather than the intentional addition of this 
phthalate to the material.  For all laptops, the plastic coating of 
these ribbon cables did not test positive for PVC.  
In contrast, for all laptops of all brands, the outer plastic coating 
of the cable from the power transformer (#35), contained two 
or more of the nine phthalates.  For each sample, the total 
concentration of phthalates far exceeded levels that might be 
due to trace contamination, indicating the intentional addition of 
phthalates to these materials.For this material, the Apple laptops had by far the lowest total 
concentrations of phthalates of all laptops (0.2-0.3%).  For 
the other brands, the highest total concentrations were seen 
in the HP and Acer laptops (18-28%), with a similar range of 
concentrations in both brands.  Somewhat lower was the level in 
the material from the Toshiba laptop (13%).  In the Dell and Sony 
laptops, the levels were lower still (3.4-9.5%), with both brands 
having a similar range of concentrations.
In all but one laptop (LTOP12), the predominant phthalates in this 
material were di isononylphthalate (DiNP) and di isodecylphthalate 
(DiDP).  All such materials also contained lesser amounts of 
diethylhexylphthalate (DEHP).  Trace amounts of certain other 
phthalates were present in samples from individual laptops, though 
the concentrations of these phthalates suggest they are present 
from unintentional trace contamination, rather than having been 
added intentionally to the materials.

Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 41The main phthalates quantified in these samples all have known 
toxicity to greater or lesser degree.  Particular concerns exist 
for DEHP which is known to be toxic to reproduction12.  The 
predominant phthalate identified in the cable coatings, DiNP , also 
has potential toxicity to reproductive systems in mammals, though 
to a lesser degree12, and potential toxicity to other organs (see the 
text box on page 42).
As noted in Section 3, the phthalates DiNP and DiDP are not 
individual chemicals.  Each one is a group of very closely related 
chemicals, or isomers, with the same overall molecular formula 
but slightly different structures.  The chemical similarity of DiNP 
and DiDP , combined with the large numbers of individual isomers 
present in each formulation, inevitably leads to a degree of overlap 
between the two during analysis when high overall concentrations 
are present.  Consequently, complete separation of DiNP and DiDP 
congeners was not possible for the majority of samples.  
In four laptops, the material contained DiNP , but not DiDP .  The 
remainder of the samples contained mixtures of DiNP and DiDP 
that could not be fully separated.  However, the data indicated that 
the mixture was predominantly DiNP in 8 of the samples where 
overlap occurred.  In each of 3 other samples DiNP and DiDP were 
present in similar amounts, and in only 3 samples was DiDP the 
predominant phthalate.  No clear pattern existed between the ratio 
of DiNP to DiDP and either the brand or the country of purchase.
Of all brands, the materials in the Acer laptops contained the 
highest concentrations of DEHP.  In one of the Acer laptops 
(LTOP12), the phthalate composition was very different to that 
found in the other 3 Acer laptops.  In particular, the cable from 
LTOP12 contained a very high level of DEHP (20%), compared 
to DEHP levels (0.1-0.3%) in the equivalent cable from the other 
Acer laptops (which predominantly contained DiNP/DiDP).There was no clear pattern between the country or region in which 
laptops were purchased and the total level of phthalates, or the 
phthalate composition in the cable coating.  For the Dell, Sony and 
Apple brands, models purchased within the EU had somewhat 
lower total phthalate levels than equivalent models purchased in 
non-EU countries.  However, for the HP and to a lesser extent the 
Acer laptops, the models purchased within the EU had somewhat 
higher total phthalate levels than equivalent models purchased in 
non-EU countries.
Phthalates that are incorporated into plastic materials are not 
chemically bound to the plastic, but are able to migrate out of 
the material over time.  This can result in substantial losses to the 
environment during the lifetime of products, and again following 
disposal.  Therefore, it is of particular concern that phthalates were 
found in external components of all laptops (the plastic coating of 
the cable from the DC power transformer, sample #35), and in very 
high levels for the majority.
Within the EU, the phthalate DEHP is classified as  “toxic to 
reproduction”14.  Phthalates are not currently included in the 
European RoHS directive that restricts the use of certain other 
hazardous substances in electrical and electronic products 
specifically.  However, due to concerns over human exposure to 
toxic and potentially toxic chemicals, the use of certain phthalates is 
restricted in toys and childcare articles within the European Union14.  
This Directive prohibits the sale of toys and childcare articles that 
include plastic containing more than 0.1 % by weight of phthalates 
including DiNP and DiDP (for products that can be placed in the 
mouth by children), as well as those with more than 0.1 % of DEHP 
or DBP (for all such products).
Moreover, though not applicable to electrical equipment, the 
classification of certain phthalates (including DEHP) in the EU as 
‘toxic to reproduction’ results in their prohibition for use in certain 
other product groups, including cosmetics 15.

3.6.1 Phthalate composition 
and the presence of PVC
In all Apple laptops, the outer plastic coating of the cable from 
the power transformer (#35) tested negative for PVC.  In contrast, 
in all other laptops but one, this material did contain PVC.  The 
PVC-free material in the Apple laptops also contained by far the 
lowest total concentrations of phthalates found for this material 
in all other laptops.
In one of the four Acer laptops (LTOP12) this material was also PVC-
free, and it had a very different phthalate composition.  In this case, 
the cable coating contained a similar total level of phthalates to 
those in the other PVC-coated cables provided with Acer laptops, 
but the mixture consisted almost exclusively of DEHP , the most 
toxic of the three main phthalates identified in these materials.  For 
the other Acer laptops in which the material did contain PVC, DEHP 
was a minor constituent of the phthalate mixture. 
For the coating of the power transformer cables, the use of PVC-
free material in the Apple laptops coincided with greatly reduced 
amounts of phthalates.  The use of other alternative PVC-free 
materials that do not require plasticisers could have eliminated 
the need for phthalates altogether.  Disappointingly, for the one 
Acer model in which a PVC based material was not used, the 
alternative material contained a very high concentration of the more 
toxic phthalate (DEHP).  This example illustrates that, although 
PVC may be eliminated in these flexible applications, it does not 
necessarily mean that the plasticizers commonly used for flexible 
PVC applications will automatically also be eliminated. 
14 EC (2005)  Directive 2005/84/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 
2005 amending for the 22nd time Council Directive 76/769/EEC on the approximation of the laws, 
regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to restrictions on the marketing 
and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations (phthalates in toys and childcare articles).  
Official Journal of the European Communities L344, 27.12.2005: 40-43 http://eur-lex.europa.eu/
LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2005:344:0040:0043:EN:PDF
15  EC (2004) Directive 2004/93/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 September 
2004 amending Council Directive 76/768/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States 
relating to cosmetic products. Official Journal of the European Communities L300, 25.9.2004: 13-41  
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUri Serv.do?uri=CONSLEG:1976L0768:20060809:EN:PDFPhthalates  are widely used as plasticizers (softeners) in 
plastics, especially PVC (e.g. in cables and other flexible 
components), though many other industrial uses exist.  Many 
phthalates are toxic to wildlife and humans, often through 
their metabolites (chemicals to which they breakdown in the 
body).  DEHP , a widely used phthalate, is known to be toxic 
to reproduction, capable of causing changes to both male and 
female reproductive systems in mammals (e.g. development of 
the testes in early life12).  Other phthalates (e.g. DBP  and BBP ) 
also exert reproductive toxicity12.  Both DEHP  and DBP  are 
classified as “toxic to reproduction” within the EU13.  There is 
also evidence of the reproductive toxicity of DINP12, and this 
phthalate can also have effects on the liver and kidneys.
13 EC (2001) Directive 2001/59/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 August 
2001 adapting to technical progress for the 28th time Council Directive 67/548/EEC on the 
approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, 
packaging and labeling of dangerous substances.  Official Journal of the European Communities 
L225, 21.8.2001: 1-333 http://ecb.jrc.it/documents/Classification-Labelling/ATPS_OF_
DIRECTIVE_67-548-EEC/28th_ATP .pdf
4

Conclusions
Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical Note l September 2007 l 43©Greenpeace/Rizman

44 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 • Bromine , indicative of brominated flame retardants (BFRs), 
was present in a wide range of different materials and 
components.  Over 40% of the 523 samples tested in total 
contained bromine (above a detection limit of 0.1%), at surface 
concentrations ranging from 0.3% to 10% by weight.
• Of all the brands analysed, the Sony laptops gave by far the 
lowest number of samples testing positive for bromine (4 
per laptop).  There was little relative difference between the 
other brands for the overall frequency with which bromine 
was detected in components tested; the Dell laptops yielded 
the greatest number of positives (14-16 per laptop), the HP 
models had the least (11-12 samples per laptop).  
• However, for those components and materials that contained 
bromine, the actual levels of bromine in many types of samples 
(i.e. discrete materials or components) did vary between 
laptops of the same brand, as well as between laptops of 
different brands.  
• There were no universal differences between the brands for 
the presence and levels of bromine across all components 
and materials tested.  Although differences between brands 
were apparent for some individual components, these patterns 
were not consistent across all component types.  However, 
the Sony laptops did stand out from the other brands; 
bromine was not detected in many types of component that 
were found to contain bromine in some or all other brands, 
particularly for circuit boards.
• For each brand there were some differences between the 
country/region of purchase and the presence and/or levels 
of bromine in individual components.  However the patterns 
were not consistent for different types of component.  In 
most cases, the distinctions were not between countries/
regions with applicable laws that regulate  the use of 
hazardous chemicals (e.g. EU and China) and those without 
such regulations.This study covered a diverse range of components within the 
various laptops, though it was not feasible to test every individual 
component or homogeneous material of each laptop.  As a 
result of the very high degree of complexity of products such as 
laptop computers, which include numerous small and complex 
components, compositional analysis of all individual homogeneous 
materials in such a product is an extremely large task.  It is possible 
that some components or materials which were not tested may 
contain one or more of the chemicals investigated in this study.  
Therefore, for each laptop, the absence of a chemical in all samples 
analysed does not indicate that the laptop is entirely free of that 
chemical.  Furthermore, each of the brands includes a range of 
different products available on the market.  The results from this 
study are applicable to the specific models tested for each brand, 
and may not reflect the use of certain chemicals in the brand as 
a whole.  These issues highlight the great difficulties in verifying 
that any individual product, or brand as a whole, is entirely free of 
a specific chemical, and hence whether or not a whole product is 
compliant with EU RoHS, or equivalent, regulations.
Nevertheless, this study into the presence of hazardous chemicals 
in laptop computers has revealed valuable information.
• The data provide a unique comparison of the composition of 
a wide range of components and materials from 18 laptop 
computers representing 6 separate brands, and available for 
purchase in many countries around the world.
• Lead, cadmium  and mercury  were not detected in any of 
the samples from all laptops tested by XRF (with detection 
limits of 0.01% for cadmium and 0.05% for lead and mercury)
• Lead  was not detected in any of the samples of electrical 
solder analysed from all laptops using other methods (with a 
detection limit of 0.1%).  These solders were composed of 
various different mixtures of other metals, with their composition 
depending on where they were used within the computer.
• Hexavalent  chromium  was not detected in any of the metallic 
samples tested for all laptops (with a detection limit of 0.1%).
Toshiba CPU and Fan. 
©Greenpeace/Rose

Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 45• Components commonly found to have the highest levels of 
bromine included the internal cooling fans, ribbon cables, 
circuit boards, and plastic electrical connectors as well as 
some insulation sheets and mouse touchpads in certain 
models.  External plastic housing samples from all laptops 
did not contain bromine, with the exception of 1 sample from 
an Apple laptop.  However, for discrete types of samples (i.e. 
specific materials or components), there was variation in the 
levels of bromine between laptops of the same brand, as well 
as between laptops of different brands.
• In the case of circuit boards, in which the elimination of 
brominated flame retardants is widely seen as a difficult 
challenge, bromine was very frequently found in the boards 
tested, with the exception of the Sony laptops, and to a lesser 
extent a Toshiba laptop.  
• For all Dell, Apple, Acer and HP laptops, all but a very small 
number of the boards that were tested contained bromine, 
including all the motherboards.  Levels were generally high, and 
for equivalent components similar ranges of concentrations 
were seen across these four brands.  Some differences did 
occur between laptops of the same brand, generally where 
different laptop models of a brand had been investigated.
• For the Sony models, only 1 of 6 type of circuit boards 
tested contained bromine; for the Toshiba model bromine 
was present in 2 of 5 samples tested.  For both these 
brands the large motherboards did not contain detectable 
levels of bromine.  The data from these models indicate that 
the use of ‘bromine-free’ circuit boards is possible across a 
wide range of applications.
• The levels of bromine in the cooling fans were very similar 
to the levels found in a related study carried out in 2006 on 
laptops purchased prior to the introduction of the EU RoHS 
Directive3.  However, in this case it was not possible to 
subject the fans also to quantitative analysis for a range of 
extractable BFRs.• XRF analysis  is a widely used technique to determine material 
composition.  This study has demonstrated that use of this 
technique may not be straight forward, and does require 
quality control checks to ensure the accuracy and reliability 
of any data obtained.  For some complex non-homogeneous 
materials, such as circuit boards, XRF analysis inappropriately or 
incorrectly applied can produce false negative results, indicating 
the absence of an element such as bromine in a material that 
does actually contain a high concentration of that element.
• Brominated flame retardants  were quantified in a relatively 
small number of samples (15).  Two classes of extractable 
BFRs (TBBPA and PBDEs) were identified in 4 of these 15 
samples;  TBBPA was found in 4 samples, 3 from the Apple 
laptops (two ribbon cables and a mouse touchpad) and in a 
single sample from the Dell laptop (in a ribbon cable), though 
at relatively low levels of between 0.0013-0.0125%.  PBDEs 
were also identified in the mouse touchpad from the Apple 
laptop, though at even lower levels. PBBs and HBCD were not 
identified in any of the 15 samples.
• Other brominated compounds were also identified in some 
other of the 15 samples.  Though levels were not quantified, 
data indicate these were also present at relatively low 
levels.  Some may be present due to trace contamination in 
brominated polymeric materials incorporated into the materials.
• For those samples quantified for specific BFRs, the vast 
majority of the bromine content could not be accounted for 
by the compounds identified.  It seems likely that the majority 
of the bromine in the samples is bound up in the polymeric 
material of the samples, or is present as high molecular 
weight oligomeric flame retardants, such as brominated epoxy 
oligomers (BEOs), and therefore not amenable to identification 
using the methods available.  To obtain information on these 
chemicals by analysis is likely to remain very difficult, and 
the only option may ultimately be for such information to be 
supplied by the component manufacturers themselves.

4 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 • PVC usage was investigated in two types of components from 
each laptop; ribbon cables and the plastic coating of wires/
cables.  PVC was not found in any of the 62 ribbon cables 
tested from all laptops, but was identified in 44% of all plastic 
coatings of internal wires and external cables (48 of 108 
samples from all laptops), most commonly in the outer coating 
of the external power cable.  For each brand, the number 
of samples that contained PVC varied significantly between 
individual laptops.  However, none of the brands stood out as 
clearly containing fewer or greater number of PVC containing 
materials for the components tested.
• Phthalates  were found in the outer plastic coating of the 
external power cable supplied with all laptops, at moderate 
to very high concentrations (up to over a quarter of the total 
weight of the plastic coating).  For every sample a mixture 
of two or more phthalates were identified.  By far the lowest 
total concentrations were found in the cable supplied with the 
Apple laptops (0.2-0.3%), and the highest levels in the cables 
supplied with the Acer and HP laptops (18-28%).  There was 
no clear pattern between the country in which laptop was 
purchased, and the total level of phthalates, or the phthalate 
composition, in the cable coating.
• The phthalate mixtures were generally dominated by di 
isononylphthalate (DiNP) and di isodecylphthalate (DiDP), 
with lesser amounts of diethylhexylphthalate (DEHP).  These 
chemicals are able to migrate out of the plastic materials over 
time. There is evidence for the toxicity of all of these phthalates; 
DEHP is classified in the EU as ‘toxic to reproduction’.  Overall, these results provide further evidence for the feasibility of 
the substitution of hazardous chemicals and materials within the 
electronics sector.  For almost every distinct type of material that 
was found to contain either bromine, a specific BFR, or the plastic 
PVC in one or more laptop, examples of equivalent materials that 
were free of these chemicals were found in other laptops.
For example, for all but one of the different types of materials 
and component tested, there were examples where bromine was 
not detectable.  For one brand, Sony, only a small fraction of the 
materials tested contained bromine, while over a third of equivalent 
materials in other brands contained bromine.  Similarly, across 
all laptops, various wires and cables had plastic coatings that 
contained PVC, although for each distinct type of component there 
were equivalent samples in other laptops with non-PVC plastic 
coatings, illustrating that it is not essential for PVC to be used for 
these applications.  The use of PVC-free coating materials for a 
cable in the Apple laptops was associated with greatly reduced 
levels of phthalates in these materials.
The results from this study, however, do also document the continued 
presence of certain hazardous chemicals in many materials used in 
these popular brands of laptop computers.  For some materials, 
the elimination of a particular hazardous chemical appears to be 
universal (for all samples tested), such as lead in electrical solders.  
This, however, was not the case for all chemicals under investigation, 
and the results document the continued presence of halogenated  
(i.e. brominated or chlorinated) materials and of certain hazardous 
chemicals in these popular brands of laptop computers.  These 
include bromine, indicative of brominated flame retardants (BFRs), 
the use of PVC in plastic coatings for wires and cables, and the use 
of phthalates as plasticisers in external power cables.  Moreover, 
some alternative materials to those found to be widely used in 
these products may be of similar concern; for example, in the case 
of one cable supplied with an Acer laptop, the apparent use of a 
material other than PVC was associated with a more hazardous mix 
of phthalate plasticisers, including a high level of DEHP .
Macbook flexible circuit board. 
©Greenpeace/Rose

Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 4Certain BFRs (including most PBDEs) that have been used in 
electrical products, some of which are now regulated in particular 
countries and regions, were present at only low levels or not at 
all in the subset of samples investigated.  However, all these 
materials did contain high levels of bromine, indicative of the use 
of other brominated compounds or other bromine-containing 
materials in these samples.  Despite the likelihood that the 
majority of the bromine in these and many of the other materials 
is present in oligomeric or polymer bound forms, the high levels 
of bromine is still significant.  At the product’s end of life, some 
disposal and/or recycling operations (especially incineration, 
smelting and open burning) can contribute to the formation of 
various hazardous products of combustion, including hydrogen 
bromide and brominated dioxins and furans11.
There were no clear and consistent differences in the prevalence 
of bromine, the presence of specific BFRs or the level and 
composition of phthalates in the tested components between 
laptops purchased in countries with or without applicable 
national regulations controlling the use of hazardous chemicals in 
electronics.  In general, however, the data do suggest that actions 
to phase-out uses of lead, cadmium, mercury and hexavalent 
chromium, at least, have been implemented on a wide-spread 
basis.  The substitution of these latter hazardous chemicals in the 
samples from the laptops investigated is almost certainly largely 
due to legislation in some countries, particularly the EU RoHS 
Directive, impacting more broadly on a globalised industry.  All of 
the samples tested from all laptops of all brands were compliant 
with the EU RoHS directive, whether purchased with the EU or in 
non-EU countries.  Furthermore, even though legislation in China 
came into force after the purchase date of these laptops, all 
samples from the laptops purchased in China would comply with 
the legislation if this type of product were to be listed as requiring 
the elimination of the regulated chemicals.Current laws relevant to this sector, however, are only applicable in 
a fraction of countries where these products are sold.  They do not 
prevent the sale in other countries of products that contain even 
the limited number of hazardous chemicals that they regulate.  As 
an example, a recent investigation16 found high levels of lead in 
electrical solder within an HCL-brand laptop purchased in India, 
one of many countries currently without specific regulations 
on the use of hazardous chemicals in electrical and electronic 
products.  There is clearly a need for suitable regulations of the 
use of hazardous chemicals in such products in all countries where 
they are placed on the market.  Given the global nature of the 
electronics industry, the same legislative requirements worldwide 
would ensure that all electronics manufacturing companies are 
operating to the same standards.
As they stand, even the laws in force in the EU and China do 
not regulate the use of all hazardous substances that can be 
present in electrical/electronic equipment.  As this study has 
demonstrated, such products can contain additional hazardous 
substances to those currently covered under these laws (e.g. 
other BFRs, PVC and phthalates).  Any legislation seeking to 
protect human health and the environment by restricting the use 
of hazardous chemicals in products must ultimately address the 
uses of all hazardous substances.
Elimination of all hazardous chemicals in laptops computers 
and other electrical and electronic equipment can be achieved 
through national legislation and/or self imposed commitments by 
manufacturers.  Experience in the UK and EU relating to other 
hazardous chemicals has recognised that the implementation of 
voluntary or negotiated measures is most effective when driven by 
the promise of future regulation. 
1 Brigden, K. & Santillo, D. (2007) Analysis of hazardous substances in a HCL laptop computer
Greenpeace Research Laboratories Technical Note 02/2007 www.greenpeace.to/publications.asp

4 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Appendix
 ©Greenpeace/Rizman

Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 4Appendix 1; Analytical methods 
b) TBBPA
Each sample was separately homogenised and acidified and then 
extracted with toluene, incorporating an internal 13C labelled 
TBBPA standard.  Extracted TBBPA was derivatives in solution 
using acetic anhydride, prior to column chromatography clean-
up and analysis using capillary gas chromatography – mass 
spectrometry (GC-MS).  Identification was  made from molecular 
and fragmentation ions, and quantification of TBBPA was 
performed using a 13C labelled standard.
PVC
The analysis was carried out on the insulating plastic coatings of 
each component (ribbon cable, internal wire or external cable) 
to determine the presence or absence of the plastic PVC.  Each 
sample was tested for the presence of the element chlorine (an 
indicator of PVC) using the Beilstein test.  For those samples 
testing positive for chlorine, the presence of PVC was confirmed 
using Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) analysis.
Phthalates
For each sample, a portion was accurately weighed and then 
extracted into dichloromethane, with the addition of internal 
standards for quality control purposes.  The extract was analysed 
using capillary gas chromatography coupled with a mass 
spectrometer (GC-MS) for the identification and quantification of 
nine phthalates; di-n-butylphthalate (DBP), butylbenzylphthalate 
(BBP), diethylhexylphthalate (DEHP), di-n-octylphthalate 
(DOP), dimethylphthalate (DMP), diethylphthalate (DEP), di-iso-
butylphthalate (DiBP), di-isononylphthalate isomers (DiNP), di-
isodecylphthalate isomers (DiDP).  
1  International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) Test for the presence of hexavalent chromium (Cr 
VI) in colorless and colored chromate coating on metallic samples. Procedures for the determination 
of levels of six regulated substances (lead, mercury, hexavalent chromium, polybrominated biphenyls, 
polybrominated biphenyl ether) in electrotechnical products IEC 62321Lead and other metals in electrical solder 
Each sample of solder was separated from the component using 
a cleaned scalpel blade and accurately weighed.  Concentrated 
hydrochloric acid (1ml) was added to each sample.  After 
standing for 12 hours, concentrated hydrochloric acid (0.5 ml) and 
concentrated nitric acid (0.5 ml) were added, and the solution left 
until all sample material had dissolved.  Deionised water was added 
to make a final volume of 10ml, and the solution analysed by ICP 
atomic emission spectrometry (AES).  
Hexavalent chromium (Cr VI)
Analysis of materials was carried out in accordance with method 
IEC 62321/1CD, 111/24/CD-method 918. To the surface of 
each sample, was added 0.2 ml of the testing solution (0.4 g of 
1,5-diphenylcarbazide, 20 ml acetone, 20 ml ethanol, 20 ml 
orthophosphoric acid solution and 20 ml of demineralised water).  
The presence of hexavalent chromium was indicated by the formation 
of a red-violet colour.  In each case, the method was applied in 
turn to 1) untreated surface, 2) surface finely abraded to remove 
any reduced chromate surface, but not remove the whole chromate 
layer, 3) surface vigorously abraded to exposure deeper layers.  
Extractable BFR quantification
Analysis of components and materials for a range of extractable 
BFRs was carried out using two separate methods, each for a 
distinct group of BFRs;
a) PBDEs, PBBs and HBCD
Each sample was separately extracted with toluene using a soxhlet 
extraction method, incorporating an internal 13C labelled standard.  
The extract solution was subsequently cleaned by column 
chromatography and analysed using capillary gas chromatography 
– mass spectrometry (GC-MS) with identification of analytes using 
the molecular and fragmentation ions.  Quantification of PBDEs, 
PBBs and HBCD was performed using 13C labelled standards.

50 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 51Appendix :  Composition of electrical solder samples; 
concentrations of all metals quantified (mg/kg)
BRAND Dell Sony Apple Acer HP Toshiba
LAPTOP L01 L0 L0 L04 L05 L0 L0 L0 L0 L10 L11 L1 L1 L14 L15 L1 L1 L1
Sample S01          
Antimony <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1
Bismuth <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.6 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 0.7 0.6
Copper 1.0 1.3 1.7 1.5 1.4 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.8 1.6 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 1.3 0.9 0.8 0.8
Indium <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 8.8 9.7 9.7 9.8 8.8 9.0 9.9 9.2 9.5 8.6 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 10 9.9
Lead <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Nickel <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Silver 3.6 3.8 3.6 3.5 3.3 4.0 4.0 3.7 3.9 4.1 3.7 3.9 3.7 3.5 3.7 3.5 3.7 3.8
Tin 92 91 94 84 81 83 82 82 83 83 80 80 83 90 91 90 84 83
Zinc <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05
Sample S0           
Antimony <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1
Bismuth <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 0.5 <0.5 0.6 0.7 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 0.5 0.5
Copper 4.2 2.9 3.5 3.5 1.5 1.4 1.4 15.5 5.2 2.6 14 13 2.9 8.2 3.7 4.4 14 8.8
Indium <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 8.1 8.5 8.8 9.5 6.9 10 8.3 7.2 7.4 7.9 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 8.5 8.0
Lead <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Nickel <0.1 <0.1 5.6 0.5 0.5 0.4 <0.1 0.1 <0.1 0.0 0.6 0.4 0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 2.0
Silver 3.7 3.8 3.6 3.4 3.7 4.5 4.7 3.8 4.8 3.6 3.3 3.3 3.6 2.9 3.5 3.0 3.7 3.4
Tin 90 94 87 80 81 82 81 69 75 81 71 71 80 85 90 90 73 74
Zinc <0.05 <0.05 0.06 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 0.08 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 0.03
Sample S0           
Antimony <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1
Bismuth <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 0.5 0.6 0.5 <0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.6 0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 0.7 0.5
Copper 1.6 4.3 2.9 19 2.3 5.5 39 12 15 1.3 5.2 4.0 29 13 3.5 6.8 9.9 23
Indium <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 7.0 9.3 7.5 3.4 7.3 7.3 9.5 8.6 8.5 5.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 12 7.5
Lead <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Nickel 0.1 <0.1 0.4 <0.1 <0.1 0.6 4.5 1.4 1.7 <0.1 0.0 0.1 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.1 0.4 0.2
Silver 0.6 2.8 1.5 3.0 3.8 3.5 1.6 3.4 3.4 3.9 3.4 3.6 2.5 3.0 3.7 2.8 5.1 3.4
Tin 92 90 94 70 81 79 31 68 63 82 76 79 58 80 90 89 67 62
Zinc <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 1.2 19 3.6 4.0 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 0.06 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 0.03

5 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 5BRAND Dell Sony Apple Acer HP Toshiba
LAPTOP L01 L0 L0 L04 L05 L0 L0 L0 L0 L10 L11 L1 L1 L14 L15 L1 L1 L1
Sample S04          
Antimony <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1
Bismuth <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Copper 3.3 1.8 4.0 0.8 1.8 4.8 1.6 3.2 1.8 3.3 10 2.7 29 19 3.0 1.7 2.1 14
Indium <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Lead <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Nickel 0.3 0.4 0.1 <0.1 0.1 0.3 <0.1 0.3 <0.1 <0.1 0.6 0.1 1.6 0.1 0.2 0.2 <0.1 0.2
Silver 3.2 4.1 3.3 3.2 3.7 4.6 3.9 4.5 4.0 3.4 1.8 3.1 2.0 3.2 3.8 3.5 4.0 3.5
Tin 88 92 89 93 92 84 90 85 90 91 84 92 61 72 91 91 92 81
Zinc 1.1 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 0.38 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 0.05 1.9 0.20 0.60 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05
Sample S05          
Antimony <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1
Bismuth <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Copper 1.4 1.3 0.8 1.4 2.0 1.1 1.0 0.9 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.0 0.9 1.0 0.9 1.0 7.5 1.1
Indium <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Lead <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Nickel <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Silver 3.4 4.1 3.4 3.4 3.7 4.0 3.6 3.5 3.7 4.2 4.0 3.8 3.5 4.2 3.4 4.0 4.1 3.8
Tin 91 91 93 91 94 95 93 95 92 90 88 93 92 91 91 92 87 93
Zinc <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05
Sample S0           
Antimony <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1
Bismuth <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Copper 14 1.1 6.8 2.4 3.5 1.1 1.3 1.3 0.7 1.1 0.3 0.4 10 5.1 1.3 1.9 1.0 0.9
Indium <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Lead <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Nickel <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 0.7 1.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 0.8 0.1 0.1 2.9 <0.1 0.1 0.4 0.1 <0.1
Silver 2.7 3.3 3.2 2.9 3.1 4.5 5.3 5.4 3.1 4.6 4.9 4.6 3.3 3.6 3.9 2.8 3.9 3.6
Tin 79 92 90 90 89 93 90 91 93 88 91 90 78 87 91 93 91 94
Zinc 0.21 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05
Sample S0           
Antimony <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1
Bismuth <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Copper 20 30 5.8 7.5 10 1.3 6.1 1.8 5.4 2.7 4.5 4.7 6.0 0.9 20 1.1 5.0 1.3
Indium <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Lead <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Nickel <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 2.6 3.3 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 1.2 1.4 1.2 2.1 <0.1 0.4 0.4 1.4 <0.1
Silver 2.5 2.4 3.0 2.7 2.8 4.3 5.0 4.3 4.2 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.0 3.4 2.7 2.9 3.0 3.5
Tin 72 67 87 86 82 91 88 89 89 88 89 85 84 92 72 94 82 92
Zinc 0.07 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 0.03 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 0.27 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 0.97 <0.05

54 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 55BRAND Dell Sony Apple Acer HP Toshiba
LAPTOP L01 L0 L0 L04 L05 L0 L0 L0 L0 L10 L11 L1 L1 L14 L15 L1 L1 L1
Sample S0           
Antimony <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1
Bismuth <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Copper 1.9 2.0 1.1 1.1 1.2 9.4 7.6 5.6 25 2.8 17 9.5 1.8 0.9 1.7 1.3 1.0 0.6
Indium <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Lead <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Nickel 0.2 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 0.1 0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 0.3 3.2 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Silver 3.3 3.7 3.8 3.5 3.8 3.7 4.4 3.7 3.1 3.8 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.7 4.4 4.1 4.0 3.4
Tin 95 93 96 93 90 81 86 88 69 89 77 83 90 91 91 94 91 95
Zinc <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 0.12 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05
Sample S0           
Antimony <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1
Bismuth <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Copper 2.1 3.9 0.8 10 6.6 1.6 6.8 1.5 1.3 14 0.9 0.9 0.8 1.3 1.4 0.9 0.8 2.1
Indium <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Lead <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Nickel <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 0.1 <0.1 <0.1 0.5 <0.1 <0.1 5.6 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Silver 3.2 3.3 3.5 3.0 3.3 4.5 4.1 3.7 3.9 2.8 3.4 3.5 3.3 4.5 3.6 3.7 3.6 3.5
Tin 91 93 95 86 89 91 85 93 93 72 93 93 92 92 94 92 90 90
Zinc <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05
Sample S10          
Antimony <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1 <1
Bismuth <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Copper 21 6.8 3.2 41 38 66 58 25 60 24 40 20 19 16 18 12 17 20
Indium <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5 <0.5
Lead <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1
Nickel 0.2 <0.1 0.0 <0.1 <0.1 1.1 1.1 0.7 1.6 0.4 1.8 <0.1 <0.1 <0.1 1.7 2.0 2.2 0.7
Silver 2.3 2.9 3.3 1.7 1.9 1.5 2.2 3.3 1.6 2.4 1.5 2.3 2.1 3.1 3.2 3.0 2.8 2.5
Tin 69 89 93 53 59 29 39 71 35 68 51 76 72 80 77 79 75 74
Zinc <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 <0.05 0.15 0.13 0.05 0.13 0.05 0.08 0.03 <0.05 <0.05 0.08 0.11 0.07 <0.05
Table A2.1  Concentrations of metals in solder samples S01-S10 in all laptops, LTOP01-LTOP18 (mg/kg)

5 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 5Sample # Component Notes
1 Mouse touchpad
2 Mouse button (left) For two Brands (Acer, HP), some laptops were slightly different models and therefore some individual components differ between 
3 Keyboard space bar laptop models of the same make. 
4 Screen surface
5 External casing: plastic casing surrounding mouse touchpad & buttons
6 Ribbon cable (internal); connected to keyboard
7 External casing: plastic casing surrounding screen
8 External casing: outside top casing (reverse of screen)
9(a) External casing: plastic casing inside battery compartment (a) Apple models-large rear plastic casing (battery compartment is metal);
10 cooling fan (internal)
11(b) External casing: casing immediately around keyboard (b) no such material for Sony and Apple models;
12(c) Electrical insulating sheet by cooling fan (c) Apple models-sheet attached to rear plastic casing (#9); Acer models-black sheet inside front casing;
13(d) Electrical insulation sheet (d) no universal material; tested similar materials within different laptop makes & models;
14 Circuit board, base board; motherboard
15(e) Circuit board, base board; memory chips (e) no such material for 2 Dell (LTOP01, LTOP03) and 1 Sony (LTOP05) models;
16(f) Ribbon cable between motherboard and component (flex. circuit board) (f) Dell; flexible PWB motherboard to HDD; Sony flexible PWB motherboard to small PWB; Apple flexible PWB motherboard-DVD drive; 
Acer thin white ribbon on motherboard; HP thin white ribbon on motherboard; Toshiba white ribbon motherboard to small PWB;
17(g) Circuit board, base board; hard drive (g) Apple; different hard drives used (LTOP07-Seagate; LTOP08-09-Toshiba); Acer LTOP12 has different hard drive to other Acers 
tested;
18 Circuit board, base board; under mouse touchpad (h) not analysed for LTOP01 and LTOP018; (i) Sony-PWB with USB sockets; Apple-small PWB linked to motherboard; HP- PWB linking 
DVD drive to motherboard;
19(i) Circuit board, base board; DVD drive
20(j) Circuit board, base board; laptop dependant   (j) Dell-PWB for flash memory card; Sony-PWB for ethernet socket; Apple-small PWB linked to motherboard; Acer-small PWB with 
LEDs; HP-PWB with USB sockets; Toshiba-small PWB linked to motherboard (via #16); 
21 Socket on motherboard for external battery 
22 External battery casing
23(k) Ribbon cable; connected to mouse touchpad PWB, or PWB sample #20 (k) to mouse touchpad PWB (Sony, Apple, HP , Toshiba); PWB sample #20 (Dell, Acer);
24(l) Ribbon cable to component (l) Dell-to PCMCIA card slot; Sony-to headphone socket PWB; Acer-to motherboard; HP-to PWB attached to keyboard plate; Toshiba 
- to small separate  PWB;
25 Plastic socket for pin connector, on motherboard (see #28)
26(m) Plastic socket for memory chip ciruit board (m) Dell-LTOP01 black plastic, LTOP02-03 white plastic; HP-LTOPO14 white plastic, LTOP15-17 black plastic;
27(n) Plastic connector socket for DVD drive (n) Dell and Sony models; plastic connector socket for WLAN CARD;
28(o) Plastic pin connector, fitting into #25 (o) Sony-no pin connector to #25 (direct cable input), different pin connector tested.
29 External power transformer plastic casing
30 Surface of main chip on motherboard
Table A3.1. Samples analysed by X-ray microanalysis (XRF).Appendix : Data from X-ray 
microanalysis (XRF) for all laptops

5 l Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 Greenpeace l Research Laboratories Technical note 06/07 l September 2007 l 5Sample #Dell Sony Apple Acer HP Toshiba
LT01 LT0 LT0 LT04 LT05 LT0 LT0 LT0 LT0 LT10 LT11 LT1 LT1 LT14 LT15 LT1 LT1 LT1
1 2.2 4.6 4.6 5 4.8 0.54
2 1.5  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7  
8 0.68  
9  
10 6.4 6.4 5.9 6.1 4.6 6.1 6.5 6.6 5.3 4.5 6 4.6 6.4 5.0 4.4 5.3 4.7 5.9
11 x x x x x x  
12 3.4 2.4 5.8 2.9 2.8 2.8 2.8  
13 2.8 1.8 1.4 1.9  
14 2.2 1.8 2.4 x 3.2 4.4 2.1 4.0 2.7* 2.9 4.3* 2.0 2.6 2.5 2.8 2.4  
15 x 6.0 x 6.0 x 6.1 4.0 6.1 7.4 8.1 4.2 6.2 6.6 6.4 6.6 
16 2.2 2.1 1.8 2.2 2.3 6.6 6.8 0.2 2.1 2.1 2.4 2.3 2.2 3.5 2.2
17 2.5 2.7 4.7 4.5 1.9 2.4  
18 x 6.0 5.1 0.37 0.16 0.15 0.21 7.3 5.9 4.8 3.9 6.0 5.1 5.4 7.5 x
19 6.2 4.5 3.9 7.0 3.8 6.5 5.6 8.2 8.1 6.1 2.2 2.1 2.7 6.4 4.8  7.7
20 4.7 2.1 5.7 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.4 7.5 8.0 5.6 6.4 2.1 2.5 2.4 2.1  
21 8.3 7.9 8.5 6.9 7.6 9.9 8.0 8.6 8.4 8.8 8.8 8.1 9.5 8.3 8.5 9.2
22 0.64 1.4 1.4  
23 0.58 0.79 0.96 1.1 4.3 3.2 1.2 2.1 1.6 1.5 2.4 1.8
24 2.3 2.8 2.7 x x x x 2.2 3.0 1.5 x 2.3 2.6 3.7 1.3 1.7
25 10 8.4 9.3 6.3 6.4 6.4 7.4 7.3 10 7.5 6.5 6.0 7.0 6.2 6.3 8.7
26 0.26  
27 0.2  
28 5.6 4.7 3.7 9.4 9.3 6.1 4.5 6.3 7.4 4.8
29 0.57 2.8 0.18 0.32
30 0.3 0.35 0.33 0.38 0.38 0.34 0.33 0.30 0.30 0.36 0.28 0.33 0.35 0.39 0.42 0.29 0.36
Table A3.2. Results of analyses of samples 1-30 from all laptops (LT01-LT18) by X-ray microanalysis (XRF) showing surface concentrations of bromine; 
empty cells indicate bromine was not detected above method detection limits (0.1%);  ‘ x’ sample not present or not analysed, * data from XRF analysis 
of ground sample

Greenpeace International
Ottho Heldringstraat 5, 
1066 AZ Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands
t +31 20 718 2000 
f +31 20 514 8151
www.greenpeace.org
JN057Greenpeace is 
an independent 
global campaigning 
organisation that acts 
to change attitudes 
and behaviour, to 
protect and conserve 
the environment and 
to promote peace.
©Greenpeace/Rose