# Archivo original: trading-away-our-oceans.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:42:05 -03 2025

Trading Away Our Oceans
Why trade liberalization of fisheries must be abandon ed©Greenpeace/Davison

Trading Away Our Oceans
Why trade liberalization of fisheries must be abandon ed
©Greenpeace/Newman
©Greenpeace/Behring ©Greenpeace/Gleizes

3
Trading Away Our Oceans - repor t
Why trade liberalization of fisheries must be abandon ed
“The Earth and the fullness of it belongs to every generation, and the preceding one can have no right to
bind it up from posterity .”- Adam Smith, 1766 Lecture on Jurisprudence©Greenpeace/Åslund

Published by: Greenpeace Intern ation al,Ottho Heldringstraat 5,1066 AZ Amsterdam, Nether lands
Author: Marc Allain, Geneva,marcallain@sjm a.net
Editors: Daniel Mittler ,Karen Sack, Jürgen Knirsch, Sari Tolvanen,and Sebastian Losada
Contact: daniel.mittler@int.greenpeace .org
Date: Januar y 2007
Design: Nicole Post,design BNO,Zandvoor t,Nether lands 
4

Trading Away Our Oceans
5Executiv e Summ ary
Introduction 
Counting paper fish
Tracking wild capture production 
Global discard volumes
BOX 1:The reliability of Chinese production statistics
The health of commercial fish stocks
The ecological impact of over-fishing
World Trade in fish and fish products
Expor ts
Impor t values
Trade flows
BOX 2:In a superm arket near you:Norw egian cod “Product of China”
The WTO and the Doha Round
The main issues in the NAMA negotiations
- Tariff reduction through “harmonization”
- Elimin ating binding overhang or "the water in the tariffs”
- Binding one hundred percent of tariffs 
- Special and differential treatment for developing countries
- Sectoral initiativ es
- Preference erosion
BOX 3:Preference erosion: its impacts on canned tuna
Other Doha Round negotiations affecting fisheries
Non tariff barriers
Tariff levels on fish and fish products
Tariff rates in the Big Three
- EU tariff rates
- US tariff rates
- Japan ese tariff rates
The NAMA Sectoral initiativ e on Fish and Fish Products
The different interests behind the fish sectoral
The objectiv e of the fish sectoral
Assessing the sectoral process
BOX 4:What’ s next?
The theoretical impact of trade liberalization 
Tariff liberalization’ s impact on wild capture fisheries
Tariff liberalization’ s impact on aquaculture
BOX 5:One person's "trash" is another person's dinner    
BOX 6:Thailand’ s environment: the long-term loser!
The lived experience of liberalizations past
Maurit ania: a case study in impoverishing growth
BOX 7:Feeling the NAMA squeeze in the Philippin es
Argentin a:a case study in the extern alization of costs
Senegal: a case study in conflicting demands
Conclusion
References
List of Acron yms
Appendix I 
Selected Greenpeace papers and press releases on the Doha Round 2003-2006 content
7
9
11
11
12
14
16
17
19
19
21
21
23
25
26
26
26
26
26
27
27
29
30
30
32
32
33
33
34
34
34
36
37
38
40
40
42
42
44
47
47
50
51
54
58
62
68
70
70

6©Greenpeace/Gleizes
©Greenpeace/Sutton-Hibbert
© Greenpeace/Grace

Under the World Trade Organization’s 
currently suspended Doha Development
Round negotiations, tariffs on fish and fish
products are to be significantly reduced and
perhaps even eliminated. The stated 
rationale for this undertaking is that trade
in fish is both important to developing
countries and that they would benefit from
further liberalization.
In this paper , Greenpeace draws on 
published studies by the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD), the European Union and the
United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) to show that further liberalization
of trade in fish and fish products, 
particularly through the reduction/
elimination of tariffs, will only bring lasting
economic benefits to a handful of 
developed, fish-exporting countries that
have relatively well-established domestic
fisheries management regimes. These 
countries should, ifthey have the political
will, be able to withstand the pressure to
increase supply beyond sustainable levels
that tariff reduction/elimination will
undoubtedly unleash. But they will be the
only ones.
Outside of this handful of beneficiar y 
countries no other countries will benefit
because the minimum conditions for mutual
benefit – effective fisheries management at
the exporting and importing end - simply do
not exist. 
UNEP case studies of the impacts of past
fish trade liberalization in three countries
(Mauritania, Argentina and Senegal)
demonstrate that market liberalization in
fish is particularly harmful for the
economies, societies and conser vation of
stocks of developing countries with weak
fisheries management regimes, a situation
which is sadly characteristic of most of the
world. 
Greenpeace concludes that further fish
trade liberalization will only worsen the
“impoverishing growth” that developing
countries suffered through the 1980s and
1990s as a result of World Bank and
International Monetar y Fund (IMF)
imposed structural adjustment programs,
and will accelerate already severe rates of
fisheries resource depletion. While tariffreductions for fish and fish products may
well bring short-ter m boosts in some 
developing countries export earnings, as the
last vestiges of their high-value marine
resources are scooped up for export, the
margins for doing so are very tight. The
current rates of exploitation on most 
high-value export stocks are already far
beyond sustainable levels. 
The most likely scenario under current 
conditions is that developing countries will
deplete what is left of their wildfish 
biomass, increasing the already 
considerable loss of both genetic and 
biological diversity in the process and erode
the very basis of sustainable use: a healthy
and productive marine ecosystem. For 
consumers in the developing world, fish
prices will rise as more of the national 
fishing effort is diverted to fishing for
export species, leading to less supply of
locally fished and consumed pelagics.
Globally , liberalization will also increase
pressure to divert food from the plates of
the third world’s poor to fishmeal 
processing in order to supply unsustainable
forms of salmon and shrimp aquaculture
that will get a boost from tariff 
liberalization.
In geographic terms there will likely be a
shift in production especially in canned
tuna to South-East Asia from African,
Caribbean and Pacific countries (ACP
countries). African countries in particular
will be affected by preference erosion as
they lose the trade preferences associated
with the Lomé and Cotonou agreements
between the EU and ACP countries. Under
this scenario, Bangkok is expected to
become the uncontested hub of the 
international canned tuna trade. 
Even importing OECD countries that 
benefit from the inadequate, lax or 
non-existent resource management regimes
in developing countries could see further
liberalization negatively impact their own
fisheries. Faced with the competition from
cheaper imports their domestic fleets are
likely to respond by fishing harder on
already depleted or threatened stocks
unless they can shift their surplus capital
(vessels) and labor to other uses; which is
highly unlikely given past experience.Executiv e Summ ary
7

While consumers in developed countries
should see some short-ter m economic 
benefits in terms of less expensive seafood,
these will be short-lived because further 
liberalization will only accelerate resource
depletion through continued over-fishing -
especially in developing countries - leading
to higher prices in the medium to long term
as global supplies diminish.
The paper concludes that the international
legal responsibility for countries to police
themselves and to ensure that their fleets
and corporations fish responsibly are
already spelled out in numerous 
international legal instruments that are
largely ignored. These include the UN Fish
Stocks Agreement, the FAO Code of
Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, and the
World Summit on Sustainable
Development’s Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation . At the very least, untilsuch time as these instruments are 
universally adhered to and enforced, it
would be irresponsible for the members of
the WTO to engage in further liberalization
on fish and fish products. For these 
reasons, Greenpeace believes the Non
Agricultural Market Access (NAMA) 
negotiations must remain suspended, and
tariff liberalization for fisheries removed
from bilateral and regional trade 
agreements.
Instead of pursuing further liberalization,
states should ensure existing international
law is implemented fully and establish new
rules to ensure sustainable and equitable
management of the high seas. Further more,
developing countries must be provided with
the capacity and know -how to establish and
enforce effective fisheries management
regimes in their own waters. 
8©Greenpeace/Davison

Introduction
On July 24,2006, after nearly five years of talks, the World Trade Organization (WTO)
suspended its negotiations to liberalize world trade in a wide range of products from
agriculture to industrial goods.
The negotiations collapsed under the combined weight of United States and EU 
intransigence. The US refused to budge on its massive domestic subsidies for large 
farmers, and joined the European Communities (EC) to demand that developing countries
rapidly open up their markets by slashing tariff protection. EU and US disagreed about
who should move and developing countries concluded that what was on the table was not
acceptable. Negotiations between key gover nments therefore collapsed on July 24thand
WTO Director -General Pascal Lamy suggested the suspension of the Round. On July 27,
2006, the WTO General Council took notice of this recommendation. Since then, the 
negotiations launched at the WTO Ministerial meeting in Doha in 2001, have been 
officially on ice – though informal discussions continue between key countries and there
were moves towards a partial resumption of the Round in November 2006 (Khor , 2006a).
Because of the impact that trade has on the environment and sustainable development
Greenpeace has followed the Doha Round closely and intervened repeatedly to highlight
the contradictions between the WTO’s free trade rhetoric and the reality of environmental
degradation and destr uction that all too often accompanies trade liberalization.1
This paper shows the real and negative conser vation and development impacts of trade 
liberalization in fish and fisher y products, which were included in the catch-all scope of
the Doha Round’s Non-Agricultural Market Access (NAMA) negotiations. It shows how
further liberalization will speed up the pace of over-fishing, further increase unsustainable
aquaculture production, and have generally devastating consequences for fish, the wider
marine environment, developing countries and the one billion poor people worldwide who
depend on fish as their primar y source of protein. The evidence for this from case studies
and projections carried out by different organizations is overwhelming. 
The combination of tariff reductions and weak fish management and enforcement regimes
will inevitably lead to over-fishing and the exhaustion and collapse of many of the world’s
wild fish stocks. In the marine environment, trade liberalization will hasten the already
significant losses of biological and genetic diversity caused by more than five decades of
large-scale industrial over-fishing; while on dry land it will exacerbate poverty and 
insecurity for the millions of poor people who depend on the wild fisher y for their food and
livelihoods. 
Greenpeace believes that the suspension of the Doha Round negotiations is an opportunity
to avert these disasters, by taking the negotiations on fish and fish products out of the
WTO and putting them where they should have been all along: in multilateral fora, where
commercial and trade interests do not dominate and where, ideally , sustainability and the
protection of the environment are the focus of discussions.
9
© Greenpeace/Gleizes1 See list of previous Greenpeace papers on the Doha Round in Appendix I.

10©Greenpeace/Grace
©Greenpeace/Gleizes©Greenpeace/MacColl

Counting paper fish
Tracking wild capture production
The challenging task of keeping track of the global amount of fish that gets taken out of
the oceans every year, and estimating the health of the commercial stocks that remain, is
part of the mandate of the Fisheries Department of the Rome-based United Nation’s Food
and Agriculture Organisation (FAO). The FAO maintains a time series on fisheries 
production that goes back to 1950, the point at which it is generally acknowledged 
industrial fishing began its rapid spread around the globe.2
The FAO’s data shows that industrial fishings’ impact on world fisheries production was
immediate. From 1950 to 1970 landings of wild marine fish more than tripled and by the
late 1980s they increased by another 40 percent. (See Figure 1)
While recent concer ns about the reliability of Chinese data could change the overall 
outlook (see Box 1), this data suggests that since the late 1980s landings have leveled off
and fluctuated between 77 and approximately 87 million metric tons (FAO Review , 2005).
This is not an encouraging trend. Despite repeated calls for a global reduction in fishing
capacity , the number of large-scale fishing vessels (above 100 gross tons) has remained
stable at around 24,000 since the 1990s and several nations, particularly in Asia, 
continue to build (and subsidize) new industrial vessels3(High Seas Task Force, 2006).
During this time fishing efficiency has improved tremendously , thanks to technological
advances in Global Positioning Systems (GPS), under water imager y and aerial and/or
satellite location of fish stocks. Moreover , on the high seas and in the poorly controlled
waters of many nations virtual open access conditions exist. The fact that fisheries 
production is not increasing under these conditions strongly suggests that global catch
rates are falling, a sure sign of an overall decline in fisheries productivity and of 
over-fishing.
The global profile of the reported landings of marine-capture fisheries, however , is only a
partial picture of the amount of wild fish that is taken out of the oceans each year. There
11100,000,000Figure 1.
World Capture fisheries landings 1950-2004
Source: FAO - Figis 2006
80,000,000
60,000,000
40,000,000
20,000,000
0
1950
1954
1958
1962
1966
1970
1974
1978
1982
1986
1990
1994
1998
2002MT
2Before the Second World War industrial fishing was constrained by the ability to conser ve its catch at sea. All this
changed after the War as advances in refrigeration technology allowed vessels to remain on prime fishing grounds for
extended periods of time. The conversion of wartime sonar to fish-finding also made it a lot easier to locate large con-
centrations of fish (Warner, 1977). The legal environment of the time also allowed foreign countries to fish up to three
nautical miles from a countr y’s shore, thereby giving them free access to some of the richest fishing grounds in the
world.
3Between 2001 and 2003, 51 large-scale fishing vessels were launched from Taiwanese shipyards for clients around
the world (High Seas Task Force, 2006). While in Vietnam a French firm announced in June 2005 that it would build
400 new deep-sea fishing vessels to “help increase the efficiency of offshore fishing” (Thanh Nien News, 2005).

are two other significant contributions to global fishing: discarding4- the fishing 
industr y’s practice of catching and dumping fish and other animals while at sea - and the
amount of fish taken by Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing. According to
conser vative estimates IUU fishing (also known as pirate fishing) amounts to a market
value of US$ 9 billion annually (High Seas Task Force 2006). While some estimates 
suggest that IUU fishing could account for 25 percent of the total global catch, there is
no consensus on the amount of fish caught by IUU activities (FAO, 2002a). 
However , a recent FAO study provides new estimates on global discards of unwanted fish
catch. 
Global discard volumes
In 1994 the FAO first estimated that the fishing industr y likely discarded some 27 million
metric tons of fish a year. This figure was subsequently downwardly revised to 20 million
metric tons based on changing assumptions about industr y practices. The latest estimate
significantly reduces the overall amount.
According to an FAO report released in 2005 the global fishing industr y is now likely
dumping or “discarding” 8 to 8.35 million metric tons of marine life at sea, or the 
equivalent of 10 percent of what reportedly gets brought to shore.5While the FAO says
the trend in discards volumes was downward in the 1990s it now believes they have
increased by 10 to 15 percent in recent years, following increases in the amount of shrimp
trawling (Kelleher , 2005). 
This is because shrimp and groundfish trawl fisheries (bottom trawling) are by far the
worst offenders and account for 50 percent of the total discard volume. Tropical shrimp
trawl fisheries top the list with an estimated 27 percent of the total estimated discards,
and the foreign shrimp fleets fishing in the waters of Mauritania and Senegal have some
of the highest rates (Kelleher , 2005).
12Figure 2.
Catches (‘000 MT) by US Gulf of Mexico Shrimp fleet 2002/03
Source: Harrington at al
Landings Discards
4Discarding involves both targeted and non-targeted species or by-catch, which can include large volumes of seabirds
in the case of long lining.
5Besides changes in the methodological approach to estimating discards, the reasons given for the sharp drop in the
volume of estimated discards from the late 1990s to today are that the fishing industr y, particularly in Asia, is 
retaining more by-catch for both aquaculture and human consumption, fishing gear has become more selective, there
are better management measures and there has been a supposed decline in intensity of fishing for species with high
discard rates (Kelleher , 2005).0100200300400500

©Greenpeace/HoffordThe highest volume of discards of any single fisher y in the world, however , belongs to the
US Gulf of Mexico shrimp trawl fisher y. Despite the mandator y use of turtle excluder
devices (TEDs), this fleet each year discards an estimated 480,000 metric tons of 
snappers, emperors and many other species, i.e. an amount surpassing the total annual
reported landings of a countr y like Senegal in recent years. (See Figure 2).
In the groundfish industr y the Argentine hake trawl fisher y stood out, discarding an 
estimated annual average of 150.000 metric tons in the 1990s.
It is useful to remember some of these examples because, as will be shown below , during
the 1990s the fisheries in Mauritania, Senegal and Argentina were all stimulated to the
point of over-fishing by preferential tariff treatment in the EU market.
13

14BOX 1
The reliability of Chinese production statistics
In 2002, the FAO began to separate Chinese production data from the rest of the world’s,
based on concer ns that Chinese capture fisher y and aquaculture production statistics had
been overestimated for the last decade (FAO, 2002; FAO, 2004). Confidence in the
Chinese data is important because the sheer magnitude of its reported landings has an
impact on the global landings picture. 
Beginning in the mid-1980s China began to report impressive year over year increases in
its fisheries production and in the 1990s became the world’s dominant fishing nation. In
1998 it reached the apex of this growth when it reported 17.2 million metric tons of 
landings from marine and inland capture fisheries (see Figure 3), roughly 20 percent of
the world’s total. 
The Chinese data was suspicious because it was out of sync with the performance of 
other fisheries around the world. One hypothesis is that the Chinese officials who were 
responsible for both monitoring fisheries production and increasing it were 
misrepresenting the data to increase their possibilities of promotion (Watson & Pauly,
2001). The Chinese gover nment seemed to recognize this problem and in 1998 declared a
zero growth policy for its capture fisheries, and landings have remained roughly at the
1998 levels ever since (Watson & Pauly, 2001; FAO, 2002;, Fishstat Plus, 2006).
By substituting corrected data for that reported by the Chinese gover nment, researchers
outside of the FAO contend that global catch trends, instead of growing and then 
stabilizing, have declined annually by 360.000 metric tons since 1988. This global trend
increases to 660,000 metric tons when Peruvian anchovy catches are also removed from
the global statistics because of the distorting effect that their large volumes have on world
production figures (Watson & Pauly, 2001).
While the steady trend of falling fisheries production remains theoretical, a recent Chinese
press report indicates that domestic Chinese fisheries production is in serious difficulty . If
this situation is generalized and begins to show up in forthcoming reports on Chinese 
landings then the global trends in fisheries production will soon change for the worse. 
In mid August 2006 the Shanghai Daily reported that fisher y production in the East
China Sea dropped 35 percent from 2001 to 2005 because of over-fishing and pollution.
The report cited data released by the Zhoushan Fisher y Bureau that the annual catch
dropped from over 1.3 million tons in 2001 to 980,000 tons in 2005, and that the quality
of the fish species caught had degraded. According to the news report, in the past this
fisher y was one of China’s most productive, providing 10 percent of its total catch.
Eighty-one per cent of the sea area has now been rated categor y four for pollution, the
second worst of five pollution grades, and an expansion from 53 percent rated categor y
four in 2000. The over-fishing was largely attributed to China’s deep-sea fleet returning to
coastal waters because of conflicts with Japan and Korea over fishing grounds, and
because of restrictions placed on fishing due to the proliferation of undersea fib-optic and
electricity cables and oil pipelines in the Zhoushan fisher y (Shanghai Daily, August 17,
2006).Figure 3.
Chinese fisheries landings in metric tonnes
Source: FAO - FISHST AT + 2006
0
1950 1956 1962 1968 1974 1980 1986 1992 1998 20045,000,00010,000,00015,000,00020,000,000China

15©Greenpeace/ Gleizes©Greenpeace/ Gleizes
©Greenpeace/Hofford

The health of commercial fish stocks
In addition to its global data on fisheries production the FAO also provides a biennial
assessment of the state of the world’s commercial fish stocks. Out of a total of 584 stock
“items” in its database in 2005 it had enough information to offer an opinion on the level
of exploitation for 441 (FAO, 2005). As has been the case in past years, the most recent
news on the state of the main commercial fish stocks is dismal.
• Fifty-two percent of the commercial stocks assessed are considered fully 
exploited i.e. with no room for further expansion.
• Another 25 percent of the stocks are in even worse shape: 17 percent are 
over-exploited, 7 percent are depleted and 1 percent is recovering. 
• Of the remaining commercial stocks, only 3 percent are under -exploited and 20 
percent moderately so. 
This last categor y of under- and moderately exploited stocks provides the only room for
any future expansion of wild fisheries production. However , there are reasons why these
stocks are under -exploited. They are often fish of little commercial value.
The long-ter m trends and overall patter ns underscore the unsustainability of current 
production: 
• By the mid-1970s the number of “undeveloped” fisheries, i.e. fisheries with low 
initial catches fell to zero. (FAO,2005)
• The trend in stocks offering potential for expansion has been heading clearly 
downward, decreasing from 40 percent in 1970 to 24 per cent in the early 
2000s. (See Figure 4)
• The proportion of over-exploited stocks has been going in the other direction, 
increasing from about 10 percent in the mid-1970s to close to 25 percent in the 
2000s. (See Figure 4)
160%10%20%30%40%50%60%Figure 4.
Global trends in world stocks state of exploit ation: 1974-2004
Source: FAO,2005
1970
Undere xploited + Moderately exploited
Fully exploited
Overexploited + Depleted + Reco vering1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2000

The ecological impact of over-fishing
Calculating and tracking the evolution of global fisheries production and assessing the
state of commercial stocks are important but they are not a reflection of the overall 
ecological health of our oceans. The data collected is only related to those species that are
commercially important and therefore gives us only a partial perspective of what is 
happening in the marine environment, i.e. what is happening to those species that have
commercial value.
But fishing has an ecological impact much beyond the performance of commercial stocks.
Because of the huge amounts of biomass that it removes from the oceans, the species that
it catches and dumps back in the water because they are damaged, too small or have little
or no commercial value, and the damage that it does to marine habitat, fishing is having a
devastating overall impact on ocean ecosystems.  
In fact, intensive over-fishing the world over has been, for some time now, fundamentally
altering eco-systems. This is something that the smooth graphs and time series that plot
reported landings don’t show. 
By severely depleting dominant predator species like groundfish, the fishing industr y 
creates the conditions that stimulate the growth in abundance of species lower on the food
web thereby generating new prey-predator relationships and establishing new dominant
species; situations that may be impossible to reverse.
Ironically , this can at times be beneficial to the fishing industr y - as happened off the
coast of Canada, where cod was fished to commercial extinction and replaced in the
ecosystem by an increased abundance of commercially more valuable crab and shrimp. 
However , there is no predicting what effects over-fishing will produce in a given 
eco-system. A recent study off the coast of Namibia indicates that jellyfish can thrive and
come to dominate a heavily over-fished ecosystem and become impossible to dislodge
because they are predator y on fish eggs and strong competitors for fish food.
The scientists who have documented this phenomenon refer to it as the ultimate “end
point” of fishing down the food web: an ecosystem dominated by jellyfish, a species 
formerly low on the food chain, with no predators and no commercial value that comes to
rule over an ecosystem where previously dominant pelagics or demersal species have been
severely depleted by over-fishing (Lyman et al, 2006).
17
©Greenpeace/ Newman

© Greenpeace/Behring-Chisholm© Greenpeace/Sutton-Hibbert
©Greenpeace/Sutton-Hibbert
18

19World Trade in fish and fish products
Expor ts
Fish is a highly traded commodity . In volume terms approximately 37 percent of world
production (capture and aquaculture combined) is traded internationally (Lem, 2006).
Measured in export values, world trade in fish and fish products reached $71 billion (US)
in 2004, about nine times the nominal values of 1976.6By comparison, international beef
exports for the same year were only 18.3 billion US$ (COMTR ADE, 2006).
The bulk of fish exports come from the EU and nine individual fish-exporting countries
(See Figure 4). The EU remains by far the largest exporter with 34 percent of total
export value7, followed by China at 9 percent, Thailand and Norway at 6 percent, Canada
and the US at 5 percent, Viet Nam, Chile and Taiwan each at 3 percent and Indonesia at
2 percent (Lem, 2006).  
Trade value by species shows that shrimp and salmon account for 27 percent of all traded
values (18 percent and 9 percent respectively)8followed by groundfish at 11 percent, tuna
at 8 percent, and cephalopods, small pelagics and combined fishmeal and oil each at 5
percent. All other species combined account for 34 percent of total value (Lem, 2006).  Figure 4.
Top 10 Fish Expor ters US$ 2002
EUChina
Thailand NorwayUSACanada
VietnamChileTaiwanIndonesia14,000,000
12,000,000
10,000,000
8,000,000
6,000,000
4,000,000
2,000,000
0
6Because of inflation nominal increases in values do not reveal much. To get an accurate picture of the evolution of
the real value of fish exports during this time they would have to be expressed in deflated constant dollar terms as a
value per ton; an exercise beyond the resources of this study . 
7This provides some of a distorted picture since much of what is exported by one EU countr y is imported by another
EU neighbour (Lem, 2006).
8It is not possible to get a breakdown of wild versus farmed exports. However , farmed shrimp represents 
approximately 25 percent of global shrimp production (Tacon, 2002) and is assumed to be largely exported. Neither is
it possible to distinguish exports of wild from farmed salmon but since farmed salmon is a moderate- to high-value
export commodity it can be assumed to contribute significantly to export values.
©Greenpeace/Sutton-Hibbert

Since 1995, developing countries have accounted for roughly half of all export values,
increasing their share steadily from 1976 when they claimed a little less than 37 percent. 
They have achieved this greater share of world fish export value by significantly increasing
their export volume. In 1976 developing countries exported just over 2.5 million metric
tons of fish and fish products, less than half the 5.39 million metric tons exported by
developed countries. 
As Figure 5 shows, the volume of developing countr y exports has risen steadily over the
last 30 years, reaching 15.1 million metric tons in 2004; a six-fold increase over 1976
levels. 
While the nominal value and the overall volume of developing countr y fish exports have
increased sharply since the 1970s, their relative value has declined steadily in recent years
(See Figure 6). In 1976 a ton of developing countr y exports expressed in US dollars was
worth 20 percent more than the value of developed countr y exports using the same 
measure. In 1984, this spread reached a high of 28.4 percent. Except for a couple of
years in the early 1990s, the relative value of developing countr y exports per ton
remained higher than that of developed countries until 1999 when this began to change.
The relative value of developing countr y fish exports declined steadily in 2002, 2003 and
2004 when they were worth 10.4 percent less per ton than developed countr y exports.
There are several possible explanations for this but what is clear is that developing 
countries are now getting a lot less value per ton for their fish exports than developed
countries, a complete reversal of the situation in the mid-1970s. This gap is larger than it
has ever been and it is increasing.
One of the sad ironies of international fish trade is that exports are particularly important
for some of the poorest countries in the world; those that classif y for the FAO’s 
Low-income Food-Deficit Countr y categor y (LIFDC).9In recent years, these countries 
collectively exported 20 percent of the value of all fisher y products. In 2003, this was
estimated at 13 billion US$. Their imports being much lower (4 billion US$ in 2003) this
created a very healthy surplus in their fish trade, which contributed positively to an overall
negative balance of payment situation (FAO, 2005a). 
20Figure 5.
World fish export volume1976
1979
1982
1985
1988
1991
1994
1997
2000
200305,000,00010,000,00015,000,00020,000,000
Developed
Developing
Figure 6.
World fish export value per ton
1976 1980 1984 1988 1992 1996 2000 200400,511,522,53
Developed
DevelopingThousands US$
9LIFDC is an FAO categor y that classifies countries according to three criteria: i) countries must have a per capita
income below the World Bank level for deter mining eligibility for overseas development assistance (1. 465 US$ in
2003), ii) the net balance of food trade for a broad basket of food stuffs and iii) a self exclusion criteria. In 2005 there
were 82 countries on the list including most of Africa and large parts of Asia (FAO, no date).

However , as the case studies of Mauritania and Senegal will show below , what has been
good for balance of payments has not been good for the state of fish stocks, food security
or the interests of the poor in these countries.
Impor t values
Unlike fish exports, which are more broadly distributed between countries, fish imports
are highly concentrated. Three big developed countr y markets, Japan, the US and the EU,
collectively garner almost 75 percent of all imports. The remaining developed countries
take another 13 percent, leaving all developing countries with the relatively small 12 
percent share of the value of overall imports (Melchior , 2006). While developing countries
collectively account for a relatively small percentage of total world imports values, their
import volumes tend to be higher , reflecting that developing countr y imports are mostly of
lower value pelagics (Ahmed, 2006).
As Figure 7 shows, in 2004 Japan’s imports were worth 14.6 billion US$, the US’s 12
billion US$ and the EU’s 29.4 billion US$. 
Trade flows
As mentioned above fish imports are highly skewed towards developed countries.
According to a recent analysis (Ahmed, 2006) about half of this trade is between 
developed countries themselves (North – North) while an equivalent amount (South -
North) flows from souther n countries into the rich markets of the (mostly) norther n 
developed world. Trade in the other direction (North - South) makes up only about 6.5
percent of global trade and trade between developing countries (South - South) makes up
the remaining 8.5 percent.10
Trade in fish products follows a rich-countr y-poor -countr y dynamic because high quality
fisheries products are becoming increasingly expensive and in many cases luxur y food
items. Essentially , high value products like crab, lobsters, shrimp, prawns and tuna, fresh
and frozen groundfish, mollusks and cephalopods (octopus) are shipped to rich countr y
markets, while low value products (relatively inexpensive pelagics to feed people and to
produce fish meal and oil to feed the burgeoning aquaculture industr y) flow from the
North to the South and between developing countries (Ahmed, 2006).
While on the surface (and using traditional accounting methods) this flow of international
fish trade provides a very healthy net fish trade surplus of more than 20 billion US$
(2004) for developing countries (Lem, 2006), it comes at a tremendous cost, as they have
in many , many cases dangerously over-fished their stocks to meet developed countr y
demand. In the process, they have endangered both their food security and their future
earning capacity . Ironically , this patter n also repeats the havoc wreaked by developed
21Figure 7.
Value of Worlds Fish Impor ts (2004)
Source: Lem, 2006
All others 26%Japan 19%
USA 16%
EU 39%
10The Ahmed figures are based on 2002 trade figures, which show developed countries
having an 85 percent share of imports. The Melchior figures (88 percent) do not indicate a
date, but are likely for a later year.

countries on their own fish stocks – the reason why their distant water fishing fleets are
now increasingly exploiting the last remaining under -exploited fisheries on the high seas
and off the coasts of poor developing nations.  
Estimating the costs of over-fishing to a countr y and society does not appear to be of
interest or concer n to mainstream economics, even though these costs are real and
increasingly evident in falling employment, reduced earnings from fishing and lost future
opportunities, as more and more countries experience drastic declines in fish stocks and
stock collapses. Yet estimates can be made. As shown below (see page 53), a cost/benefit
analysis of the Argentine fisher y estimates that over-fishing the countr y’s hake resources
constituted a social loss for future generations of 3.5 billion US$ over 30 years. Had the
resource been managed sustainably - simply by respecting the total allowable catch quotas
- it could have instead generated a net benefit of 5 billion US$. (See case study Argentina
below; UNEP , 2002)
This kind of costs/benefits accounting of international trade has yet to be done on a larger
scale, yet the evidence of unsustainable fishing levels continues to mount especially in
developing countries. Most developing countries are ill-equipped to monitor and control
resource extraction in their coastal waters - either that of their domestic artisanal and
industrial fleets or those of foreign boats fishing either legally or illegally in their waters.
Consequently , they are witnessing the rapid depletion of their fishing resources even as
their share of international trade grows. The declining value per ton of their exports 
relative to that of developed countries is perhaps an indication that the benefits of this
strategy are short-lived.
22 ©Greenpeace/Gleizes ©Greenpeace/Gleizes

BOX 2
In a superm arket near you:
Norw egian cod “Product of China”
In 2002 China overtook Thailand to become the world’s largest single exporter of fish and
fisheries products, with 4.5 billion US$ in exports. At the same time, China moved into
8thposition on the list of the world’s largest fish importers (Lem, no date). 
China’s imports and exports, however , are becoming increasingly linked as it emerges as
the dominant player in the secondar y processing of fisher y products, particularly in the
highly globalized trade in groundfish. By the early 2000s an estimated 25 to 30 percent
of the world’s headed and gutted groundfish was being shipped to China for further 
processing (Rowe, 2002) in what has become known as the “twice frozen” market.  
The process works like this: industrially fished groundfish (e.g. cod from the Barents Sea
or Alaskan Pollock) are headed, gutted and frozen at sea, sold and shipped to Chinese 
processing firms which then thaw, fillet, package and refreeze the fish for re-export
labelled as a Chinese or combined China/countr y of origin product. Because of its low-cost
labour , large and moder n processing facilities and its ability to meet the most rigorous
food safety standards China is likely to dominate the global groundfish sector in the very
near future if it hasn’t already done so. 
Traditional developed countr y groundfish producers simply cannot compete with the
Chinese costs of converting round fish to a finished product. As a result, Chinese firms
have driven up the price of round groundfish in the open market because they can afford
to pay more given their comparative advantage in overall costs. This has led to closures of
traditional groundfish plants in countries like Canada and Norway (Rowe, 2002), which -
under one of the ironies of globalisation - are often much, much closer than China to the
grounds where the fish is caught in the first place. The ecological costs of transporting
frozen fish around the globe and back are obviously not factored into this equation. 
23
©Greenpeace/Ger main

24©Greenpeace/Newman
©Greenpeace/Grace©Greenpeace/Grace

The WTO and the Doha Round
The World Trade Organization (WTO) was created in 1995 to replace the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which started the process of trade liberalization
after the Second World War.11
The WTO furthers the GATT liberalization process by providing both a forum for the 
negotiation of new rules to liberalize international trade and an unprecedented means to
resolve disputes under existing rules. Because of the breadth of its membership (149
members12), the strength of its rules (WTO rules supercede national legislation) and their
enforceability (all members agree to follow the rules and abide by the decisions of the
WTO’s dispute settlement mechanism) the WTO has become, in its short histor y, the
world’s most power ful international organization (Narlikar , 2005). From Greenpeace’s
perspective, the WTO is increasingly acting as a global gover nance organisation, 
extending its work program to new areas of competence, and thereby frustrating bodies
that possess more appropriate expertise, including some Multilateral Environmental
Agreements (MEAs) (Birdlife International et al, 2005). 
In November 2001, after years of discussions and concerted pressure exerted on 
developing countries, WTO members agreed to launch a series of multi-faceted trade 
negotiations known as the Doha Round (Jawara and Kwa, 2004).
In the lead-up to the launch, developing countries, particularly those from Africa, were
hesitant to engage in new trade negotiations, especially as the commitments made to them
by developed countries in 1994 during the GATT’s Uruguay Round remain(ed) unfulfilled.
Because of intense political and economic pressure, they were eventually forced to 
participate in the Round. Their participation was made somewhat more palatable by the
WTO’s Doha Ministerial declaration, which claimed that developing countr y needs and
interests would be placed “at the heart of the negotiations” (WTO , 2001). 
While the declaration adopted at Doha committed gover nments to undertake a wide range
of negotiations, three areas - agriculture, non-agricultural market access (NAMA) and
services - became the focus of negotiations after 2003.
Under the Non-Agricultural Product Market Access (NAMA) negotiations, which are
often referred to as the negotiations on industrial goods, the members agreed to focus on
tariff reduction in a wide range of products and industries. Product coverage was to be
comprehensive, without a priori exclusions (WTO , 2001; Greenpeace, 2005) and fish and
fish products, like forestr y and mining, were included in the scope of the NAMA 
negotiations process.
The Doha Round was approached as a ‘single undertaking’, i.e. nothing was to be agreed
until everything was agreed. Its goal was to produce at the end of all the negotiations, an
agreed upon single package of new trade measures that would be binding on all members.
Therefore, all strands of the negotiations are linked. This also meant that the stalling of
the agriculture negotiations in July 2006 directly resulted in the suspension of all other
strands of the negotiations, i.e. the entire Round. 
2511GATT was both an agreement (a) and an institution (b). 
a) The agreement: From 1947 to 1994, GATT was the forum for negotiating lower customs duty rates and other trade
barriers; the text of the General Agreement spelt out important rules. The Uruguay Round negotiations (1986–94) led
to a major revision of the original General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) of 1948. Since 1995, the updated
GATT has become the WTO’s umbrella agreement for trade in goods. 
b) The institution: GATT was a de facto “inter national organization” without a proper legal foundation. International
law did not recognize GATT as an organization. See
http://www .wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/inbrief_e/inbr03_e.htm, accessed on October 21, 2006.
12Data for membership as of 1st of December 2006. Viet Nam was set to become the 150th member in januar y
2007.

The main issues in the NAMA negotiations
Although their mandate was wide and specifically included non-tariff measures, the
NAMA negotiations in recent years were essentially a tug-of -war around tariffs fought
between developed and developing countries. Developed countries entered the negotiations
seeking deep and rapid tariff cuts across the board under a zero for zero scenario: 
developed countries proposed to cut their tariffs to zero and expected developing countries
to do the same.13Developing countries by and large resisted this push, seeking to 
maintain tariff protection for existing or future industrialization and to protect vulnerable
sectors of their economies in terms of livelihoods and food security . Given past 
liberalization initiatives and structural adjustment programs, tariffs are often the last
industrial policy instruments left to developing countries. 
The negotiations that followed on tariff reduction focussed on six main issues:
• Tariff reduction through “harmonization”
In the esoteric jargon of trade negotiators, tariff “harmonization” became the means of
achieving the NAMA tariff reduction objective. Harmonization was to significantly narrow
the gaps in tariff rates between developed and developing countries, an exercise which
would have required very large concessions from developing countries given their relatively
higher tariff rates. Tariff harmonization was to be achieved through a tariff reduction 
formula with different coefficients for developed and developing countries. According to
the Doha Declaration less than full reciprocity would be required from developing 
countries; i.e. developing countries were to cut their tariffs by lessthan developed 
countries. However , throughout the negotiations, developed countries pushed for 
coefficients that would result in far more significant tariff cuts for many developing 
countries than developed ones. The Doha Mandate for less than full reciprocity was simply
ignored or re-interpreted as developed nations aggressively pursued market access for
their own industries.
• Elimin ating binding overhang or “the water in the tariffs”
Binding overhang or water in the tariffs refers to the difference between the maximum
tariff rate a countr y has agreed to limit itself to for a given product (known as the bound
rate) and the usually lower applied rate, i.e. the actual tariff rate it imposes on goods
entering the countr y. The differences between the bound and applied rates are quite often
significant for developing countries. Binding overhang therefore becomes an important
consideration when applying across-the-board tariff cuts because if they are applied to
bound levels that are significantly higher than the applied rates the end result is no tariff
reduction in real terms. 
• Binding one hundred percent of tariffs 
Agreeing to bind one’s tariffs (i.e. establish a maximum tariff rate) is considered a 
concession in and of itself because it eliminates a countr y’s flexibility to increase tariffs
beyond a certain level in the future. Many developing countries have high levels of
unbound tariffs. The objective of achieving 100 percent binding became an important issue
in the negotiations as 100 percent binding significantly under mines the flexibility of 
developing countries in their tariff policy , and therefore limits their policy space.
• Special and differential treatment for developing countries
The GATT established the precedent of providing Special and Differential Treatment for
developing countries, especially Least Developed Countries (LDCs) in order to lessen the
impact of the liberalization measures the rest of the world was agreeing to. The Doha
Declaration reaffir med this principle and committed the WTO members to strengthening
special and differential treatment and making it more precise, effective and operational
(WTO , 2001). Once negotiations began, however , developed countries, particularly the US,
seemed to suffer collective amnesia on the application of this principle. Throughout the
Round Special and Differential Treatment was consistently ignored and, as in the case of
tariff reduction, developing countries were consistently under pressure to make greater
concessions than developed ones (Khor , 2006). 
2613The starting US position was that all tariffs in all agricultural and NAMA products should be completely 
eliminated for all countries by 2015.

• Sectoral initiativ es
Sectoral initiatives were the Doha Round’s means of eliminating tariffs completely in 
certain key sectors or products by allowing members to move beyond the formula cuts of
the broader NAMA negotiations. In trade jargon, the sectoral initiatives were aimed at
increasing the level of ambition by fast-for warding liberalization in certain sectors. In the
course of the negotiations, certain parameters were set to guide the sectoral negotiations.
The two main ones were that participation was non-mandator y, and a ‘critical mass’ of
countries representing a significant percentage of world trade in the sector would have to
be achieved for it to be successful (Para 16; Hong Kong declaration, see WTO 2005a). In
the course of the NAMA negotiations seven sectors were identified or proposed by 
members for sectoral initiatives - including one for fish and fisher y products (see page
34).
• Preference erosion
In the course of the NAMA negotiations, the issue of preference erosion became a 
dominant concer n for some of the poorest developing countries,14 known as the ACP
Group. The ACP Group is made up of 79 countries  from Africa, the Caribbean and the
Pacific. Under the Lomé Convention, a preferential trading agreement negotiated with the
European Communities in 1975 and subsequently renewed as the Cotonou Agreement in
2000, these countries received duty-free access to the European market for their goods.15
As a result of these trade accords and accompanying fisheries agreements (see case 
studies of Mauritania and Senegal below), fisheries products now make up a significant
part of the export trade flowing from ACP countries into the EU market.
2714The ACP group consists of 79 members, but only 78 signed the Cotonou agreement. Cuba, becoming the 78th ACP
member in December 2000, is the exception. 
15The Cotonou agreement is the successor to the Lomé Convention, which expired in February 2000 and provided
preferential access to the EU market, as well as development assistance. The Cotonou arrangements are to be 
extended to 31 December 2007 and based on a WTO waiver of 14 November 2001 (see
http://www .wto.org/english/thewto_e/minist_e/min01_e/mindecl_acp_ec_agre_e.htm, accessed on October 21, 2006).
The negotiations leading to the new Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs), the successors of the Cotonou 
agreement, were launched in Brussels on 27 September 2002 and are still ongoing.
©Greenpeace/Behring-Chisholm

From the ACP perspective, the NAMA negotiations are a clear threat, because the 
reduction of tariffs for all WTO members exporting to the EU would under mine the tariff
advantages they have under the Lomé/Cotonou agreements. This holds true especially in
the case of fisheries products, particularly canned tuna (see Box 3). As a result, ACP
countries were reluctant to engage in the NAMA negotiations in general and the fisheries
sectoral in particular and remain so, despite some flexibilities agreed to in 2004, that
would exempt ACP countries from making their own commitments under NAMA (WTO
2004).16
Table 1 below shows examples of some of the main beneficiaries of the preferential
schemes of the EU and Japan for selected fisheries products.
2816See paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Annex B: Framework for Establishing Modalities in Market Access for Non-Agricultural
Products in the Doha Work Programme. Decision Adopted by the General Council on 1 August 2004 (WTO , 2004):
7. ”We recognize that a sectoral tariff component, aiming at elimination or harmonization is another key element to achieving
the objectives of paragraph 16 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration with regard to the reduction or elimination of tariffs, in
particular on products of export interest to developing countries. We recognize that participation by all participants will be
important to that effect. We therefore instruct the Negotiating Group to pursue its discussions on such a component, with a
view to defining product coverage, participation, and adequate provisions of flexibility for developing-countr y participants.”
8. ”We agree that developing-countr y participants shall have longer implementation periods for tariff reductions. In addition,
they shall be given the following flexibility: a) applying less than formula cuts to up to [10] percent of the tariff lines provided
that the cuts are no less than half the formula cuts and that these tariff lines do not exceed [10] percent of the total value of a
Member's imports; or b) keeping, as an exception, tariff lines unbound, or not applying formula cuts for up to [5] percent of
tariff lines provided they do not exceed [5] percent of the total value of a Member's imports.
We further more agree that this flexibility could not be used to exclude entire HS Chapters.” (WTO , 2004)
17 Most Favoured Nation (MFN) status is the duty or tariff treatment that WTO members agree to give other members of the
organization. It is based on the principle of non-discrimination, i.e. that a member will treat all other members equally . The
WTO rules, however , allow for some exceptions to MFN treatment through preferential arrangements under its General
System of Preferences and free trade agreements (see Box 3- Preference erosion).Table 1.
Key fisheries products impor ted under EU preferential schemes (2002)
Product
Frozen shrimp/prawns
Fresh or chilled fillets
Frozen shrimp/prawnsMFN17rate
12%
9%
12%ACP rate
0%
0%
n.a.LDC rate
n.a.
n.a.
0%Main supplier & share of total impor ts
Madagascar (55.3%)
Tanzania (64.6%)
Bangladesh (99.1%)Key fisheries products impor ted under preferential schemes Japan (2002)
Product
OctopusMFN rate
7%GSP rate
0%
Source: UNCTAD,2005Main supplier & share of total impor ts
Mauritania (97.3%)

BOX 3
Preference erosion: its impacts on canned tuna
Agreements that provide developing countries with preferential access to developed 
countr y markets, usually in the form of reduced tariffs, are important elements in 
international trade. One such agreement is the Lomé Convention18signed in 1975 
between the EU and 71 countries from Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific, known as
the ACP group. 
Under this agreement fish and fisheries products enter the EU market duty free. As a
result the ACP share of the overall EU fish market rose from 6.1 percent in 1976, to 9.3
percent in 1986 and 13.2 percent in 1996. The agreement is especially important for
African countries as the EU now absorbs 80 percent of their fish exports (UNEP , 2002b).
Because the NAMA negotiations aim to reduce and in some cases eliminate tariffs 
completely they would, if completed, erode the advantages ACP countries have over 
competitors not covered by the agreement. This process is known as preference erosion
and is a major concer n of ACP countries, especially when it comes to trade in fish 
products. The case of canned tuna shows why.
Since the signing of the Lomé Convention, ACP countries have become important 
suppliers of canned tuna to the EU - now the world’s largest market for canned 
tuna - because they are not subject to the stiff 24 percent duty imposed on their 
competitors. Largely as a result of this agreement, ACP countries account for 56 percent
of all canned tuna entering the EU, with 29 percent coming from South-East Asia
(Thailand and the Philippines) and 12 percent coming from Latin American countries
(mostly Ecuador) under different and less favourable preferential arrangements known as
the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP). 
What is significant about this distribution of market share is that Southeast Asian
exporters are able to garner and maintain such an important portion of the European
market while still paying full duty.19In fact, Asian canned tuna has a slight competitive
advantage over ACP products of 11 euros a ton even after it has cleared customs, and
198 euros a ton over GSP producers.
An analysis of the impact on the European tuna trade of complete liberalization at the end
of the WTO negotiations without any progressiveness (i.e. immediate elimination of tariffs)
shows that there would be an immediate shift in production from ACP countries – mainly
West African - to Asia, principally Thailand, because of the price advantage. 
2918Renewed in 2000 under the Cotonou agreement and now covering 78 ACP countries.
19Canned tuna from Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia faces an initial 12 percent duty on a shared quota of
27.750 mt. Once the quota is filled these countries qualif y for the standard GSP treatment with duty set at 21.5 
percent. Because Thailand out-sources a significant part of its tuna supplies it cannot meet the GSP rules of origin
thereby forcing it into the MFN treatment and duty of 24 percent.
© Greenpeace/Behring-Chisholm

30While the elimination of the 24 percent tariff on canned tuna would result in a drop of 18
percent in the price European consumers would pay for a can of tuna it would result in the
loss of approximately 10,000 jobs (direct and indirect) from the processing industr y in
ACP countries and between 6,000 and 9,000 jobs in Europe dependent on tuna activity .
Production from European tuna boats fishing in ACP waters would likely continue and
result in trans-shipments to Asian canneries which are currently operating at only 
two-thirds capacity . 
Thailand, which is already the world’s largest exporter of canned tuna would become the
new hub for canned tuna production flowing into the EU, with Bangkok at its center . 
Source: Megapesca, 2005.
Other Doha Round negotiations affecting fisheries
In addition to the NAMA process, there are several other negotiations under the umbrella
of the Doha Round that involve fisheries. The WTO’s Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR)
was mandated to negotiate the new rules for the disciplining of fisheries subsidies
(Greenpeace, 2006). Under the General Agreement in Trade in Services (GATS) members
undertook to liberalize services incidental to fishing (Action Aid, 2006). The WTO 
members also undertook to review the Agreement on Sanitar y and Phyto-Sanitar y
Measures (SPS), and the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT). Lastly , the
WTO’s Committee on Trade and the Environment was mandated to start negotiations on
the relationship between existing WTO rules and Multilateral Environmental Agreements
(MEAs) (Adelphi Research et al, 2005).
Non tariff barriers
There were two types of fisheries-related Non Tariff Barriers (NTB) in the WTO 
negotiations: those that relate to food safety under the Agreement on Sanitar y and 
Phyto-Sanitar y Measures (SPS), and those dealing with other kinds of standards under
the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT).
Both agreements promote international harmonization in their respective areas so as to
reduce the obstacles to trade that the proliferation of different standards would engender .
Under the SPS agreement food safety standards have been harmonized considerably . WTO
members base their national measures on the standards and recommendations of the
World Health Organization’s (WHO) Codex Alimentarius Commission (Josupeit, 2005).
As a result, Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) certification has become the
generally accepted requirement for the export of fisheries products. 
This is not only positive from a consumer perspective, as it provides a minimal standard in
food safety , but it can also have beneficial conser vation effects. The HACCP process deals
with identif ying critical contamination points in the handling and processing of food 
products. Because the quality of fish is very much influenced by the freshness of the 
product this can have a positive conser vation effect.
In Mauritania for example, it has been found that concer ns about product quality , linked
to meeting HACCP standards, encourages the more selective techniques (pots, handlines)
of the artisanal sector ’s harvesting of cephalopods as opposed to industrial trawling.
Artisanal fisherpeople get paid a 30 percent premium for their catch, because they are
able to land it either very fresh or still alive. The conser vation impact is significant as the
artisanal sector often employs more selective fishing methods resulting in less by-catch
and discards thus avoiding damage to vital benthic habitats needed to maintain ecosystem
productivity (PNUE, 2006).

31However , the imposition of SPS standards using HACCP has not been without controversy ,
as developing countries’ producers have in some cases had difficulty in making the 
adjustment to HACCP certification, which is technically demanding and costly to 
implement and maintain.20There have also been suggestions that it can be selectively
applied to favour some trade partners over others. Greenpeace firmly believes that global
standards are necessar y for food safety and conser vation and that developed countries
have the responsibility to enable developing countries to meet any access requirements to
their markets. The principle of common but differentiated responsibilities must apply , and
developed countries must ensure that developing countries are enabled to meet global
market requirements. 
The issues related to TBT are much more complex, and moves towards harmonization less
advanced. A critical issue from a conser vation perspective is how the WTO would deal
with such things as eco-labelling. At present, no agreed-upon international standard exists
concer ning the issue of sustainable production processes although the FAO has established
guidelines for the eco-labelling of fish and fisher y products. The WTO rules, in principle,
do not accept that production methods are relevant to the trading of a product. A table is
a table, no matter how it has been produced. This is one of the most basic faults of the
WTO trade system and makes the WTO blind to unsustainable production methods. Labels
informing consumers about how a product has been produced are not recognized by the
WTO as an important public education tool (Greenpeace, 2005). Countries requiring such
labelling therefore face the threat of WTO legal action against them. 
The WTO’s resolution of disputes that have emerged when countries have imposed 
conser vation-based trade restrictions is not encouraging. In 1995, when the US required
that all exporters of wild shrimp demonstrate the use of Turtle Excluder Devices, this
measure was challenged by India, Thailand and Malaysia. The WTO’s Dispute Settlement
Body (DSB) eventually ruled in their favour by finding that the US had not followed WTO
rules, since it had applied its measure in an arbitrar y and discriminator y manner
(Emmerson, 2006).
In the WTO case brought by the United States, Canada and Argentina against the EU’s
restrictions on genetically engineered organisms, the WTO panel simply ignored 
international environmental rules on the trade in genetically engineered organisms. This is
a negative precedent, and could imply that even if there was a global set of 
conser vation-based rules for the world’s oceans, these could simply be ignored by the WTO
(Greenpeace, 2006a).  
In another WTO case brought by the United State and Canada against the EU's ban of
hormones in meat production, the WTO found that the EC import prohibition was 
inconsistent with the SPS Agreement, and refused the EU position that the ban was 
justified on the basis of the precautionar y principle.21
While trade rules are no excuse for countries to not implement existing commitments and
laws – by acting, for example, to halt imports from IUU fishing - in the current policy 
climate, it would certainly be difficult for a countr y to impose trade sanctions on 
unsustainable fisheries imports. 
20One countr y that has had difficulty with HACCP compliance is Bangladesh. In 1997, the EU banned imports of
Bangladeshi shrimp on the basis of non-compliance with HACCP . The ban resulted in severe disruptions and loss for
the Bangladeshi industr y, which were eventually recouped thanks to major investment in establishing the HACCP 
system with the help of the FAO (Rahman, 2001).
21 See WTO Dispute Settlement: Dispute DS26; European Communities - Measures Concer ning Meat and Meat
Products (Hormones). See http://www .wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/cases_e/ds26_e.htm, accessed on October 23,
2006.

Tariff levels on fish and fish products
Getting a hold on the global tariff profile for fish and fish products is not an easy task.
The large number of tariff lines (the EU has by far the highest with 757), the wide range
in applied, bound and unbound rates between countries, added to the existence of 
preferential and free trade agreements makes for such a complex array that it defies
meaningful generalizations. A comprehensive study of the global fish tariff situation 
published by the FAO in 2006 in fact concluded that there was no “single true measure
for the world tariff average for seafood” (Melchior , 2006). 
That being said, the study was able to offer the following conclusions: 
•That in the WTO context, average bound tariffs in seafood are above 30 percent 
but the actual tariff burden faced by importers is more likely around 10 
percent.
•That the WTO’s Most Favoured Nation status (MFN) applied tariffs for seafood 
are higher than tariffs for manufactured goods. 
•That the extent of tariff binding is somewhat lower for seafood than for other 
goods.
•That binding levels are much higher in developed countries than developing. 
High-income countries have on average bound 79 percent of their seafood 
tariffs while low-income countries on average have bound only 43 
percent.
•That there is a lot of water in the fish tariffs so that applied tariffs would only 
be affected if there were considerable reductions in the level of bound 
tariffs.
Tariff rates in the Big Three
Given that tariffs are applied on imports, and approximately 75 percent of global fish
imports are concentrated in three main markets (the EU 39 percent, Japan 19 percent
and the US 16 percent – Figure 7), it is useful to look at the tariff situation that prevails
in these markets since it is tariff schedules there that have the most profound effects on
trade.  
32Source: EU TARIC home pageFigure 8.Selected EU Most Favoured 
Nation tariff lines for seafood
Product %
Lobster frozen in shell excluding whole 
Lobster meat cooked (other) 
Mussels preser ved 
Mussels prepared  
Smoked fish all varieties
Shrimp for further processing < 7000 mt  
>7000 mt
Coldwater shrimp shelled/boiled/frozen
< 500 mt 
> 500 mt
Canned tuna         16
20
20
20
20
13
20
20
0
18
24

EU tariff rates
After the Uruguay Round, the weighted average tariffs on fish products in developed 
countries was 4.5 percent (Lem, no date). This would seem to suggest that tariffs on fish
and fish products in developed countries are relatively low. However , the EU - by far the
world’s largest single market for fish - has a simple average MFN tariff line for fish of
11.8 percent (Melchior , 2006) or more than twice the developed countr y average.
But even this figure does not give a true picture of the tariff protection the EU has around
its fisheries. As Figure 8 shows, the EU has much higher MFN tariffs on many individual
products, with rates of 20 percent on some forms of shrimp, cooked lobster and certain
mussel products. The simple tariff line average therefore can mask what are known as 
tariff peaks (much higher tariffs on certain products) and tariff escalation (increasing 
tariff levels as a product changes through processing). According to one analysis, the EU
has tariff peaks (defined as bound MFN rates over 15 percent) in 128 tariff lines (OECD,
2003).
The practice of tariff escalation is best illustrated by how the EU treats tuna. When it
comes to raw material intended for EU based processors in Spain, France and Italy, tuna
enters the EU market at a zero tariff; the tariff increases to 15 percent for fresh tuna 
fillets, 18 percent for frozen fillets, 22 percent for tuna intended for direct consumption,
and 24 percent for tuna loins and canned tuna (Megapesca, 2005).
US tariff rates
The situation in the US is even more striking. While most fresh and frozen seafood can
enter the US duty free or for a few cents per kilogram, the US practises steep tariff 
escalation by increasing tariffs sharply for processed fish products. 
For example, processed (smoked, dried, salted or in brine) salmon, herring, mackerel and
anchovies all have 25 percent duties. Tariffs are even higher for canned sardines (30 
percent) and canned tuna (35 to 45 percent) (US, 2006). Moreover , the US has not 
hesitated to apply draconian tariff sanctions against importers that threaten certain
domestic producers. In recent years, the US International Trade Commission (US ITC),
responding to complaints from some of its domestic producers, has levied the following
anti-dumping duties on fish and seafood products (USDA , 2005):
•Warm water shrimp : duties of 2.35 to 112 percent on imports from Brazil, 
Ecuador , India, Thailand, China and Viet Nam
•Catfish: duties from 36 percent to 63 percent on imports from Viet Nam, which,
because of another US ITC ruling, is forced to market its products in the 
US under the name of “basa” and “tra”. 
•Salmon : duties ranging from 2.3 to 31 percent on imports from Norway.
•Crawfish: duties of 223 percent on imports from China.
33
©Greenpeace/Gleizes

Japan ese tariff rates
The fish and seafood tariff schedule for Japan is even more mixed. While the average
MFN applied rate is 5.9 percent with a GSP rate for LDC’s of 3.9 percent, a look at the
individual tariff lines shows that many items (frozen lobster , shrimp and prawns) have
duties of only 1 percent - significantly below the average. At 2 to 3.5 percent the tariff
rate for many categories of fresh fish fillets follow this patter n as well. However , some
forms of mussels, octopus and herrings have tariffs of 10 percent. Some Pacific salmon,
hard clams and oysters are at 10.5 percent, and some crab products are levied at a 15
percent rate (APEC, 2006). There is also evidence of tariff escalation in the Japanese
treatment of tuna. All fresh, refrigerated and frozen tuna entering the Japanese market is
assessed a 3.5 percent MFN rate. The rate jumps to 9.6 percent, however , for canned tuna
(Megapesca, 2005).
Tariff levels, however , do not provide a complete picture of the extent of Japanese 
protection for its fishing industr y as it also imposes import quotas on Alaskan Pollock,
herring, mackerel, cod and squid (OECD, 2003).
One can only make sense of all of this by remembering that tariff protection, like trade
negotiations, is all about interests. The rule of thumb is that countries protect those
domestic interests they think would be vulnerable to foreign competition if the tariff 
protection was not there. 
In the case of fish and fish products, those interests are distant water fleets, domestic 
harvesters or fish processors who could easily be under mined by foreign competition. For
example, US tariffs for canned tuna are there to protect the jobs of 5000 workers in
American Samoa where two of the largest fish plants in the world produce 500 million
US$ worth of tuna a year for the US market. While Samoan hourly wage levels are low
by US standards (3.50 US$ per hour in 2002), they cannot compete with the low-wage
canning industries of South-East Asia (Wolman 2002). Tariffs therefore serve to protect
special interests and vulnerable sectors of a countr y’s economy .
There are also clear interests behind those seeking to remove tariffs completely .
The NAMA Sectoral initiativ e on Fish and Fish Products
The NAMA Sectoral initiative on fish and fish products reveals the rather narrow interests
at play in fisheries liberalization.
Although discussions had been happening informally and behind closed doors for some
time, the sectoral initiative was officially launched in October 2005 - rather late in the
NAMA negotiations - by five fish-exporting countries (Canada, Iceland, New Zealand,
Norway and Thailand) as well as Singapore, a trade-dependent countr y. They were 
formally joined just prior to the Round’s suspension in May 2006 by Panama (WTO ,
2006), a key facilitating countr y for the world’s Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated
(IUU) fishing.
The different interests behind the fish sectoral
The sponsors of the sectoral initiative all have important fish export interests that would
improve significantly with liberalization. Of the four developed countr y sponsors, all are
fishing nations. Norway is the world’s number three exporter by value and Canada is the
fifth, with 6 and 5 percent of shares of global export values respectively (Lem, 2006).
Although New Zealand’s fish exports represent less than 2 percent of the world total, 
fishing is the countr y’s fourth largest export industr y and exports make up 90 percent of
its revenues (New Zealand, 2001). The importance of fish exports is even more 
pronounced in tiny Iceland, the world’s thirteenth largest exporter , where they made up
more than 60 percent of the countr y’s total export earnings in 2004 (Iceland, 2005).
34

Because they are net fisheries exporters outside of the EU, all of these countries would
benefit from a liberalization process that would reduce tariffs significantly . Canadian and
New Zealand products face an average of 12 percent duties when they enter the EU, with
peaks as high as 20 percent on important species like lobster . While neither Iceland nor
Norway are members of the EU they fall under preferential arrangements that reduce the
average duties they face on fish to 3.5 and 5 percent respectively (Melchior , 2006). This
has not stopped the EU, however , from imposing both anti-dumping and counter vailing
duties on Norwegian salmon imports, moves that are being challenged by Norway under
the WTO’s dispute-settlement process (OECD, 2003). Norway also faces duties of up to 31
percent on its salmon entering the US market. 
All these fish-exporting countries, therefore, would benefit from a trade regime that 
eliminated fish tariffs across the board, as called for in their proposal for a fish sectoral.
None of the sponsors would benefit economically as much as Thailand, however . Thailand
is the world’s number two fish exporter22, second in world production of farmed shrimp
and first in exports of the all-important canned tuna (Kleih et al, 2006). As discussed in
Box 3, tariff elimination in the very high tariffs on canned tuna - 24 percent in the EU
and 35 percent in the US - would make Thailand the undisputed world leader in canned
tuna exports and Bangkok the new global hub of worldwide tuna production.
While Singapore is not a fishing nation per se – it reported landings of only 3.000 metric
tons in 2004 - its trade in fish, 635.9 million US$ of fish imports and 415.4 million US$
in exports in 2004, is not insignificant. Singapore is above all a trading nation, firmly
committed to liberalization, that trades extensively with the fishing powers of Asia (Japan,
Thailand, Taiwan, China)23and plays an important role in the global tuna trade as a key
supplier to Thailand (Kleih et al, 2006).
35
22Excluding the EU as a single market.
23Singapore also has a histor y of investment in the New Zealand fishing industr y. Up until 2001 Brierley
Investments, a  Singapore-based, Bermuda headquartered investment firm owned half of Sealord Group Ltd., New
Zealand’s largest fishing company . Bierley subsequently sold its 50 percent share of Sealord to Nissui of Japan, a
worldwide fishing company with large US interests (Gorton’s) and a one-third share in Japan’s whaling fleet. For
information on Nissui, Gorton’s and Sealord’s role in Greenpeace’s recent anti-whaling efforts, see 
http://oceans.greenpeace.org/en/the-expedition/news/nissui-sealord-gortons, accessed October 21st, 2006.©Greenpeace/Hofford

In this group, the odd countr y out is Panama. Prior to 1995 Panama never landed more
than 125.000 metric tons of fish, two thirds of which regularly came from its traditional
shrimp fleet. From 1995 onward, however , Panama began to register significant year over
year increases in its fish production, recording landings in species it had never reported
before, and by 2004 had nearly quadr upled its production figures (Fishstat Plus, 2006).
Panama’s production figures, however , are probably only a fraction of what its fleet 
catches because the countr y is one of the three world leaders in providing cover to the
practice of Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated fishing.24
Along with Honduras and Belize, Panama offers what is known as an open register for
fishing vessels. An open register is one that imposes no nationality or citizenship 
requirements on vessels wishing to fly its flag (High Seas Task Force, 2006). Also known
as flags of convenience these countries are perhaps better described as offering flags of
non-compliance25because they refuse to take responsibility for the conduct of the vessels
registered under their flag and snub international efforts to regulate and control 
over-fishing. As of 2005 Panama had a total of 222 large-scale fishing vessels under its
register , just behind Belize’s 241 and the 416 of Honduras, the world leader (High Seas
Task Force, 2006).
IUU fishing involves a highly complex series of activities but in general it tends to focus
on high value species that end up being traded in the international market place. As a
major facilitator of IUU fishing, Panama therefore has an interest in seeing the 
international rules on the trade in fish, especially those relating to rules of origin and
labeling, relaxed as much as possible.
The objectiv e of the fish sectoral
The objective of the fish sectoral initiative was straightfor ward: the comprehensive 
elimination of all tariffs, and allegedly unjustified non-tariff barriers, affecting fish and
fish products (WTO , 2006).26
The proponents pitched the initiative as a meaningful response to the Doha mandate to
eliminate tariffs, tariff peaks, and tariff escalation on products of particular export 
interest to developing countries. With a view to addressing tariff escalation they proposed
the widest possible product coverage. In keeping with the understanding that had been
reached in the broader NAMA negotiations, participation in the sectoral was to be 
non-mandator y, and they proposed a critical mass of countries representing 90 percent of
world fish trade as the participation benchmark for success.
The fish sectoral commitments to eliminate tariffs would be phased in no later than the
final implementation of the tariff reductions agreed to in the broader NAMA negotiations.
As far as Special and Differential treatment for developing countries, they proposed a zero
for xtariff reduction scheme. While developed countries would have to completely 
eliminate their tariffs by going to zero duties, developing countries would only be required
to reduce theirs to an undeter mined x value. However , they would have to adopt the 
sectoral’s x value or the formula-deter mined value from the broader NAMA talks,
whichever was lower . As further special and differential treatment they also proposed
longer implementation periods for developing countries. They identified the complexity and
lack of transparency of non-tariff barriers as an additional burden for the trade in fish,
particularly for developing countries without the technical capacity to meet various
requirements, but indicated that no specific NTBs had been identified for negotiations.
Lastly , they proposed that the negotiations proceed at a pace that would allow for each
member to incorporate their new fish tariff rates into their draft schedule of commitments
by July 31, 2006.
3624Singapore is not lily-white on the question of IUU fishing either as it hosts the administration of Mongolia’s open
registr y which advertises no restrictions on crew nationality , imposes no taxes and claims to be able to issue 
registrations “within the hour” (High Seas Task Force, 2006).
25Term used by delegates at the UN Conference to review the Agreement for the implementation of the provisions of
the UN Convention of the Law of the Sea, May 22-26, 2006.
26 The initiative also proposed to address non-tariff barriers specific to fish but as of mid-May 2006 none had been
identified (WTO , 2006).

Assessing the sectoral process
Because the Doha Round is a single undertaking, the fish sectoral initiative - like the
NAMA negotiations under which they were carried out - was suspended when the talks
collapsed at the end of July 2006. 
It is difficult to assess how much progress was being made towards the objective of 
completely eliminating tariffs in the fish trade, since the WTO negotiations are carried out
in private amongst the members and are not accessible to independent outside obser vers
or non-gover nmental organizations. The small number of countries that had formally
signed on to the proposal would seem to indicate, however , that the initiative was far from
the critical mass of countries representing 90 percent of world trade in the sector . This
threshold would be impossible to reach without the participation of all three big importers
(EU, Japan and US), none of which participated in the discussions, although the US 
indicated privately that it was not opposed to the direction of the proposal. The EU 
position was that it wanted agreement first on the overall NAMA formula before engaging
in sectoral initiative negotiations; but they had by no means ruled out participation.
Developing countries, especially those from the ACP group, were cool to the initiative
because of the potential erosion of their preferential treatment in the EU market that 
tariff elimination or significant tariff reduction would entail. (See Box 3 – Preference 
erosion.)
Privately , several negotiators indicate that the momentum of the single undertaking would
have been overwhelming had there been a broader NAMA agreement on tariff reduction
and an agreement in the agriculture negotiations. If that scenario plays itself out, e.g. if
an outline deal is agreed by April 2007, there will be tremendous pressure to reach 
agreement in some of the more ‘minor ’ negotiations of the Round like the sectorals in fish
and forestr y.
With the talks now suspended it is unclear what the next steps will be. There is some talk,
however , that initiatives like the fish and forestr y sectorals might be revived under less
ambitious negotiations (“Doha lite”) and private talks and consultations continue 
unabated. One thing is clear, however : the commercial interests behind complete 
liberalization of trade in fish and fish products will not disappear , and will continue to be
a factor in any future resumption of global trade negotiations as well as in ongoing and
future bilateral and regional negotiations. (See Box 4).
37

BOX 4
What’ s next?
The Doha negotiations are not dead; they are “suspended”. Whether they are revived or
not depends to a high degree on political developments in the United States. The Bush
administration’s authority to “fast-track” a new trade deal runs out in June 2007. 
“Fast-track” means that the US Congress can only accept or reject a complete trade deal.
It is the American equivalent of the WTO’s “single undertaking” and prevents Congress
from “cher ry picking” by, for example, only agreeing to the NAMA negotiation result, but
not to the one on agriculture.
Some obser vers believe a deal is still possible in 2007, if an outline agreement is reached
by April 2007. There is currently much quiet diplomacy happening worldwide, in order to
establish if such a revival of the talks is possible. Some negotiations were also quietly
resumed in November 2006 (Khor , 2006a). Given the importance of agricultural subsidies
to the US farm constituency , politicians do not want these subsidies to be an election
issue. Indeed, there is some speculation that the US accepted a suspension of the Round in
July 2006 in order to avoid the WTO becoming an issue in the mid-ter m congressional
elections in November 2006. The intentions of the Democrat-controlled Congress are as
yet unclear (Financial Times, 2006). However , if an agreement is not reached by April
2007, then the Round is likely to remain suspended for quite some time – probably until
2009 or later.
But that does not mean that the process of trade liberalization will not continue. As has
been the trend since the early 1990s, bilateral agreements are being pursued by the main
trading powers alongside their activities within the WTO. This trend is not new; and it will
certainly continue. From a fisheries perspective, recent EU bilateral agreements provide
some indications of what such future deals may look like.
According to the Coalition for Fair Fisheries Arrangements, under recent EU reciprocal
free trade agreements with countries that have important fisheries resources, particularly
South Africa and Chile, the liberalization of trade in fisheries products has been 
conditioned to the opening up of third countr y waters to EU fleet access through 
investment.
•In the South Africa-EU Trade, Development and Cooperation Agreement 
(TDCA), an explicit link is made between the liberalization of trade in fisheries 
products and the signing of a fisheries access agreement, making it clear that 
the elimination of EU tariffs on South African fisheries exports will only come 
into effect once a fisheries agreement with the EU has been concluded. 
•The Chile-EU Association Agreement, signed in November 2002, contains 
provisions for the liberalization of trade in fisher y products on a reciprocal 
basis. In addition to the elimination of tariff barriers, there is a separate 
Protocol on Fishing Enterprises, which sets out provisions under which the 
European owners investing in Chilean companies may register their vessels, buy 
licenses and quotas, and transfer vessels to Chile. (These provisions are 
reciprocal.) (CFFA, 2006)
38

©Greenpeace/Grace©Greenpeace/Davison
©Greenpeace/Hofford
39

The theoretical impact of trade liberalization 
The logic of trade liberalization rests on the early 19th centur y economic theories of 
comparative and absolute advantage, i.e. that efficiency flows from an international 
division of trade based on what countries do best, based on certain advantages - natural or
other wise - they have over their trading partners and competitors. According to the 
theor y: if every nation focuses on producing what it does more efficiently than others and
trade is free amongst all nations, then the general welfare of all will rise.
Tariffs are anathema to liberal economic theorists because they interfere in markets and
keep them from attaining the levels of efficiency that the free flows of goods and services
based on comparative advantage provide. From the classical liberal (or neo-liberal) 
perspective, tariffs prop up and maintain inefficient production at the importing end and
impede the full development of efficient production at the exporting end.
Liberalization theor y assumes that there is a pent-up potential of under -utilized and more
efficient production waiting to be released when tariff walls fall. While this may be the
case in the production of some manufactured goods, it is certainly not the case in 
fisheries.
In world wild capture fisheries there is absolutely no room for sustainable increases in
production in almost all areas.
As described above, 77 percent of the stocks are either fully exploited - i.e. with no room
for further expansion - or in even worse shape: over-exploited, depleted or recovering. 
This leaves only 23 percent of assessed stocks, in the “under -” or “moderately exploited”
categories. These are the only stocks, that have some potential for sustainable growth,
provided they were to be managed sustainably .27
If the potential for wild capture fisheries growth is extremely limited in overall 
quantitative terms, it is even more limited in qualitative commercial terms.  After 55
years of industrial fishing there are reasons why certain stocks remain under - or 
moderately exploited; they are less appealing to markets for intrinsic reasons and cannot
substitute for the more sought-af ter over-fished stocks. For example, Canada may have an
abundance of under -exploited silver hake, but it is a species for which there are limited
markets and it won’t substitute for declines in lobster landings, a valuable export.
Tariff liberalization’ s impact on wild capture fisheries
So, if sustainable production levels of most commercial stocks have either been reached or
surpassed what will happen to wild capture fisheries if markets are liberalized through
tariff elimination?
This question was asked and answered by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development’s Committee for Fisheries (OECD) in a major study of the effects of fisheries
trade liberalization, published in 2003 (OECD, 2003).
The study’s main conclusion was that further liberalization of trade in fish and fish 
products, particularly through the reduction/elimination of tariffs will only bring lasting
benefits to twoOECD fish exporting countries (New Zealand and Iceland) that have
“effective” domestic fisheries management regimes. 
According to the study’s modeling, these countries should be able to withstand the 
pressure to increase supply beyond sustainable levels that tariff reduction/elimination will
4027It represents an even smaller percentage of overall commercially fished stocks since fisheries managers don’t have
enough information to make assessments of 24 percent of all identified stocks, representing about 20 percent of world
capture landings (FAO, 2005).

undoubtedly unleash. While there may be limited increases in production from efficiently
managed fisheries in these countries, the main benefits besides increased prices to 
producers will be increases in the value of their privately held fishing quotas.
According to the OECD, outside of these two countries, their fisher y quota holders and
consumers in importing countries, who should see less expensive products, no others will
derive sustainable benefits from liberalization because the conditions for mutual benefit –
effective fisheries management at the exporting and importing end - simply do not exist.
However , the OECD ’s criteria for effective management is highly skewed towards systems
predicated on the questionable merits of privatized access rights through tradable 
individual quotas. New Zealand and Iceland are singled out because they are the two
countries that have gone the furthest down the fisheries privatization road prescribed by
the OECD for all its members. 
However , the OECD ’s confident assertions about the effectiveness and sustainability of
New Zealand’s privatized management scheme do not stand up to objective assessment.
According to a recent study (Wallace & Weeber , 2006), under New Zealand’s privatised
quota scheme all but two of its orange roughy stocks have been fished well below legally
established sustainable levels. In one case, a stock has been fished down to three percent
of its unfished biomass and in another down to seven percent. The study also documents
how quota owners, rather than being advocates for conser vation, consistently resist moves
to reduce fishing levels and other conser vation initiatives. New Zealand’s fisheries 
management also fails to meet socio-economic sustainability criteria. Under privatised
quota management, fish companies are unable to attract New Zealand labour to work on
their boats because they offer only minimum wage. According to the New Zealand
Maritime Union, quota holders are getting around this problem through joint ventures
with fishing vessels from low-wage countries. This in turn has led to an alarming increase
in foreign crewmembers jumping ship in New Zealand ports because of non-payment of
wages and in some cases physical abuse; a situation which the Union says is symptomatic
of what is going on across the industr y (RNZ, 2006; Newstalk ZB, 2006).
While the New Zealand experience under mines the OECD assertion about the effectiveness
of privatized fisheries management schemes, that is not to say that other OECD 
fish-exporting countries that take their fisheries management seriously and use a variety
of management means - like Canada or Norway for example – won’t be able to keep 
over-fishing under control, provided they have the political will to do so.
While the OECD ’s criteria for effective fisheries management are highly debatable its
modeling exercise is extremely revealing of the impacts of tariff liberalization on poorly
managed fisheries. 
The logic behind the OECD ’s liberalization model is that cuts in tariffs will be translated
into a change in price, with higher prices for producers in the exporting countr y and lower
prices for consumers in the importing countries.
As the OECD explains, in most market situations price stimulation leads to increased 
production and supply except in wild fisheries, where increased effort will only lead to
increases in supply until the maximum sustainable levels of production are reached. If
effort continues to increase beyond sustainable levels, supply begins to drop and the 
fisher y sooner or later goes into its classic downward spiral of increasing inputs and 
decreasing outputs.
Under an ideal management system with strict enforcement and total compliance, fisheries
would reach their level of maximum sustainable output and any market stimulus to 
overproduce would be held in check by the management regime.
41

But this highly idealized situation does not exist in reality . What is useful about the OECD
modeling, however , is that it also predicts what will happen under situations where 
fisheries are poorly managed or operated under open access situations; conditions that
exist in all too many of the world’s fisheries today , especially in the developing world.
For a fish exporting countr y the OECD study says: “The long-term effects of market 
liberalization will be catch declines, reduced trade and a loss of welfare as the higher
prices faced by the exporter will be translated into an increased effort and hence
over-exploitation”.
For the importing countr y it says: “The opposite holds true i.e. fish stocks recover (as it is
cheaper to consume imported fish than home produced) and domestic catches may 
ultimately increase following recovery. However, the outcome for the importing country
assumes that both capital (vessels) and labour are malleable and can easily move out of
the fishing industry into other occupations. If no other fishing opportunities are found,
depending on the fisheries management regime, it is more likely, as suggested for the
exporting country, that vessels/fishers will continue to fish and even increase harvesting
pressure to compensate for lower prices in the short term, and thus a situation of
over-exploitation will develop or continue” (OECD, 2003 p. 24).
Tariff liberalization’ s impact on aquaculture
While the OECD ’s study deals primarily with the effects of tariff reduction on wild capture
fisheries, it also offers an opinion on its impact on aquaculture. It predicts that the 
lowering of tariffs will stimulate aquaculture production, which, in turn, will increase
pressure on gover nment regulation, lead to more demands for suitable sites, and increase
competition for feed compounds (OECD, 2003). Because of the issue of feed compounds,
any stimulation of aquaculture production will have a knock-on effect on wild fish 
production and food security . The two most highly traded farmed species, shrimp and
salmon, help to illustrate why. 
Together with their wild cousins, farmed shrimp and salmon make up 27 percent of all fish
exports. They were the two export-oriented aquaculture boom fisheries of the 1980s and
1990s.
BOX 5
One person’ s “trash” is another person’ s dinner
The aquaculture industr y is highly dependent on aquafeed compounds made up of fishmeal
and fish oil, derived by the rendering of pelagic species (anchovies, mackerel, herring,
caplin) and what the fishing industr y pejoratively calls trash fish, i.e. low value or 
damaged fish that normally is not destined for human consumption. While the notion that
some marine life is garbage is profoundly un-ecological it is also a relative notion in a
hungr y world. In most countries in Asia and the Pacific almost all of the fish that is
caught is consumed locally as part of household food security , with nothing wasted and a
lot being converted through drying, fermenting and salting into a very wide range of
human food products (FAO, 2004).
The farming of high-value carnivorous species like shrimp and salmon not only consumes
more fish than it produces (see Food Conversion Rates opposite) but it consumes the kind
of fish that are vital for the food security of the world’s poor.
It is estimated that China’s marine fish farming now consumes about 4 million metric tons
of “trash” fish a year over and above its fishmeal inputs. 
(See Kleih et al, 2006; 
specifically: http://www .sia-trade.org/wto/FinalPhase/FR_APP1_Chi)na_C S_May_06.pdf)
42

Farmed shrimp grew from less than 10.000 metric tons in the early 1970s to more than 1
million metric tons today , and now accounts for approximately 25 percent of world shrimp
production. (Capture fisheries account for approximately 3 million metric tons.) (Tacon,
2002). The growth of farmed salmon production was even more spectacular . From a little
over 7,000 metric tons in 1980 it reached the 1 million metric ton plateau in 2000. 
Both farmed shrimp and farmed salmon have numerous sustainability problems. These
include environmental degradation, bio-diversity issues, and food safety concer ns related
to pesticides and pharmaceutical residues etc. In addition to all of this, they are also net
consumers of wild fish because of their total dependence on feed from fishmeal and fish oil
that come from the wild capture fisheries.
Farmed shrimp has what is known as a Food Conversion Ratio (FCR) of 2.08, that is to
say that it takes 2.08 kilograms of fish (pelagic wet weight) converted to fishmeal to 
produce 1 kilogram of farmed shrimp (Tacon, 2002).
At 3.5, the FCR for farmed salmon is even higher , i.e. it takes 3.5 kilos of wild fish 
converted to fishmeal and oil to produce 1 kilo of farmed salmon (David Suzuki
Foundation, no date). The food conversion ratios for other carnivorous farmed species that
have high commercial value (e.g. cod, halibut, bass, bream, grouper) and whose farmed
production is increasing is even greater (IFOMA , 2001).
For the production of farmed carnivorous marine species to increase, therefore, at least
one of three things has to happen: overall fish meal production has to increase, or 
aquaculture has to increase its share of existing production, or a substitute to fishmeal
has to be found.28
4328Carnivorous aquaculture is even more dependent on fish oil and its share of overall production is estimated at 77
percent. It is very unlikely that a substitute will be found for fish oil (IFOMA , 2001).
©Greenpeace/Duncan

44While there is some room for aquaculture increasing its overall share of existing fishmeal
production – at present it consumes about 45 percent of all fishmeal and most of the rest
goes to the swine and poultr y industries  (IFOMA , 2002) - there is no possibility of 
sustainably increasing overall fishmeal production.
For the last 15 years world fishmeal production has been relatively stable, mostly 
fluctuating between 6.3 and 7 million metric tons. This corresponds to wild fish landings
of between 31.5 and 35 million tons as the generally accepted conversion ratio for 
fishmeal from wet fish is 5:1 (Tacon 2002; David Suzuki, no date). 
BOX 6
Thailand’ s environment: the long-term loser!
Thailand is the world’s second largest producer and the world’s largest exporter of farmed
shrimp. Almost all of this is sold to the US, where Thailand supplies 30 percent of the
overall market. 
In contrast Thailand exports very little shrimp to the EU where it only has a 3 percent
market share. This is due to the fact that until very recently , Thailand’s shrimp faced high
EU import duties making it more expensive than imports from ACP countries and GSP
qualifiers like Brazil. Recent changes to the EU’s tariff schedule for shrimp, however , have
changed all this. 
Under a new arrangement for 2006 the duty on raw Thai shrimp entering the EU market
fell from 12 percent to 4.2 percent and the duty on processed shrimp was cut from 20
percent to 7 percent. It is expected that this will lead to substantial increases in Thai
shrimp exports to the EU with some producers anticipating that exports could more than
triple in 2006. The early 2006 export data from the Thai Ministr y of Commerce 
apparently confir ms this, as there are dramatic increases in exports to Germany , Belgium
and the UK.
The change in tariff levels on Thai shrimp clearly shows how tariff levels can influence
supply from a given countr y, as the new lower EU tariff rates revert Thailand to the 
situation it was in until 1999 when its shrimp exports to the EU were five times higher . 
It is not clear whether the change in tariffs will lead to trade diversion or increased
shrimp production in Thailand. The consequences for the environment, however , are
severe. According to the EU Sustainability Impact Assessment of the WTO’s negotiations,
aquaculture is the fisheries sector most threatening to the Thai environment. Shrimp
aquaculture is associated with loss of productive agricultural land (rice paddies), coastal
pollution and the spread of disease in shrimp farms. 
The assessment concludes that while tariff cuts will be good for exports, Thailand’s 
environment will be the principal longer -term loser in the trade process, with coastal zone
eco-systems and wetlands coming under particular threat.
Source: Kleih et al, 2006, 
in particular : http://www .sia-trade.org/wto/FinalPhase/FR_APP8_Thailand_May_06.pdf ,
accessed November 23, 2006.
This is roughly one third of all reported wild capture fisheries production and in historical
terms twice the total amount of fish that was landed in 1950. There is no room for
increasing this production without negative impacts on both the state of the world’s fish
stocks and food security for the world’s poor, since it is the pelagic species that are turned
into fishmeal and pelagics that the poor in many developing countries eat to survive (see
case studies on Senegal and Mauritania below). 

Shrimp and salmon aquaculture is therefore in direct competition with pigs, chickens and
the world’s poor for food. While the production figures for fishmeal indicate stability 
during the phenomenal growth years of aquaculture, there is evidence that more fish went
into fishmeal production in the 1990s than was reported, as the FAO attributes the 
estimated sharp declines in discard rates in part to the retention of discards in Asia for
the aquaculture industr y (Kelleher , 2005).
The question of fishmeal substitution is equally if not more troubling. The aquaculture
industr y has been researching plant-based alternatives to fish protein for two decades now,
without much success. But it is eyeing another possibility: the use of rendered animal
parts, because of the availability of 60 million metric tons of animal meal. They are also
hoping that by creating a new food chain and crossing the species barrier from 
warm-blooded terrestrial animals to cold-blooded marine ones, they won’t also transmit
bovine spongifor m encephalopathy , BSE (Tacon, 2002).
45
©Greenpeace/Behring-Chisholm

© Greenpeace/Behring©Greenpeace/Novis
©Greenpeace/Novis
©Greenpeace/Behring
46

The lived experience of liberalizations past
Theoretical modelling is not the only way to assess the impacts of trade liberalization.
Recent histor y also provides examples of what happens when a countr y embarks on an
export-oriented fisheries strategy as a result of policy incentives like tariff elimination.
In these cases the practise confir ms the theor y. Trade liberalization in fish in a conte xt of
weak or non-e xistent fisheries management is a recipe for rapid resource depletion and
impoverishment for the exporting countr y.
Several case studies point this out unequivocally . 
Maurit ania: a case study in impoverishing growth
Mauritania is a thinly populated norther n Africa countr y (2.6 million inhabitants) 
bordering on the North Atlantic Ocean between Senegal and Western Sahara. According
to the United Nations Development Programme’s (UNDP) latest Human Development
index - which measures achievements in terms of life expectancy , educational attainment
and adjusted real income - it is one of the poorest countries in the world (152ndon a list 
of 177). It also has a large accumulated foreign debt, which now stands at approximately
3 times the annual value of its exports (CIA, 2006).
Mauritania is also high on the FAO list of low-income food-deficit countries (LIFDC) but
fits the profile, discussed above, of those poor countries that have huge surpluses in their
fish trade. While in 2004 Mauritania had an overall trade deficit of 340 million US$
(CIA, 2006) its fish trade surplus was huge: exports totalled 122 million US$ while
imports were a paltry 8.2 million US$ (Fishstat Plus, 2006).
While Mauritania is a dry, arid countr y with only 0.2 percent arable land, it is blessed
with a rich and productive marine environment because of major upwellings along its
coast; a natural phenomenon that contributes large amounts of nutrients to the ecosystem.
It is especially endowed with high value demersal species, both groundfish and crustaceans
and also valuable cephalopods, mainly octopus.
The story of how Mauritania has been encouraged to exploit these resources to offset its
balance of trade problem is a terrible indictment of the trade liberalization process in fish. 
Under the provisions of the Lomé Convention, Mauritania gained duty-free access to the
EU for its fish exports. In 1987 it also signed a Fisheries Agreement (FA) with the EU
thereby granting European vessels access to its waters in exchange for cash payments
(Chérif , no date).29In 1995, the gover nment further liberalized the fishing sector by 
eliminating its trade monopoly in fish and signed a new agreement with the EU that ended
the national fleet’s exclusive rights to the valuable cephalopod (mainly octopus) resources.
(PNUE, 2006)
In addition to the EU distant water fleet the gover nment also allows fleets from Japan,
Russia, China and different West-African countries to fish in its waters.30Under separate
arrangements, Mauritania’s fisheries products also have privileged access to the Japanese
market and the US.
4729Duty-free access to the EU market for ACP fish products and EU distant water fleet access to the ACP fish
resources are linked, in part, through detailed rules of origin that virtually oblige ACP countries to enter into fisheries
agreements with the EU especially in the tuna trade (Personal communication, Béatrice Gorez, CFFA).
30The Chinese fishing presence in Mauritania exerts particularly strong pressure on its resources. There has been a
heavy presence of Chinese vessels in Mauritanian waters since at least the early 1990s and a recent study says there
are more than 109 Chinese vessels now fishing under the Mauritanian flag (Personal communication, ICSF).

As a contribution to the Doha Round process, in 2006 UNEP released the results of a
major study it commissioned to assess the impact of Mauritania’s experiment with trade
liberalization in fish. The report is an unambiguous condemnation of the process.  It 
concludes that the stimulation of fish exports through multilateral liberalization of trade
and preferential trade agreements amounted to “impoverishing growth” for Mauritania,
its people and its environment. The report’s assessment is clear: liberalization has
unleashed “abusive harvesting” of Mauritania’s fisheries, “ecological dumping” and a
“sell-off ” of its natural resources (PNUE, 2006).
The repor t paints a horrif ic picture of ecological waste and destruction.
•The majority of Mauritania’s once plentiful demersal species (the full array of 
groundfish, ocotopus, squid, lobster and crabs) are now over-exploited. The over
all stocks of sharks and rays are in danger of, or heading towards, extinction 
and some formerly abundant species have disappeared from Mauritanian waters. 
•Foreign and domestic fleets (industrial and artisanal) are all seriously 
over-fishing, especially for valuable near-shore species, and over-fishing has 
reached such a level that it is having an impact on the overall eco-system.
•The levels of discarding and dumping of by-catch by industrial shrimp trawlers 
and groundfish draggers indicates “a general acceptance of a production system 
that wastes living things”.31 Ray discards are so voluminous they are polluting 
the marine environment and affecting the behaviour of other species.
•While the artisanal cephalopod fleet uses gear that is very selective (hand line 
and pots) and has virtually no by-catch, it is constrained to a very small band of 
coastline. This geographical concentration of the fishing effort is leading to 
negative impacts on the health of the ecosystem. 
•Overall over-fishing is reducing marine bio-diversity through both excessive 
fishing mortality on target species and through by-catch, and there has been a 
noticeable drop in mean trophic levels with species higher up the food chain 
disappearing first.
•The by-catch in the shrimp trawl fisher y is equal to 80 percent of the shrimp 
landings and in 1998 represented an economic loss of 10 million US$, more 
than the landed value of the shrimp and equivalent to 10 percent of the total 
value of Mauritanian fish exports. While by-catch limits are stipulated in foreign
fishing agreements there are no on-board obser vers, and foreign vessels land in 
Spanish ports making control/verification impossible. 
•Only two species show signs of increased abundance - one because the end of a 
bilateral fishing agreement with neighbouring Senegal led to a drop in fishing 
effort.
•Shrimp landings and biomass seem stable, in part because of a drop in predation
from overfished groundfish species.
•Food security is worsening because both national fleets (industrial and artisanal)
now concentrate their efforts on the more valuable export species, abandoning 
fisheries for locally consumed pelagics thereby reducing local market supply and 
driving up prices.
•The Mauritanian Fisheries Department is highly dependent on the EU fisheries 
agreements for core funding, which places it in a catch-22 situation: it can’t 
meet its objectives without funding but its funding is dependent on letting in 
foreign fleets which under mine its objectives!
4831Translated from the French “gâchis du vivant”.

•The national gover nment continues to face intense international pressure to sell 
off its fisheries resources to meet minimal economic growth demands linked to 
the World Bank and IMF Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSP).32In this 
context its Fisheries Partnership agreements respond to the gover nment’s 
immediate financial needs and the development of its own fisheries and the 
biological status of the stocks do not carry much weight in its decision-making. 
The study also commented on the Doha Round’s NAMA negotiations and offered an 
opinion on the impact of tariff reduction on Mauritania. It estimated that because of 
preference erosion Mauritania’s incipient pelagic processing industr y (sardines and tuna)
would not be able to survive the competition from Asian processors (Thailand and
Philippines) in the EU market. Further more it forecasts that Mauritania’s debt servicing
and foreign exchange needs are such that it would have to fish and export more to 
compensate for the drop in earnings that will inevitably come from its inability to compete
with cheaper Asian products as it loses tariff preferences.
In light of the report’s devastating findings and because of Mauritania’s newfound 
petroleum resources, it had been hoped that the gover nment would not renew its Fisheries
agreement with the EU, which expired in 2006. 
However , the direct contributions the Mauritanian gover nment receives from the EU under
its Fisheries agreements represent 30 percent of the gover nment’s total budget and almost
all its non-fiscal revenue (PNUE, 2006). 
On July 27, 2006 the Mauritanian gover nment renewed its fisheries partnership 
agreement with the EU, the same day it adopted a budget amendment for the fiscal year.
The new agreement will contribute 86 million Euros to the Mauritanian treasur y, the
same amount as under the previous agreement (2001-2006).
4932Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSP) are exercises promoted by the World Bank and the International
Monetar y Fund and bilateral donor countries that encourage export-led growth supposedly to reduce poverty .
Countries’ papers are on the IMF website http://www .imf.org/exter nal/np/prsp/prsp.asp#M; the last Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper for Mauritania (Progress Report for the Islamic Republic of Mauritania) is of October 10, 2003 (see
http://www .imf.org/exter nal/pubs/f t/scr/2003/cr03316.pdf , accessed on October 21, 2006).
© Greenpeace/Behring-Chisholm

BOX 7
Feeling the NAMA squeeze in the Philippin es
Community-based artisanal fish harvesters from the Philippines have consistently voiced
their opposition to the NAMA process. In July 2006 they even traveled to Geneva where
they built a small flotilla of their traditional fishing boats and led a color ful “fluvial
protest” to the WTO headquarters on Lake Geneva.
The fishing sector in the Philippines directly employs 1.6 million people, mainly 
subsistence artisanal harvesters, and provides livelihoods for an estimated household 
population of 6 million.
The Philippines export only 6 percent of their total fisheries production with the main
exports being tuna, shrimp and seaweed. It is the NAMA impact on fisher y imports, 
however , that has the Philippines’ artisanal fish harvesters worried. Fish imports into the
Philippines are presently relatively small because of a domestic regulation that restricts
them to supplying canneries and processing plants and prohibits imported fish from being
sold into the domestic market. 
Despite this regulation, smuggled fish from subsidized Taiwanese and Chinese industrial
vessels still finds its way into the domestic market where it competes with artisanal 
production. Filipino artisanal fish harvesters fear that the NAMA process will not only
cut tariffs on fish imports but weaken the Philippines’ laws that keep subsidized and 
unsustainably produced foreign fish from flooding their market. They point to what 
happened to Philippines agriculture to show how tariff reduction under mines the 
livelihoods of small-scale producers. Under the Uruguay Round concessions, the
Philippines cut tariffs on agricultural products and since the late 1990s has had a 
growing deficit in agricultural trade. The biggest problem is the dumping of subsidized
corn and rice from the US, which enters the Philippines at 1/2 and 1/3 the costs of local
products.
The Philippines lacks a serious fisheries resource management system and is largely
unable to prevent foreign fishing vessels from poaching in its waters and its own 
industrial fleet from encroaching on artisanal fishing grounds. What the Filipino artisanal
harvesters see in NAMA is a process that will squeeze them out of a livelihood by 
intensif ying unsustainable forms of aquaculture production and industrial fishing for
export while allowing subsidized imports to flood their market.
Source: Bernardino, Naty, 2005.
50
© Reyes/Jacinto

Argentin a:a case study in the extern alization of costs
Argentina offers a good contrast with Mauritania in terms of the impact of fish trade 
liberalization on countries of very different size and relative wealth. Argentina ranks 34th
on the UNDP ’s Human Development Index, in the “High” categor y ahead of several
European countries (Poland, the three Baltic states, Slovakia and Croatia). It is a 
populous countr y, (39.9 million inhabitants) with a highly literate population (97.1 
percent), rich natural resources, a highly developed export oriented agricultural sector and
a diversified industrial base. It also has close to 5,000 kilometres of coastline and close to
1 million square kilometres within its Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). (CIA, 2006;
UNEP , 2002). Argentina is a net fish exporting countr y. In 2004 its exports were worth
816.5 million US$ and imports a mere 47.6 million US$ making for a very healthy 
balance of 768.9 million US$ in fish trade. 
Like Mauritania, it too was ushered down the fish trade liberalization path in the 1990s
by the EU and multilateral lenders as a means of addressing the gover nment’s fiscal crisis
and chronic economic instability .
Argentina is not a traditional fishing nation. Rather it is a nation of proud red meat
eaters. Domestic industrial fishing first began to emerge in the 1960s, off the Province of
the capital Buenos Aires, and by the 1970s had extended south into Patagonia. During
this period there were peaks of intense fishing linked to agreements signed with the former
Soviet Union, but going into the 1990s Argentina had what was considered an 
under -exploited fisheries resource base. What fishing took place went to supply the small
domestic market. Its fishing policy up until that point was also highly nationalistic with
policies in place to keep fishing in Argentine hands (UNEP , 2002).
In 1991 Argentina, under International Monetar y Fund (IMF) guidance, adopted a series
of macro-economic measures meant to stabilize the economy and foment growth. The plan
included privatisation of public utilities, deregulation of numerous economic activities and
markets and progressive liberalization of foreign trade (UNEP , 2002).
As part of this new thrust, in 1994 Argentina signed a fisheries agreement with the EU.
The agreement differed from those the EU signed with its West African partners under the
Lomé Convention in that instead of direct EU fishing it encouraged subsidized joint 
ventures between European and Argentine firms. The differences appear to have been
mostly cosmetic as European vessels registered under the Argentine flag as joint ventures
or as “temporar y companies” (UNEP , 2002).
51Figure 9.
Argentin a Landings (MT)
2,000,0004,000,0006,000,0008,000,00010,000,00012,000,00014,000,00016,000,000
0
1950
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004

In any event the results were the same as in West Africa. Within a few short years, the
fisheries sector was in severe crisis. Argentina embarked on an export-led exploitation of
its fisheries resources with “enor mous deficiencies” in its fisheries management system,
which, combined with “serious suspicions of briber y and corruption” (UNEP , 2002), were
the perfect recipe for disaster . 
As Figures 9 and 10 show, beginning in the early 1990s at the start of the liberalization
process Argentina’s landings and exports of fish began a steep climb. Landings increased
by 78 percent from 1990 to 1994 and then jumped another 38 percent by 1997 when
they hit the astounding figure of 1.38 million metric tons (Fishstat Plus).
Increases in fish exports were even more prodigious, leaping by 131 percent from 1990 to
1994 and then moderating to the relatively more modest rate of 41 percent through to
1997 when they topped the 1 billion US$ mark and eclipsed beef33, the countr y’s 
traditional food export (Fishstat Plus, UNEP , 2002).
What is even more surprising is that just one species, Argentine hake, contributed almost
half of this performance making up between 46 and 48 percent of all Argentina’s reported
landings during the mid-1990s, reaching an impressive 600.000 MT in 1996 (Fishstat
Plus). Of course, this couldn’t last. By 2000 Argentina’s recorded hake landings dropped
to 193.700 MT, a 68 percent decline from the high point in 1996 (Fishstat Plus).34
Most of this information comes from another study in the series UNEP undertook on the
liberalization of the fish trade that documents the degradation of Argentine hake and
other overexploited resources during the fishing frenzy of the 1990s. 
5233Beef exports that year were just over 800 million US$ (UNEP , 2002).
34Recorded landings show Argentine hake increasing in subsequent years to over 400.000 MT in 2005, however no
analysis of these numbers is available other than the FAO statement in 2005 that Argentine Hake resources were still
in decline (FAO, 2005).
© Greenpeace/Gleizes1,200,000
1,000,000
800,000
600,000
400,000
200,000Figure 10.
Argentin e Fish Expor ts
0
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2001
2004

The report says that there is no argument from any source that the fisher y resources of
Argentina have not been overexploited, and it points to gross deficiencies in the 
management regime and the un-selectivity of trawl gear in terms of size and age as the
main causes. 
For example:
•For three successive years (1997-1999) hake fishing greatly exceeded the 
gover nment-established total allowable catch (TAC). For 1997 the TAC was set 
at 395.000 mt, yet reported landings were 584.000 mt, a 47 percent 
overshoot. But even this impressive figure is probably less than what was really 
caught. Because of by-catch, discards and unreported catch the 1997 catch is 
estimated to have reached 834.000 mt, 111 percent higher than what was 
allowed. 
•In 1998 the TAC was lowered to 289.000 mt, yet reported landings overshot 
again, reaching 314.000 mt or 34 percent more than what was legally 
permitted.
•In 1999 with landings in sharp decline the TAC was lowered to 238.000 mt, 
but again fishing continued well beyond this cutoff , reportedly reaching 
314.000 mt.
•The same patter n is reported for the blue whiting fisher y with the TAC being 
exceeded by 26 percent in 1998.
•Because the Argentine fisheries relied heavily on trawl gear, discard rates were 
especially high and estimated at between 55 to 62 percent of reported catches. 
This translated into an estimated discarding of 300.000 mt of fish annually , 
most of it comprised of juveniles.
•By 2002 a total of 6 Argentine stocks were considered endangered (Argentine 
hake, blue whiting, Croaker , Patagonian toothfish, red porgy and souther n hake).
Like the study on Mauritania, the report is caustic in its assessment of the 
impacts of liberalization. However , the study brings something new to the impact analysis
of liberalization by attempting to estimate the costs of over-fishing to 
Argentine society .
Using Cost Benefit Analysis based on broad assumptions, it concludes that the main 
beneficiaries of the policies of the 1990s were the private fishing firms (profits of 1.6 
billion US$) and fish workers (salaries of 1.4 billion US$) with very low net benefits to
the Argentine treasur y of 50 million US$, and an enormous social loss for future 
generations of 3.5 billion US$. If there is no recuperation of the hake biomass this loss
increases to 5.6 billion US$.
The liberalization of fisheries trade in Argentina in the 1990s occur red under conditions
of extremely weak fisheries management and the absence of even basic measures of 
royalties and fees that could have exerted some pressures for restraint on the resource
exploiters. The end result was a gold rush mentality as fish companies discounted the
future value of Argentina’s fisheries resources and took what they could while they could.
Under these conditions, as the report concluded, “The market is short sighted with
respect to any concern for future generations and a sustainable environment”.
53
©Greenpeace/Hofford

Senegal: a case study in conflicting demands
Senegal is a poor West African countr y of approximately 12 million people bordering on
the Atlantic Ocean and with Mauritania immediately to the north. Like its norther n 
neighbour , Senegal is also ranked low on the human development list (157/177), is on the
FAO’s list of low-income food deficit countries and is a net fish exporter . In 2004 Senegal
had an impressive net surplus in fish trade of 314.6 million US$ within an overall trade
deficit of 879 million US$ (CIA, 2006). Fishing, therefore, substantially reduces a very
large overall trade deficit for Senegal. 
However , fishing is not only of export interest to the Senegalese. They are also great 
consumers of fish, annually eating on average 27 kg per person; more than twice the
world average excluding China35and three to four times the average consumption for 
sub-Saharan Africa (UNEP , 2002; FAO, 2004; O’Riordan, 2006). Small coastal pelagic
fish make up an estimated 75 percent of the population’s animal protein needs (UNEP ,
2002a), making fishing for food critical for Senegal’s food security .
These two factors - a strong export pull and very strong internal demand and consumption
- are the two conflicting forces driving Senegalese fisheries production. 
Expor t performance 
The overall volume of Senegalese fish exports more than doubled from 1976 to 1991,
when it reached an all-time high of 142.6 thousand metric tons. (See Figure 11)
There were several reasons for this. Initially the Senegalese gover nment provided a series
of direct subsidies to the fishing industr y to encourage exports. Secondly in the 1980s
Senegal, like Mauritania, signed a fisheries agreement with the EU and came under the
preferential trading arrangements of the Lomé Convention, and its fish exports began to
enter the EU market duty free. Lastly under a series of IMF-sponsored Structural
Adjustment policies the Senegalese gover nment provided the fishing industr y with several
advantages that stimulated exports (UNEP , 2002b).
In 1992, however , Senegalese fish exports went into free fall, dropping to 79 thousand
metric tons, a 44 percent decline from the previous year. The Senegalese economy was
stagnating under the weight of an overvalued currency . In 1993 they fell even further ,
dropping another 33 percent to 52.2 thousand metric tons. In discussions with the IMF,
Senegal agreed to remedy the problem with a 50 percent devaluation of its currency . 
Senegalese fish exports revived immediately , shooting up by 79 percent in 1994 and 
continuing to rise steadily until 2000. Although exports fell abruptly again in 2000 they
have rebounded and, in 2004, stood at 130 thousand metric tons, very near the all-time high.
5420,00040,00060,00080,000100,000120,000140,000180,000Figure 11.
Senegalese Fish exports (MT)
(Source: FISHST AT+)
0
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
35FAO estimates annual Chinese fish consumption to be 27.7kg/per capita based on reported data (FAO, 2004-b).

Fish landings
Contrar y to the ups and downs of fish exports, Senegal’s fisheries production data shows
very rapid year over year increases from the late 1980s to 1997 except for a slight dip in
1994. What is interesting in this data is that fish production did not contract during the
years when export volumes dropped sharply . This suggests that strong internal demand
keeps fishing pressure constant in Senegal irrespective of export demand.36
The latest production data shows production hit an all-time high of 507 thousand metric
tons in 1997, declined by 16 percent the next year and averaged around 436.9 thousand
metric tons until 2004, the last year for which data is available.
This is not to suggest that all is well with the Senegalese fisher y: quite the contrar y. It is
under serious stress as a result of very poor management and the conflicting demands
placed on it to meet both Senegal’s food security and balance of payment needs.
This is one of the main conclusions of a third UNEP study on the impact of fish trade 
liberalization (UNEP , 2002a).
Like the two previous UNEP studies discussed above (Argentina and Mauritania), it
underscores the unsustainability of fisheries with very weak or non-existent management
systems and high supply demands, particularly those that are export induced. 
It points to Senegal’s duty free access to the EU market under the Lomé Convention as a
significant factor in the overexploitation of its demersal stocks, creating a conser vation
crisis in the Senegalese fisher y and under mining the countr y’s food security situation.
The study provides shocking details of over-fishing by both the EU industrial fleet - given
access to Senegal’s stocks under a negotiated fisheries agreement - and Senegal’s 
domestic artisanal fleet that expanded considerably under the combined opportunities that
open access and higher earnings from export fishing provided.37
Some of its findings:
•There have been sharp declines over 28 years in the global catch rates for all 
species but those targeted for export are especially high, with some species 
threatened by biological extinction. Demersal species for export are being fished 
before they reach sexual maturity and average sizes of these continue to 
decrease.
•In the offshore areas intensive dragging (bottom trawling) and the use of illegal 
gear has depleted stocks, destroyed and changed marine habitat, eroded 
biodiversity and induced the ecological replacement of groundfish species with 
cephalopods (cuttlefish, octopuses and squid).
•Resource scarcity from over-fishing in the offshore areas leads trawlers to fish in
inshore grounds causing similar habitat destr uction and biodiversity problems 
(e.g. large red mullets disappearing because their aquatic plants habitat is 
destroyed).
•The worst infractions in the coastal zone are by the artisanal sector . Using 
un-selective gear in inshore spawning and nurser y areas the artisanal sector is 
5536Although landings for pelagics, especially sardines, increased substantially during the two years when exports fell,
an initial examination of the data suggests that landings for valuable export species did not decline significantly . More
detailed examination of the data is necessar y, however , to confir m this.
37In addition the Senegalese industrial fleet, composed mainly of boats from the EU (Spain) and China that have
been “Senegalised” through reflagging, has also expanded significantly and now represents the biggest industrial
effort in Senegalese waters as EU-flagged boats have diminished considerably since 2000.  The Senegalese industrial
fleet behaves much like the IUU fleets and has been repeatedly denounced by the on-board obser vers’ trade union, the
artisanal sector and NGOs (Personal communication Béatrice Gorez, CFFA).

under mining stock recover y by destroying large quantities of juveniles that would
eventually migrate to the offshore areas.  
•Because fishing for export is more profitable than fishing for the local market, 
the artisanal sector also targets export species. As in Mauritania, this increases 
the pressure on demersal stocks, and reduces the supply and increases the costs 
of pelagics for local consumption. 
•Trade has also developed between the artisanal and industrial sectors. 
The artisanal sector supplies the industrial fleet with demersal species and buys 
the industrial fleet’s by-catch for sale in the local markets. This has reduced 
both the supply and quality38of fish available in local Senegalese markets, 
under mining food security .
•Given that Senegal’s artisanal fleet can fish all the resources available in 
Senegal’s waters, the EU’s Fisheries Partnership Agreement39violates the 
United Nations Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) provisions that limit foreign fishing 
in a countr y’s EEZ to a complementar y role, i.e. only to those stocks that are 
surplus to the host nation’s capacity .
What emerges from this account is the picture of a countr y without the means to 
adequately protect its marine resources, squeezed by balance of payment problems and
being encouraged to exploit its fisheries to the point of collapse.
Senegal, it appears, is expecting too much from its fisher y. It must make both a major
contribution to food security and help reduce the balance of trade deficit. However , 
without the means to develop a fisheries management regime predicated on the long-ter m
conser vation of its resources, Senegal runs the risk of placing its fisher y in a position
where soon it will not be able to accomplish either . 
5638Fish from the by-catch of the industrial fleet is not as fresh or as good quality as that landed by the artisanal fleet
specifically for domestic consumption. 
39The EU’s fisheries agreements, recently relabelled as “partnership agreements”, are a major contributing factor to
overfishing in the waters of developing countries.
© Greenpeace/Behring

©Greenpeace/Behring-Chisholm
©Greenpeace/Behring-Chisholm
©Greenpeace/Behring-Chisholm
57

Conclusion
The conclusions from this study are not difficult to draw. Both the theor y and the practice
of the liberalization of fish trade say the same thing: when fish trade is liberalized in a
context of deficient management, or worse, no management at all, it quickly leads to 
overexploitation of fisheries resources, and results in social harm and environmental
degradation. 
In the context of extremely weak fisheries management systems in most countries of the
world today , the consequences of this are patently clear.
Further fish trade liberalization, especially through the reduction/elimination of tariffs,
will only bring lasting economic benefits to those few developed countries that have 
well-established and reasonably effective fisheries management regimes. It is no accident
that these are the same countries leading the push for tariff cuts. They should - provided
they have the political will - be able to withstand the pressures to increase supply beyond
sustainable levels that tariff elimination will unleash, but they are likely to be the only
ones.
It is obvious that further liberalization of fish trade will be particularly harmful for 
developing countries, as it accelerates the treadmill of “impoverishing growth” they have
been on since the structural adjustment programs of the 1980s. While tariff reductions in
fish may well bring short term boosts in their export earnings as the last vestiges of their
high value marine resources get scooped up for export, the margins for doing so are
extremely tight given that most high value stocks are already exploited at or beyond 
sustainable levels.
The most likely scenario under current conditions is that developing countries will deplete
what is left of their wildfish biomass, increasing the already considerable loss of both
genetic and biological diversity in the process. For their local consumers, fish prices will
rise as more national fishing effort is diverted to fishing for export species, leading to less
supply of locally fished and consumed pelagics. Globally , liberalization will also increase
pressure to divert food from the third world’s poor to fishmeal processing to supply 
unsustainable forms of salmon and shrimp aquaculture that will get a boost from tariff
liberalization. 
In geographic terms, there will likely be a shift in production, particularly in canned tuna
to South East Asia from ACP countries, particularly African countries, as they suffer 
preference erosion and lose the trade benefits associated with the Lomé and Cotonou
agreements. Bangkok is expected to become the uncontested hub of the international
canned tuna trade.
Even the importing OECD countries, that benefit from the inadequate, lax or non-existent
resource management regimes in developing countries, could see further liberalization
negatively impact their own fisheries. Faced with competition from cheaper imports, their
domestic fleets will likely respond by fishing harder on weak stocks unless they can shift
their capital (vessels) and labour to other uses; which is highly unlikely given past 
experience.
While fish consumers in developed countries should see some short term benefits in terms
of less expensive seafood prices, these will be short lived because further liberalization will
only accelerate resource depletion through continued over-fishing -especially in developing
countries - leading to higher prices in the medium to long term as global supplies 
diminish.
The case studies of Mauritania, Argentina and Senegal provide consistent and horridly
detailed descriptions of the ecological destr uction and waste that has occur red and is
58

occur ring in their waters, under the combined factors of poor management and strong
export-stimulated demand for fish products. But these countries are not unique and should
not be singled out for particular opprobrium.40They are the rule not the exception.
Management regimes the world over are woefully inadequate in terms of keeping the
increasing efficiency of the fishing industr y within the narrow limits of sustainability .
This is not news. The situation has been described and decried ad nauseam for almost two
decades now, in UN General Assembly resolutions, FAO studies, successive World
Summits on sustainable development and OECD reports.41The FAO’s biennial State of the
World Fisheries report, for example, has now become a predictable litany that 
quantifies the continued over-exploitation.
What is new, however , is that a concerted multilateral initiative would now accelerate the
whole unsustainable and destr uctive process; because that is what the Doha Round’s
NAMA negotiations would unleash were they to succeed.
The incoherence of the world community on the question of unsustainable fishing is 
staggering. The members of the WTO that put fish and fish products on the list of sectors
to be liberalized under NAMA and those that created the fish sectoral are also members
of the FAO’s Committee on Fisheries and, in the case of the developed countries, members
of the OECD. They know full well the state of the world’s wild stocks and - if they have
read the OECD report - they know as well what the consequences of further liberalization
will be. While countries like Canada, Norway, New Zealand and Iceland have clear 
economic gains to be made from the increased market access for their products that tariff
reduction would provide, it is highly disingenuous for them to couch their self-interest as a
benefit to developing countries. 
But the worst hypocrites are those nations that negotiate sweetheart deals for their distant
water fleets by bribing debt-ridden poor countries with infusions of badly needed hard cash
to open up their waters to the insatiable and unscr upulous practices of surplus foreign
industrial fishing capacity . While the EU’s Fisheries agreements with West African
nations are the most notorious and well documented, thanks largely to the transparency of
the EU’s political process, they are not the only ones. There are an estimated one hundred
of these agreements in place internationally , of which the EU has only about a dozen.
Japan alone is estimated to have about 40, often camouflaged under its overseas 
development assistance and technical cooperation programs (UNEP , 2002a). Taiwan and
Korea also have large distant water fleets, and China, as was shown in Mauritania and
Senegal, is also exporting its fishing capacity wherever it can. 
Clearly the problem is not one of poor countries like Mauritania, or even rich ones like
Canada, fishing off the coast of Spain and making off with as much bounty as they can
under the cover of an economic accord. A large and significant part of the problem in
global over-fishing is that power ful fishing nations, instead of assuming their legal 
obligations to act responsibly , and ensuring that their citizens and corporations do too, are
aiding and abetting ocean pillage by preying on the vulnerabilities of developing nations.
If the problem is well known, so are the solutions. There are a series of painstakingly
crafted international instruments and laws to which many (but not all!) of the guilty 
parties subscribe, that would remedy the problem if they were rigorously applied and
adhered to.
5940A recent FAO study on fish trade and food security in LIFDCs found that international trade in fish products had a
negative impact on the fish resources in all 11 countries studied. The study points out that there appears to be an
“uncanny relationship between a fish species entering international trade and its depletion “and that the 
“opportunities for profitable trade drive the depletion” (Kurien, 2005).
41The latest warnings come from a team of ecologists and economists whose projections are that the populations of
just about all seafood face collapse by 2048 if current rates of over-fishing continue (Worm et al, 2006).

There is a logical and coherent link in the key instruments of oceans gover nance starting
with the United Nations Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), the FAO Code of Conduct for
Responsible Fisheries and its companion agreement the FAO Compliance Agreement
(1993,) through to the UN Fish Stocks Agreement as well as the series of FAO
International Plans of Action , that address illegal fishing, overcapacity and over-fishing. 
Sooner rather than later, there has to be universal adherence to these key instruments.42
In the meantime those countries that are adherents have no excuses not to respect their
obligations, starting with the basic UNCLOS provision of assuming responsibility for the
fishing vessels flying their flag. There is no international ocean police, though an ‘Interpol
for the Oceans’ is clearly needed. International oceans law is largely constr ucted around
the principles of self-enforcement. It is time for responsible countries to step forward and
establish the ethical and legal standards for conduct on the high seas and in their fishing
relations with other countries.43
At the same time, those nations that are committed to sustainable fishing must come
together to create a new international conser vation instrument for marine reser ves on the
high seas (Greenpeace, 2005c). 
The last thing gover nments should do is to revive the Doha Round in general and the Non
Agricultural Market Access (NAMA) negotiations in particular . Instead of pursuing 
further trade liberalization, states should ensure existing international law is implemented
fully and establish new rules to ensure the sustainable and equitable management of the
high seas. Developing countries must be provided with the capacity and know -how to
establish and enforce effective fisheries management regimes in their own waters. 
Responsible states must act quickly however . The ecological, social and economic losses
are accumulating and some of these may be irrecoverable.
6042 Four key fishing nations China, Japan, Korea and Thailand have not signed the most important global fishing 
agreement – the UN Fish Stocks Agreement (High Seas Task Force, 2006). Japan has committed to doing so.
43See: Greenpeace, Freedom for the Seas at http://www .greenpeace.org/inter national/press/reports/freedom-for -seas,
accessed November 23, 2006. 
©Greenpeace/Davison

©Greenpeace/Sutton-Hibbert
©Greenpeace/Novis©Greenpeace/Davison
61

References
Action Aid,2006. Taking the fish: fishing communities lose out to big trawlers in
Pakistan.
Adelphi Research, Greenpeace & Friends of the Earth,2005. Is the WTO the only way?
Safeguarding Multilateral Environmental Agreements from international trade rules and
settling trade and environment disputes outside the WTO. Berlin, Amsterdam, Brussels.
http://www .greenpeace.org/raw/content/inter national/press/reports/is-the-wto-the-only-
way.pdf, accessed November 23, 2006. 
Ahmed, Mahfuz, 2006. Market Access and Trade Liberalisation in Fisheries, ICTSD, 
Issue Paper No. 4.
APEC, 2006. APEC Tariff datebase for Japan effective April 2006. Accessed at
www.apectariff .org, September 10, 2006.
Bern ardino ,Naty,2005. Presentation at the South Centre Panel on “Making Trade
Support Development: Global Problems and Viable Alter natives”, WTO Public
Symposium, April 21, 2005, Geneva accessed at: 
http://www .wto.org/english/news_e/events_e/symp05_e/ber nardino10_e.ppt, October 24,
2006.
Birdlif e Intern ation al,European Federation for Transpor t and Environment
Friends of the Earth Europe ,Greenpeace Intern ation al,Intern ation al Friends of Nature
and WWF European Policy Office,2005. Don’t trade away the planet, Brussels,
December 2005, accessed at:
http://www .foeeurope.org/publications/2005/G6_Statement_Do_not_trade_away_the_
planet.pdf , October 23, 2006. 
CFFA,2006. ACP-EU Fisheries relations: Who will pay? Who will benefit? Coalition for
Fair Fisheries Agreements, Béatrice Gorez, July 2006.
Chérif ,no date.Renouvellement de l’Accord de pêche Mauritanie-UE : le dossier sensible
des cephalopodiers. 
CIA, 2006. The World Factbook, accessed at:
www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/geos/mr .html on September 13, 2006.
COMTRADE, 2006. International Trade Statistics, accessed at:
http://www .intracen.org/tradstat/sitc3-3d/ep011.htm on October 16, 2006.
David Suzuki Foundation, no date.Net loss of wild fish to produce farmed salmon,
accessed at: http://www .davidsuzuki.org/Oceans/Fish_F arming/Salmon/Net_Loss.asp on
September 6, 2006.
Emmerson, W.,2006. The Dispute Settlement Understanding, Power Point presentation,
Geneva, March, 2006.
FAO,no date.FAO, Countr y profiles and Mapping information system, accessed at
www.fao.org/countr yprofiles/lifdc.asp?lang=eng on September 8, 2006.
FAO,2000. State of the World’s Fisheries and Aquaculture, Rome.
FAO,2002. State of the World’s Fisheries and Aquaculture, Part I, Rome.
62

FAO,2002a. Implementation of the International Plan of Action to prevent, deter and
eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, FAO Technical guide for responsible
fisheries, Rome.
FAO,2004. Status and potential of fisheries and aquaculture in Asia and the Pacific, By
Shunji Sugiyama, Derek Staples & Simon Funge-Smith,
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific.
FAO,2004a. State of the World Fisheries and Aquaculture, Part 1, Rome.
FAO,2005. Review of the state of world marine fisher y resources, Fisheries Technical
Paper, 457, Rome.
FAO,2005a. FAO support to WTO negotiations. Fisheries trade issues in the WTO. Globe
Fish. Accessed at: http://www .globefish.org/index.php?id=2690 on September 8, 2005.
Financial Times, 2006. Democrats pledge joint stance on global trade, 9 November .
Greenpeace ,2005. NAMA Drama. Greenpeace International, Amsterdam. Accessed at:
http://www .greenpeace.org/inter national/press/releases/wto-under mines-right-to-act-wi on
October 23, 2006. 
Greenpeace ,2005a. NAFO Case Study . The Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation: A
case study in how RFMOs regularly fail to manage our Oceans. Greenpeace International,
Amsterdam. Accessed at:
http://www .greenpeace.org/raw/content/inter national/press/reports/NAFO -Case-Study .pdf,
November 23, 2006
Greenpeace ,2005b .Trading away our last ancient forests. The threats from trade 
liberalization under the WTO. Greenpeace International, Amsterdam. Accessed at
http://www .greenpeace.org/raw/content/inter national/press/reports/T radingawayancientfore
sts.pdf , November 23, 2006
Greenpeace ,2005c. Black Holes in Deep Open Space: Closing the legal voids in High
Seas Biodiversity Protection. Greenpeace International, Amsterdam. Accessed at
http://www .greenpeace.org/raw/content/inter national/press/reports/black-holes.pdf ,
November 23, 2006
Greenpeace ,2006. Deadly subsidies: How gover nment subsidies are destroying the oceans
and forests and why the CBD rather than the WTO should stop this perverse use of public
money , Greenpeace International, Amsterdam. Accessed at
http://www .greenpeace.org/raw/content/inter national/press/reports/deadly-subsidies.pdf ,
November 23, 2006.
Greenpeace ,2006a. Genetic Engineering and the WTO: an Analysis of the Report in the
‘EC-Biotech’ Case, Greenpeace International, Amsterdam. Accessed at http://www .
greenpeace.org/raw/content/inter national/press/reports/genetic-engineering-and-the-
wto.pdf , November 23, 2006. 
Harrington et al,2005. Wasted fisher y resources: discarded by-catch in the USA, Fish
and Fisheries, 2005, 6, 350-361.
High Seas Task Force,2006. Closing the net. Stopping illegal fishing on the high seas.
High Seas Task Force, London.
IFOMA, 2001. International Fish Meal and Fish Oil Organization, slide presentation from
www.iffo.org.uk/tech/STIRLING.pdf , accessed on October 30, 2006.
63

IFOMA, 2002. International Fish Meal and Fish Oil Organization, slide presentation from
www.iffo.org.uk/pdflib/BORDEA UX.pdf , accessed on September 5, 2006.
Iceland, 2005. Icelandic fisheries in figures. Accessed from http://eng.sjavar utveg-
sraduneyti.is/ on September 10, 2006.
Jawara, F.,Kwa, A.,2004. Behind the Scenes at the WTO, updated edition, London, Zed
Books.
Josupeit, H.,2005. WTO and Fisheries. Globe Fish, October , 2005.
Josupeit, H.,2006. Regulations in Fish Trade. Globefish, June 2006.
Kelleher ,Kieran, 2005. Discards in the world’s marine fisheries: an update, Technical
Paper 470, FAO, Rome.
Khor,Martin,2006. A Development Assessment of the current WTO negotiations, Third
World Network, September , 2006.
Khor,Martin,2006a. WTO meeting agrees on a 'soft' resumption of Doha talks, TWN Info
Service on WTO and Trade Issues (Nov06), 21 November 2006.
Kleih, U.,Greenhalgh, P.,Marter,A.and Peacock, N.,2006. Sustainability Impact
Assessment of proposed WTO negotiations: Final report for the Fisheries Sector Study ,
Natural Resources Institute, University of Greenwich, UK. See http://www .sia-
trade.org/wto/FinalPhase/FINAL_Fisheries_10-07-2006.pdf , accessed November 23,
2006
Kurien J (Editor), 2005. Responsible fish trade and food security . FAO Fisheries,
Technical paper 456.
Lem, Audun, 2006. WTO and Fisheries: An Update, IFFET 2006 Portsmouth proceedings.
Lem, Audun, no date.China, the WTO and World Fish Trade.
www.globefish.org/index.php?id=2066. Accessed September 8, 2006.
Lem, Audun, no date.FAO Fact sheet for WTO Ministerial Conference in Cancun, Mexico.
www.globefish.org/index.php?id=2112. Accessed September 8, 2006.
Lyman,Christopher P.,M.J.Gibbons, B.E. Axelsen, C.A.J. Sparks, J.Coetzee ,B.G.
Heywood and A.S.Bierley,2006. Jellyfish overtake fish in a heavily fished ecosystem,
Currrent Biology , Vol 16, No 13, July 11, 2006.
Megapesca, 2005. The European Tuna Sector Economic situation, prospects and analysis
of the impact of the liberalization of trade. Final Report, November 2005.
McGoodwin, James R,1990. Crisis In the World’s Fisheries - People, Problems and
Policies, Stanford, Standford University Press.
Melchior ,Arne,2006. Tariffs in world seafood trade. FAO Fisheries circular no. 1016.
Rome, 2006.
Melchior ,Arne,2006a. Handout Workshop on Impact of WTO Agreement and Current
WTO Negotiations on the Fisheries Sector - Geneva, March, 2006.
Myers,Ransom A.& Worm, Boris, 2003. Rapid worldwide depletion of predator y fish
communities, Nature, May 15, 2003.
64

Narlikar,Amrit a,2005. The World Trade Organization, A very short introduction. Oxford,
Oxford University Press.
Newstalk ZB,2006. Striking foreign fisher men won’t budge. Newstalk ZB 12-05-2006.
New Zealand, 2001. New Zealand Seafood Industr y Profile, July 2001. Accessed from
www.seafood.co.nz/doclibrar y/news/P rofile.pdf , September 10, 2006
OECD ,2003. Liberalizing fisheries markets, scope and effects, Paris, 2003.
OECD ,2005. Why fish piracy persists: The Economics of Illegal, Unreported and
Unregulated Fishing.
O’Riordan, Brian, 2006. Growing Pains: Child Labour . In: SAMUDR A, number 44, July,
2006.
PNUE, 2006. Évaluation de l’impact de la libéralisation du commerce. Une etude de cas
sur le secteur des pêches de la République Islamique de Mauritanie.
Rahm an,M.,2001. EU ban on shrimp imports from Bangladesh: A case study on market
access problems faced by the LDCs, presented at the CUTS Seminar on SPS Standards
and Trade, April 2001.
RNZ, 2006. Growing concer n at the number of foreign fisher men jumping ship in New
Zealand, RNZ, 15 March, 2006.
Rowe,Derrick 2002. Address to the National Seafood Sector Council Human Resources
conference, Halifax, November 15, 2002. 
Shanghai Daily ,2006. In: SAMUDR A News Alert, August 17, 2006.
Tacon, Alber t G.J,2002. Shrimp farming and the environment: World Bank, WWF &
FAO Consortium program on Shrimp farming and the environment.
Thanh Nien News,2005. In: SAMUDR A News Alert, June 14, 2005.
Umali,Bass, 2004. Why the WTO is unable to deliver trade benefits to small-scale fisher?
Focus on the Global South. www.focusweb.org/philippines/content/view/55/2/. Accessed
September 7, 2006.
UNCTAD,2005. Report of the expert meeting on dynamic and new sectors of world trade,
Geneva, November 25, 2005.
UNEP,2002. Integrated Assessment of Trade Liberalization and Trade-R elated Policies: A
countr y study on the Argentina Fisheries Sector , New York and Geneva.
UNEP,2002a. Integrated Assessment of Trade Liberalization and Trade-R elated Policies:
A countr y study on the Fisheries Sector in Senegal, New York and Geneva.
US,2006. United States International Trade Commission, Harmonized Tariff Schedule of
US (2006).
USDA, 2005. US Department of Agriculture, International Trade Report, US Seafood
imports continue to soar, July 8, 2005.
Wallace C.and Weeber B.,2006. The devil and the deep sea – economics, institutions and
incentives: the theor y and the New Zealand quota management experience in the deep sea
in FAO Fisheries Proceedings 2005. No. 3/1. Rome. 
65

Warner,William, 1977 .Distant Water: The Fate of the North Atlantic Fisher man, Boston:
Little, Brown and Company .
Watson, Reg and Pauly ,Daniel, 2001. Systematic distortions in world fisheries catch
trends, Nature, Volume 414, November 2001.
Wolman,Lewis,2002. What’s American Samoa’s future if canneries pack up? Pacific
magazine, Januar y 1, 2002.
Worm B,Barbier EB,Beaumont N,Duffy JE,Folke C,Halpern BS,Jackson JBC, Lotze
HK,Micheli F,Palumbi SR,Sala E,Selkoe KA,Stachowicz JJ,Watson R,2006. Impacts
of Biodiversity Loss on Ocean Ecosystem Services Science, volume 314, November 3,
2006.
WTO ,2001. Ministerial Declaration, Doha. WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1, http://www .wto.org/eng-
lish/thewto_e/minist_e/min01_e/mindecl_e.htm, accessed November 23, 2006.
WTO ,2004. Doha Work Programme - Decision Adopted by the General Council on 1
August 2004. See:
http://www .wto.org/english/tratop_e/dda_e/draf t_text_gc_dg_31july04_e.htm, accessed
November 23, 2006. 
WTO ,2005. Liberalisation of trade in fish and fish products, Communication from
Canada, Iceland, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Singapore and Thailand. TN/MA/W/63.
WTO ,2005a. Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, WT/MIN(05)/DEC,
http://www .wto.org/english/thewto_e/minist_e/min05_e/final_text_e.htm. Accessed
November 23, 2006. 
WTO ,2006. Trade liberalization of fish and fish products. Communication from Canada,
Iceland, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore and Thailand. TN/MA/W/63/Add.1, 2006.
Zeller ,Dirk & Pauly ,Daniel, 2005. Good news, bad news: global fisheries discards are
declining but so are total catches, Fish and Fisheries, 2005.
66
© Greenpeace/Behring

© Greenpeace/Gleizes
© Greenpeace/Newman©Greenpeace/Care
67

List of Acron yms
ACP: African, Caribbean, and Pacific countries
CFFA: Coalition for Fair Fisheries Arrangements
DSB: Dispute Settlement Body
EC: European Community
EEZ: Exclusive Economic Zone
EU: European Union
FA: Fisheries Agreement 
FAO: United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
FCR: Food Conversion Ratios
GATS: General Agreement on Trade in Services
GATT: General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GPS: Global Positioning System
GSP: Generalized System of Preferences
HACCP: Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point
IMF: International Monetar y Fund
IUU fishing: Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing
LDCs: Least Developed Countries
LIFDC: Low Income Food Deficit Countr y
MEA : Multilateral Environmental Agreement
MFN: Most Favoured Nation treatment
NAMA : Non-Agricultural Market Access
NGR: Negotiating Group on Rules
NTBs: Non-Tariff Barriers
OECD: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
PRSP: Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
SPS: WTO Agreement on Sanitar y and Phytosanitar y Measures
TAC: Total Allowable Catch
TBT: WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade 
TEDs: Turtle Excluder Devices
UNCLOS: United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
UNDP: United Nations Development Programme
UNEP: United Nations Environment Programme 
USITC: United States International Trade Commission
WHO: World Health Organization 
WTO: World Trade Organization
68

© Greenpeace/Grace©Greenpeace/Hofford
©Greenpeace/MacColl
69

Appendix I 
Selected Greenpeace papers and press releases on the Doha
Round 2003-2006 
2006
“Face it, Doha is dead”: time to look at alternatives to WTO
24 July 2006 (press release)
http://www .greenpeace.org/inter national/press/releases/doha-is-dead 
Deadly Subsidies, How gover nment subsidies are destroying the oceans and forests and
why the CBD rather than the WTO should stop this perverse use of public money .
31 May 2006 (study)
http://www .greenpeace.org/raw/content/inter national/press/reports/deadly-subsidies.pdf 
2005
Face-saving declaration by the WTO fails to address the real impacts of free trade
18 December 2005 (press release)
http://www .greenpeace.org/inter national/press/releases/WTO_declaration_fails_address_rea
l_impacts_free_trade
The NAMA Drama 
02 December 2005 (background paper)
http://www .greenpeace.org/raw/content/inter national/press/reports/the-nama-drama.pdf
Trading away our last ancient forests 
02 December 2005 (study)
http://www .greenpeace.org/raw/content/inter national/press/reports/T radingawayancientfore
sts.pdf 
WTO Hong Kong 2005 Position 
02 December 2005 (paper)
http://www .greenpeace.org/raw/content/inter national/press/reports/wto-hong-kong-2005-
position.pdf 
Adelphi Research, Greenpeace & Friends of the Earth, 2005. Is the WTO the only way?
Safeguarding Multilateral Environmental Agreements from international trade rules and
settling trade and environment disputes outside the WTO. Berlin, Amsterdam, Brussels
http://www .greenpeace.org/raw/content/inter national/press/reports/is-the-wto-the-only-
way.pdf 
2004
WTO: Dangerous fudge--not victor y for multilateralism
01 August 2004 (press release)
http://www .greenpeace.org/inter national/press/releases/wto-dangerous-fudge-not-vict 
2003
USA and EU sink the WTO round in Cancun and we call on gover nments to create a new
trade system, 14 September 2003 (press release)
http://www .greenpeace.org/inter national/press/releases/usa-and-eu-sink-the-wto-round 
70

A Guide to the 5th Ministerial Conference of the WTO (paper)
http://www .greenpeace.org/raw/content/inter national/press/reports/a-guide-to-the-5th-
ministerial.pdf 
Greenpeace Position Paper for the 5th Ministerial Conference of the WTO
http://www .greenpeace.org/inter national_en/multimedia/download/1/308757/0/
positionpaper -FINAL.pdf
Questions and Answers about the 5th Ministerial Meeting of the WTO in Cancun, Mexico
(paper)
http://www .greenpeace.org/inter national_en/multimedia/download/1/306498/0/q&A .pdf 
71

72

73

74

Trading Away Our Oceans
Why trade liberalization of fisheries must be abandon ed
©Greenpeace/Novis ©Greenpeace/Behring-Chisholm©Greenpeace/Behring-Chisholm
www .oceans.greenpeace .org

Trading Away Our Oceans
Why trade liberalization of fisheries must be abandon ed
Greenpeace Intern ation alOttho Heldringstraat 5,1066 AZ  Amsterdam, Nethe rlands
T+31 20 718 2000 F+31 20 514 8156 www .oceans.greenpeace .orgGreenpeace is an independent, campaigning organisation which uses non-violent,
creative confrontation to expose global environmental problems and to force 
solutions essential to a green and peaceful future.
Design: www.nicolepostdesign.nlPrinted on 100% Post Consumer Recycled,
chlorine free paper©Greenpeace/Sutton-Hibbert