# Archivo original: western-forest-products-loggi.pdf
# Tipo: .PDF
# Procesado el: Sat Oct 11 09:41:42 -03 2025

Logging Practices & 
The Forest Stewardship
C o u n c i l ’ s Principles 
& Criteria:Western Forest 
Products 
An Indicative 
A s s e s s m e n t
Published by Greenpeace V a n c o u v e r
September 1998
This report was written and researched by:
Rick Zammuto , Ph.D, Head, SEE ME Consultants Ltd 
(Sustainable Ecology and Evolution of Montane Ecosystems)
Bill Barclay , Greenpeace International
Tamara Stark , Greenpeace V a n c o u v e r
Phil Aikman , Consultant to Greenpeace

C O N T E N T S
1 Executive Summary
3 Preamble: The SGS Certification Process
Indicative Assessment of WFP Logging Practices
6 I n t r o d u c t i o n
8 M e t h o d s
8 R e s u l t s
Results for Each FSC Principle and Criteria:
9 Principle 1: Compliance with Laws 
and FSC Principles
1 1 Principle 2: Tenure and Use Rights 
and Responsibilities
1 2 Principle 3: Indigenous Peoples’ Rights
1 4 Principle 4: Community Relations 
and W o r k e r ’ s Rights
1 6 Principle 5: Benefits from the Forest
1 9 Principle 6: Environmental Impact
2 4 Principle 7: Management Plan
2 5 Principle 8: Monitoring and Assessment
2 6 Principle 9: Maintenance of Natural Forests
2 7 Principle 10: Plantations
3 0 Discussions and Conclusions
3 1 R e f e r e n c e s
3 4 Appendix 1
Forests Certified by FSC-Accredited 
Certification Bodies
3 7 Appendix 2
List of SGS Technical Committee for WFP 
assessment standard
3 8 Appendix 3
FSC: Introduction to the FSC’s Principles 
and Criteria for Forest Stewardship
3 9 Appendix 4
Letter from Chiefs, Recent 
Non-conformance example
4 0 Appendix 5
Contact Information A b b r e v i a t i o n s :
F S C Forest Stewardship Council
W F P Western Forest Products
C S S P Clayoquot Sound Science Panel
B C British Columbia, Canada
A A C Annual allowable cut
F D P Five-year development plan
S P Silvicultural prescriptions
P & C Principles and criteriaFront Cover 
1997 logging by Western Forest
Products on Roderick Island.
C l e a r cutting is planned to be used
for over 90% of the cutblocks
Western Forest Products plans to
conduct in the next few years.
( M c A l l i s t e r )

E X E C U T I V E  S U M M A R Y
Western Forest Products (WFP) recently announced that
they would have their operations audited under the Forest
Stewardship Council (FSC) certification and labeling sys-
tem to demonstrate to their customers and the public that
their forestry practices adhere to acceptable standards.
The FSC is a non-profit, non-governmental organization
which has been set up to support environmentally sound,
socially beneficial and economically viable forestry 
management, and the labeling and marketing of forest
products from such forests. The FSC system is based 
on audits conducted by professional auditors against 
stringent, internationally recognized standards. 
WFP has widely promoted the fact that it is going through
an FSC audit to its customers, the forest industry, press
and the Canadian public. However, an FSC audit is not a
guarantee that a certificate will be issued. A number 
of serious and persistent issues have been documented
and raised by scientists, environmentalists, aboriginal
peoples, consumers and the public about the environmen-
tal and social impacts of WFP’s operations. 
This indicative assessment studies WFP’s current and
planned forestry practices against the Forest Stewardship
C o u n c i l ’ s Principles and Criteria (FSC P&C) to identify
compliance gaps. For each of the FSC P&C, we assessed
WFP performance and then rated it as either a) compliance
b) non-compliance c) serious non-compliance and 
d) insufficient information available to assess. 
Of the 52 individual FSC Criteria, insufficient information
was available to assess 20 of them. Of the remaining 
32 criteria, WFP was in compliance with 6%, in non-
compliance with 25% and in serious non-compliance with
69%. Of the criteria we were able to assess, we 
determined that WFP had an overall failure rate of 94%.Principle broad areas of WFP serious non-compliance
i n c l u d e :
• Failure to adequately conserve primary forests of 
major environmental, social and cultural significance 
(FSC Principles 6, 9 and related Criteria);
• Failure to respect the rights of First Nations to own, 
use and manage their lands, territories and resources 
(FSC Principles 2, 3 and related Criteria);
• Continued widespread use of intensive logging practices
which negatively impact associated biodiversity, ecological
functions and forest integrity (FSC Principles 5, 6, 7, 9 and
related Criteria);
• Continued use of forest management systems which 
lead to the degradation and conversion of primary forests
to short-rotation tree-farms (basis of FSC Principle 9).
This report finds that WFP is out of step with the latest
thinking in BC forestry policy:
F i r s t l y , the Clayoquot Sound Science Panel (CSSP) pro-
vides a detailed study on maintaining ecosystem integrity
and long-term social and economic needs in coastal 
temperate rainforests of British Columbia and sets an
important benchmark for FSC certification standards for the
area. For example, one of the CSSP 120 recommendations
was that timber planning be ecosystem-based, rather 
than volume-driven as is currently practiced by WFP, which
would entail “abandoning the specification of Annual
Allowable Cut as an input to local planning. ”
Our assessment finds the CSSP recommendations to 
be much more consistent with the FSC’s guiding Principles
and Criteria than WFP’s current and planned forestry oper-
ations. The assessment concludes that WFP’s operations
are far from being certifiable under the FSC system without
f a r-reaching and fundamental changes to the company’s
operations and forest management planning.1 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

S e c o n d l y , WFP’s position on FSC certification and forest
policy compares sharply with the position taken by 
B C ’s leading coastal forestry company MacMillan Bloedel,
whose recent declaration is a significant shift from 
traditional BC forest policy. The company intends to phase
out clearcutting of coastal primary forests within 5 years
and to gradually shift from primary forests towards second-
growth forests exploitation within 25 years. In addition, 
the company states that certification will be applied as an
effort to satisfy customers.
These overall findings contrast sharply with WFP’s own
publicly stated opinions by their Chief Forester, Bill
Dumont, who has claimed that WFP current operations are
FSC-certifiable without any significant changes to their
activities on the ground. For example, on CBC Radio 
(10 June 1998) he said: “I think that our operations… a r e
going to be recognised and we’ll get our [FSC]
c e r t i f i c a t i o n . ” Similar statements have been by other WFP
representatives in recent months, in published literature
and to a number of their customers. It is clear that the FSC
name is being used to give some ‘green’ credibility and
marketing advantage to WFP .
This assessment concludes that WFP’s current and 
planned operations demonstrate a consistent pattern of
broad non-compliance with the Forest Stewardship
C o u n c i l ’ s guiding Principles and Criteria. W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 2

P R E A M B L E
SGS Qualifor (SGS) based in Oxford, United
Kingdom, has recently been contracted by Western
Forest Products Ltd. to conduct a Forest Stewardship
Council endorsed certification assessment of all 
of its forestry operations in British Columbia. SGS
has certified 64.3% of the land area of FSC accredited
certifications worldwide.  
The Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) is a 
non-profit, non-governmental organization which has
been set up to support environmentally sound, 
socially beneficial and economically viable forest 
management, and the labeling and marketing 
of forest products from such forests. The introduction
to the FSCÕs Principles and Criteria for forest 
management can be found in Appendix 3 and explains
further its goals and functions. 
SGS 
“The SGS International Certification Services group 
of companies (SGS-ICS) is active in over 60 countries and
accredited in 14 countries, SGS-ICS services embrace 
a wide range of accredited certifications and the related
registered training courses.
SGS inspection, testing and consulting capabilities and
numerous services linked to the production, marketing and
sales of consumer goods are available to enable both 
suppliers and distributors to comply with safety and quality
standards and other regulatory requirements. 
SGS Forestry is the Group’s centre of technical excellence
in forestry and wood products, specializing in forest 
management auditing, forest certification (QUALIFOR), 
log and wood product control systems (Logtrak), due 
diligence assessments and training. In addition, SGS
F o r e s t r y provides technical services in fields such as 
forest management and monitoring, forest product pricing,
forest revenue collection system design and forestry
research and development. SGS Forestr y ’s international
forest management certification program is accredited 
by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC). ”The Forest Stewardship Council reasons for formation, 
and goals (5):
“Forest certification emerged in the late ’80s in response
to perceived poor forestry management and calls for 
boycotts of certain wood products. Consequently, the
Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) was formed to oversee 
a credible process of independent certification of well-
managed forests. The Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) 
is an international, independent, non-profit, non-govern-
mental organization. In 1993, after three years of 
extensive international consultation with a broad range of
stakeholders, the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) was
founded. Interested parties actively participating in the
establishment of the FSC included representatives from
environmental institutions, the timber trade, the forestry
profession, indigenous peoples’ organizations, community
f o r e s t r y groups and forest product certification organiza-
tions from 25 countries. This diverse group developed the
FSC's Principles and Criteria, which applies to tropical,
temperate and boreal forests. They cover broad issues
such as land tenure, the reduction of environmental
impacts, optimal utilization of forest products, and written
management plans. The Principles and Criteria are 
intended to be used as a guiding framework for developing
regional forest stewardship standards which are appropri-
ate to local social, ecological and economic conditions.
The FSC is a membership association with more than 200
members from over 37 countries. Membership is open to a
wide range of organizations and individuals representing
social, economic and environmental interests. Through a
voting process that gives equal weight to the economic,
social, and environmental chambers, all decisions are
made. The voting process is also balanced South-North.
Principles and Criteria
After three years of extensive consultation around the
world, ten Principles and complementary Criteria were
agreed upon at the FSC’s founding meeting in Toronto, in
1993. The FSC’s Principles and Criteria are universal in
nature and apply to tropical, temperate and boreal forests.
They cover broad issues such as land tenure, the reduction
of environmental impacts, optimal utilization of forest 3 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

products, and written management plans. The Principles
and Criteria are intended to be used as a guiding frame-
work for developing standards which are appropriate 
to social, ecological and economic conditions at national
and/or regional levels. 
Regional Forest Stewardship Standards
The FSC Principles and Criteria require interpretation at
the local level. For this reason, the FSC encourages the
development of regional forest stewardship standards
which are in line with FSC’s mission. This structure makes
the standards relevant to local circumstances within a set
of globally agreed upon Principles and Criteria. The FSC’s
approach provides a system that is accountable to the
interested and affected parties in a region or country
because they are the key actors in the development of 
forest stewardship standards. The standards development
process must be equitable and transparent, include 
representatives from Aboriginal, environmental, economic
and social organizations as well as including consultation
with the public at large.
Regional forest stewardship standards strengthen the 
certification process. Certifiers operating within the region
must use these standards as the basis for their evaluation.
These standards are an important tool in improving 
transparency and public acceptance of certification in a
region. The inclusive and transparent manner in which the
FSC operates offers a promising and practical alternative
in defining what good forest management is, and in 
communicating this message effectively to environmentally
and socially concerned consumers. ”The FSC accredits certifiers, such as SGS, to con -
duct independent assessments of logging companies
to determine whether they comply with FSC P&C.
WFP has contracted SGS to evaluate WFPÕs forest
management against the generic requirements of the
FSC P&C, supplemented by regional standards 
or specific performance criteria, relevant to local 
ecological, social, and economic circumstances. 
SGS has informed the FSC BC Drafting Committee
that it will be part of the SGS evaluation process. 
The first draft of the FSC Standards for British
Columbia (BC) are expected in late Fall 1998.
SGS is proceeding with assessing WFPÕs opera -
tions. However, there are a number of unresolved
issues concerning WFPÕs operations that will influ -
ence whether WFP is able to meet FSC certification
standards within the BC context. These include 
the fact that land use planning processes for much of
the coastal temperate rainforest zones where WFP
operates are not yet completed. Additionally, the
nature of land title and tenure with indigenous 
peoples and the high level of logging of old growth
forests are unresolved issues. Each of these issues
holds the potential to set precedents. 
The certification assessment process for WFP is
planned to follow these steps: 
1. Checklist Development and Stakeholder Consultation;
2. Main Assessment by an SGS Quality Forestry
(Qualifor) Assessment Team using the checklist;
3. Peer review of the assessment results.
The development of the local checklist will be 
based on existing local standards and requirements
including: relevant government legislation, regula -
tions, guidelines and policy, recognized industry and
non-government organization (NGO) guidelines for
forest management, environmental protection, social
responsibility, and any other relevant criteria.W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 4

SGS has convened a group of BC Forest Specialists
with experience in forest ecology, forest economics,
and in social, environmental, and First Nation issues
to develop the draft checklist that is to help determine
if WFP operations are certifiable by FSC (see
Appendix 2 , BC Forest Specialists appointed to devel -
op the draft SGS checklist). Interested stakeholders
are allowed to provide their views on the checklist and
on WFP forest practices under the stakeholder con -
sultation process. Once the stakeholder consultation
process is complete and reasonable consensus 
has been achieved on the local checklist, the Main
Assessment of WFPÕs forest management against
these requirements will be undertaken.   
The current schedule is:
Phase 1: Development of local standard checklist and
stakeholder consultation
June 22: Certification process information circular sent 
to key stakeholders;
August: SGS convened a small technical group of 
independent BC ÔspecialistsÕ to produce a draft checklist
for the main assessment;
September 4: Stakeholder consultation process begins
with the circulation of draft checklist to FSC BC Steering
Committee and interested stakeholders;
October 16: End of stakeholder consultation phase;
Early November: Local standard finalized by SGS 
technical committee.
Phase 2: Main Assessment of Western Forest Products
operations and further stakeholder consultation
Exact dates to be determined at completion of Phase 1.
A SGS Audit team will assess WFPÕs operations against
the local standard developed under Phase 1, above.
Stakeholders are encouraged to submit comments and
concerns on Western Forest Products operations. 
Process planned to be completed by July 1999.Flexibility is incorporated into the process to allow
for unforeseen developments, the anticipated FSC
announcement regarding changes to Principle 9, and
the release of draft BC standards.
Contact information for SGS and the FSC, 
including the FSC-Canada BC Steering Committee,
can be found in Appendix 5 . SGS will provide 
further information on request related to the WFP
certification assessment, including how to provide any
comments or input into the stakeholder consultation
process. 
Stakeholder input is a key part of the FSC certifica -
tion assessment process. Comments submitted to
SGS are shared with Western Forest Products. Note
that comments will normally be attributed to the 
person submitting them, but you can request SGS to
keep your name confidential if you prefer.
The FSC-Canada BC Steering Committee welcomes
copies of any comments submitted by stakeholders to
SGS on the WFP certification assessment.  
Western Forest Products is a wholly owned subsidiary of
Doman Industries Limited, and logs over 800,000 ha of
Coastal forestlands in BC primarily from three operations:
Vancouver Island, Central Coast, and Queen Charlotte
Islands (seven sawmills and two pulp mills). It logs over 4
million cubic meters annually (89% non-local employment
(8, 11)), almost exclusively by clearcutting of old growth
(21, 22), on lands unceded by First Nations (most of BC is
legally unceded by First Nations, (2)). Much of WFP’s
operations are in the few remaining large intact areas of
p r i m a r y temperate rainforest, recognized by the W o r l d
Resources Institute, the Worldwide Fund for Nature, and
many other groups as being globally rare and endangered.5 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T  O F  W F P  
L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S  
I n t r o d u c t i o n
The purpose of this study is to provide an early,
indicative assessment of Western Forest ProductsÕ
forestry operations as they compare to the Forest
Stewardship CouncilÕs (FSC) Principles and Criteria
for forest management. The study assesses the 
probable conformance of WFPÕs logging operations
against each of the FSCÕs Principles and Criteria,
based on a sample of the information available in the
public domain on WFPÕs operations. This analysis
identifies specific conformance or ÒcredibilityÓ gaps
between WFP's current and planned logging practices
and the performance standards that would be 
expected by application of the FSCÕs Principles and
Criteria in British Columbia. This study is not a 
substitute for a full FSC certification assessment. The
full assessment will undoubtedly uncover many more
problems with WFPÕs operations. Therefore, while
preliminary, this study provides a useful indication of
the degree which WFPÕs operations conform to the
FSCÕs guiding principles and criteria. 
The FSC is an international, voluntary, forest 
management certification and labeling system, 
created to promote ecologically and socially responsi -
ble forest use, and help meet growing market demand
for forest products from ecologically and socially
responsible forestry operations. The FSC gives buyers
an opportunity to support good forestry management
through their purchases, and an alternative to buying
from companies that use ecologically destructive 
logging and forest management practices. The FSC
provides marketing advantages in Europe, the USA
and other environmentally sensitive markets to
forestry companies certified as meeting the FSCÕs
environmental and social performance standards (82).W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 6
Doman Operations
n Crown Timber T e n u r e s

In early June 1998, Western Forest Products (WFP)
announced they would go through a certification
assessment of all its forestry operations against the
FSCÕs social and environmental performance stan -
dards (27). The audit of WFP will be conducted by
SGS Qualifor; a FSC accredited certifier organization
based in the UK (68). The audit of WFP is planned 
to be completed by July 1999
As recently noted by the FSC, however, Òthe process
of conducting an audit is not a guarantee that a 
certificate will be issued .Ó This is because, Òwhere 
performance is not found to be in conformance with
FSC requirements a certificate will not be issued . Ó
(83). Nonetheless, WFP launched an intensive public
relations and marketing initiative in Canada and
internationally of its ÒcommitmentÓ to the FSC as 
evidence of its ÒgreenÓ credentials, despite the fact
that its forest management has yet to be audited.
WFPÕs announcement that it would put all 
its operations through a FSC audit is surprising in
several regards:
Firstly, WFP logging activities have generated 
substantial controversy and widespread opposition,
both in British Columbia and internationally, from
scientists, environmental organizations, and members
of local First Nation indigenous communities, 
businesses and the general public. These controver -
sies include both where WFP logs or plans to log, 
and how it logs.  
Secondly, the same forest management practices
WFP is proposing to be endorsed by the FS C Ñ clear -
cutting of primary coastal temperate rainforest s Ñ
were just publicly renounced in June 1998 by British
ColumbiaÕs largest forestry company, MacMillan
Bloedel, as no longer socially or environmentally
acceptable, either in BC or with international cus -
tomers of BC coastal temperate rainforest products.  This statement was based on an intensive company
wide review of its operations, scientific developments
in forest ecology and management, public opinion
and market assessments. The company intends to
phase out clearcutting of coastal primary forests with -
in 5 years and to gradually shift from primary forests
towards second-growth forests exploitation within 
25 years. In addition, the company states that 
certification will be applied as an objective to satisfy
customers.
WFP is a wholly owned subsidiary of Doman
Industries Limited. They log around 4 million cubic
meters per year on over 800,000 hectares of coastal
temperate rainforests on Crown lands in British
Columbia from three principal areas: Vancouver
Island, the Central Coast, and the Queen Charlotte
Islands.  
WFP logging operations consist almost exclusively
of clearcutting in primary forest (also known as old-
growth or ancient forests);  
WFP operates in the traditional territories of 27 
different First Nation (indigenous people) communi -
ties. No treaties exist between these First Nations 
and the BC and Canadian governments, and their
rights over their territories and resources have never
been ceded. Treaty negotiations are under way or
planned, but only one has been completed to date;
WFP operates in numerous areas that have 
been identified by scientists and numerous conser -
vation organizations as having globally outstanding
conservation values, and that are priorities for 
protection.7 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

M e t h o d s :
Western Forest ProductsÕ forestry practices are 
compared with the FSCÕs Principles and Criteria and
related regionally relevant standards. Western Forest
ProductsÕ forestry practices are assessed using a 
sample of WFPÕs Five-Year Development Plans (FDP)
and Silvicultural Prescriptions (SP), government 
documents, scientific literature and communications,
non-governmental reports, published field studies,
journal articles, press stories, correspondence, and
interviews with WFP and BC Ministry of Forests staff,
environmentalists and other stakeholders. 
Related regionally relevant standards under FSC
procedures for WFPÕs certification assessment
include, the SGS Forestry Checklist, The Clayoquot
Sound Scientific Panel reports, the Silva Forest
Foundation Standards for Ecologically Responsible
Timber Management and work of the FSC-Canada,
BC Technical Committee.
For each of the FSCÕs Principles and Criteria, 
relevant evidence of Western Forest ProductsÕ 
performance is evaluated and WFP is categorized
either as:
1. Conformance: 
WFP operations are found to conform to the stated 
FSC P&C;
2. Non-Conformance:  
WFP operations are found that do not conform to the
stated FSC P&C;
3. Serious Non-Conformance: 
WFP operations are found that do not conform to the
stated Principle or Criteria, and the non-conformance is
serious and/or affecting a large portion of their operations; 
4. Insufficient Information: 
Conformance with Principle or Criteria is not yet 
determinable from the information available. 
The referenced information supporting each 
classification of WFPÕs operations are organized
under the appropriate FSC Principle and Criteria in
chronological order.  R e s u l t s :
Summary Results: There are 52 Criteria found under
FSC Principles 1Ð10. Insufficient information was
available from the sources used to assess 20 of these
criteria, including all of Principle 10 (Plantations).  
Of the remaining 32 FSC criteria under Principles
1Ð9, we judged Western Forest Products as follows:
C o n f o r m a n c e 6 %
N o n - c o n f o r m a n c e 2 5 %
Serious non-conformance 6 9 %
The study yielded a 94% overall failure rate of
Western Forest ProductsÕ performance in comparison
to the FSCÕs Principles and Criteria.
Principle broad areas of WFP serious non-compli -
ance with FSC P & C 1 Ð9 include:
¥ failure to adequately conserve primary forests of 
major environmental, social and cultural significance
(FSC Principles 6 and 9 and related criteria);
¥ failure to adequately respect the rights of First Nations 
to control, use and manage their lands, territories and
resources (FSC Principles 2 and 3 and related criteria);
¥ widespread use of clearcutting and other intensive
forestry practices which negatively impact associated 
biodiversity, ecological functions and forest integrity.
(FSC Principles 5, 6, 7 and 9 and related criteria);
¥ continued use of forest management systems which 
lead to the degradation and conversion of primary forests
to short-rotation tree-farms (basis of FSC Principle 9).W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 8

R E S U L T S  F O R  E A C H  F S C  P R I N C I P L E  
A N D  C R I T E R I A :
F S C  P R I N C I P L E  # 1 :  
Compliance With Laws 
and FSC Principles  
Forest management shall respect
all applicable laws of the country
in which they occur, and inter-
national treaties and agreements to
which the country is a signatory,
and comply with all FSC Principles
and Criteria.
FSC Criteria 1.1 
Forest management shall respect all national and local
laws and administrative requirements.
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance.
WFP has been cited for numerous violations of 
the BC Forest Act, the BC Forest Practices Code, and
the BC Litter Act (3). According to BC government
information obtained through a Freedom of
Information request, WFP was convicted of 11 Forest
Act infractions, 12 Forest Practices Code infractions, 
3 contraventions of the Litter Act, and was Òin non-
complianceÓ for another 121 Code requirements,
between 15 June 1995 and 26 March 1998. WFPÕs
Five Year Development Plans (FDPs) and Silvicultural
Prescriptions (SPs) examined (19, 20, 21) appear to
misclassify fish-bearing streams as non-fish-bearing
streams and misclassify stream sizes as being smaller
than they are on the ground, which reduces the 
attention they require during logging under BC law.
This is a persistent problem in this region well 
documented by independent field audits (14).FSC Criteria 1.2  
All applicable and legally prescribed fees, royalties, taxes
and other charges shall be paid. 
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.
FSC Criteria 1.3 
In signatory countries, the provisions of all binding 
international agreements such as CITES, ILO Conventions,
I T TA, and Convention on Biological Diversity, shall be
respected. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
Canada is a signatory of the Convention on Biological
Diversity, a comprehensive agreement under which
countries commit to a number of steps to secure the
conservation of genetic, species and ecosystem diver -
sity and the sustainable use of biological resources
(15). Actions are to be guided by application of the
precautionary principle (65). The Convention includes
a number of measures relevant to the timber industry
in BC under Article 6 (General Measures for
Conservation and Sustainable Use), Article 7
(Identification and Monitoring), Article 8 (In-Situ
Conservation), Article 10 (Sustainable Use of
Components of Biological Diversity), and Article 14
(Impact Assessment and Minimizing Adverse
Impacts). 
Under Article 8(k) Canadian and Provincial
Governments commit to develop or maintain neces -
sary legislation and/or other regulatory provisions for
the protection of threatened species and populations
(15, 65). Existing regulations are considered to 
be largely inadequate (24), yet endangered species 
legislation proposed by the Canadian government 
and widely supported by the public was aggressively
opposed by the Forest Alliance of BC, a timber 
industry-funded lobby group of which WFP is an
active and leading member (23). The legislation 
was subsequently dropped from the order paper.9 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

To date, none of the five key mechanisms under
the BC governmentÕs Forest Practices Code to 
protect endangered species have been effectively
implemented, including listing wildlife species that
are endangered or threatened, protecting the habitat
of endangered species, or setting aside sensitive areas
critical to endangered species (24). Western Forest
Products is conducting operations in numerous areas
with known presence of vulnerable, threatened or
endangered species, such as marbled murrelets, based
on preliminary wildlife surveys (73), yet their plans 
do not make sufficient provisions to safeguard these
species. In general, little scientific information is
available on wildlife resources in the Central and
North Coast region of WFPÕs tenures.
The Framework Convention on Climate Change, 
of which Canada is also a signatory, Òcommits us to
protecting old-growth forests and wetlands, and to
sustainable forest management as part of our global
obligationÓ(12). Nonetheless, scientific assessments
from the Pacific Northwest for similar forest types
and logging operations find that it takes more than
250 years for young stands following clearcutting of
old-growth forests to re-sequester the carbon stored in
the initial old-growth stand (66). WFP projects that 
its second-growth stands at harvest age (8 0 Ð120
years) will contain roughly 1/3 the standing volume of 
biomass, and thus carbon, found in the old-growth
stands that they replace (67). Old-growth temperate
rainforest contain from 50 0Ð2,000 metric tonnes of
organic matter per hectare, compared to a hundred
tonnes or so in tropical rainforests (60). 
FSC Criteria 1.4 
Conflicts between laws, regulations and the FSC Principles
and Criteria shall be evaluated for the purposes of 
certification, on a case by case basis, by the certifiers and
the involved or affected parties.Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
One example of a particularly significant conflict
exists between FSC Criteria 5.6 and the annual allow -
able cut (AAC) set by the Provincial government 
for WFPÕs holdings. Whereas FSC Criteria 5.6 states,
Òthe rate of harvest of forest products shall not exceed
levels which can be permanently sustained ,Ó the 
AAC for the Timber Supply Areas of WFPÕs tenures
are well above long-term sustained yield (26). (See
discussion under FSC Criteria 5.6).
FSC Criteria 1.5 
Forest management areas should be protected from illegal
h a rvesting, settlement and other unauthorized activities.
Western Forest Products: 
Conformance. 
This is the responsibility of the BC Ministry of
Forests. However, it should be noted that since 1995
the BC government has steadily reduced funding and
staffing to the Ministry of the Environment, Land and
Parks. These cuts to funding limit the departmentÕs
ability to properly enforce environmental protection
laws (76).
FSC Criteria 1.6 
Forest managers shall demonstrate a long-term commit-
ment to adhere to the FSC Principles and Criteria. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
Demonstration of long-term commitment by 
forest managers is met by a) most importantly, a
demonstrated history and current pattern of forest
management consistent with FSCÕs standards, 
b) successful achievement of FSC certification, and 
c) establishment of written policy commitments to
adhere to FSC Principles and Criteria by the company
into the future. 
This assessment indicates that WFPÕs forest 
management will require significant and far-reaching
changes to be consistent with FSC standards.W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 1 0
“Doman Industries has had significant compliance problems at its Squamish and Port Alice facilities in BC. Although the
problems occurred in the early 1990s and the company has taken steps to mitigate further compliance problems, its record
of environmental fines leads the industry sector and ranks among the highest in Canada over the last five years. T h i s
record constitutes a concern. ” —Michael Jantzi Research Associates, 1996

Nonetheless, WFPÕs chief forester, Bill Dumont, was
quoted in the BC press as saying, Òwe do not expect in
any way to have to make significant changes in our
operations .Ó(27). On CBC radio (10 June 1998),
Dumont stated, ÒI think that our operations, the kind
of changes weÕve made, are going to be recognized
and weÕll get our [FSC] certification .Ó(84). Public 
statements of ÒcommitmentÓ to the FSC are relatively
meaningless, or worse, constitute potentially 
misleading marketing claims (68), where they do not 
correspond to demonstrated adherence to forest 
management practices consistent with FSC Principles
and Criteria.
F S C  P R I N C I P L E  # 2 :
Tenure and Use Rights and
Responsibilities 
Long-term tenure and use rights to
the land and forest resources shall
be clearly defined, documented
and legally established. 
FSC Criteria 2.1 
Clear evidence of long-term forest use rights to the land
(e.g. land title, customary rights, or lease agreements)
shall be demonstrated.
Western Forest Products: 
Non-Conformance. 
Although WFP has been granted licenses to log in
numerous areas of British Columbia, all of these
licenses fall on publicly owned lands where land title
has not been formally resolved and which are the 
traditional territories of First Nations. The recent
Supreme Court of Canada decision concerning the
Council of the Haida Nation vs. Minister of Forests 
et al. upheld the Haida NationÕs case that unextin-guished aboriginal title is Òan encumbranceÓ on 
the governmentÕs ability to grant a logging company
the exclusive rights to log in their traditional 
territory (28).
FSC Criteria 2.2 
Local communities with legal or customary tenure or 
use rights shall maintain control, to the extent necessary
to protect their rights or resources, over forest operations
unless they delegate control with free and informed 
consent to other agencies.  
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
The purported benefits to local communities from
WFP operations are promoted at length by WFP (21,
22), but this promotion masks the more fundamental
issue of whether or not local communities, particular -
ly First Nations, are able to maintain effective control
over WFPÕs operations to the extent necessary to pro -
tect their rights and resources. Currently the burden
of proof falls on the First Nation to Òdemonstrate how
the fish and game which sustain the people use the
watershed as habitat, as well as how they used the
watershed, through encampments and trails in their
pursuit of fish, game, berries, medicinal plants, etc . Ó
However, ÒSignificant obstacles exist for First Nations
to be able to develop and defend these rights in 
practice, particularly in the face of political pressure to
ignore these other values if they significantly lessened
timber extractionÓ(57). In a number of WFPÕs logging
operations, First Nations have opposed logging plans
(Appendix 4 ).
FSC Criteria 2.3 
Appropriate mechanisms shall be employed to resolve 
disputes over tenure claims and use rights. The circum-
stances and status of any outstanding disputes will be
explicitly considered in the certification evaluation.
Disputes of substantial magnitude involving a significant
number of interests will normally disqualify an operation
from being certified. 1 1 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T Heiltsuk hereditary chief Har v e y
Humchitt at WFP logging site at
Ingram Lake. In April more than 70
Heiltsuk people travelled to the 
logging site to request a one-year
moratorium on all new logging 
on Heiltsuk lands. ( G P / S i m p s o n )


Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance.
Disputes over tenure claims and use rights have led 
to a consistent pattern of fierce disagreements among
stakeholders in WFPÕs areas. In two recent cases,
community members and hereditary chiefs from the
Nuxalk and Heiltsuk Nations, whose traditional 
territories are currently being logged by WFP, have
released statements and taken actions to oppose 
proposed logging, which have been ignored by WFP
(4, Appendix 4 )
Scientists and conservationists have similarly 
disputed the rights of Western Forest Products and
other logging companies to continue logging in 
the central coast region of British Columbia while a
government process established to meet the needs of
a Protected Areas Strategy is not complete (77). This
process, entitled the Central Coast Land and Coastal
Resource Management Plan, is currently underway,
but is not expected to be completed until the end of
1999 at the earliest, and only covers a portion of
WFPÕs tenures. During this process, only 18 per cent
of the land base has been placed under deferral from
logging interests, despite concerns over the risks to
biodiversity values this creates, repeatedly expressed
by environmental groups working on conservation
issues in coastal BC (50, 78). F S C  P R I N C I P L E  # 3 :
Indigenous People’s Rights 
The legal and customary rights of
indigenous peoples to own, use
and manage their lands, territories,
and resources shall be recognized
and respected.
Recently a number of legal decisions have been passed
down by the Canadian Supreme Court which recognize the
legal and customary rights of First Nations to include 
not just the traditional territories themselves, but also the
natural resources which the territories contain (2).
H o w e v e r , these rights are not being adequately recognized
or respected by companies active in their traditional 
territories, including Western Forest Products. The most
significant decision is the case commonly referred to as
the Delgamuukw decision, decided 11 December 1997. 
The Delgamuukw decision formally acknowledged that the
rights or aboriginal peoples to land and title exists, and
defined ways in which title can be proven and ways in
which section 35 of the Constitution Act must protect that
title. When resource extraction is proposed on aboriginal
lands, Delgamuukw stated that “there is always a duty 
of consultation, ” and went on to state in paragraph 168 
that “in most cases, it will be significantly deeper than
mere consultation. Some cases may even require the full
consent of an aboriginal nation... ” Delgamuukw also 
reinforced that the rights to the land title and resources
are held communally by a nation (2).
In no circumstance do any of the First Nations whose 
lands are being logged by WFP possess the legal authority
to veto proposed logging: the lands where WFP logs lie 
in the traditional territories of 27 different First Nations
(29, 67). Based on a series of Supreme Court decisions
that recognize aboriginal title and rights, there is a legal
requirement for logging companies to consult with First
Nations, when there is logging proposed to occur on that
N a t i o n ’ s traditional territories, but consent is not required.W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 1 2
“We, the Nuxalk, are opposed to the industrial clearcut logging of our traditional territories in the mid coast 
of British Columbia by Western Forest Products, Interfor and MacMillan Bloedel and we call for an end to it. ”
—statement issued by hereditary chiefs of the Nuxalk Nation. 4 June 1997

The logging company may or may not revise the FDP based
on input by First Nations and other stakeholders, but is not
obliged to incorporate the recommended changes. 
A review of WFP’s FDPs, SPs and other documents indicate
that in a number of cases WFP has not incorporated recom-
mended changes (6, 21). Legal challenges can be made 
by First Nations in such cases where regulatory policies
have not yet caught up with Delgamuukw (2). However, this
depends on the capacity of the specific First Nation to
defend its rights in court — a significant obstacle in poor
communities when facing powerful corporate interests.
In the case of WFP, hereditary chiefs from the Nuxalk
Nation and the Heiltsuk Nation have both repeatedly 
written to WFP and requested that proposed logging not
proceed: in each case, the logging company has chosen 
to proceed (4, 21).
It should be noted that, although WFP is not in violation of
existing law, it is in conflict with recent court decisions
which support the basis of Principle 3, and with Principle 3
i t s e l f .
FSC Criteria 3.1 
Indigenous peoples shall control forest management on
their lands and territories unless they delegate control with
free and informed consent to other agencies. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
The mechanism for providing Òfree and informed
consentÓ must entail the ability of a Nation to veto
proposed development on their territories. This mech -
anism is currently lacking in provincial and federal
legislation and is not observed in practice by WFP: In
no circumstances on lands where WFP logs are First
Nations legally able to veto proposed development. 
Further, Delgamuukw has defined that the rights 
of the Nation are held communally, which indicates
that in order to be in conformance with criteria 3.1,
the overwhelming majority of a Nation must have 
delegated control freely and with informed consent.However, in a number of cases it is evident that 
communities are divided over logging proposed by
Western Forest Products ( Appendix 4 ).
FSC Criteria 3.2 
Forest management shall not threaten or diminish, 
either directly or indirectly, the resources or tenure rights
of indigenous peoples.
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
The Supreme Court of CanadaÕs upholding of the
case the Council of the Haida Nation vs. Minister of
Forests et al. recognized that unextinguished aborigi -
nal title and rights are Òan encumbranceÓ on the 
governmentÕs ability to grant exclusive logging rights
to a logging company. In that case, MacMillan Bloedel
had exclusive rights to log on Haida land, via the
granting of Tree Farm License 44 (TFL44). WFP 
similarly has been granted exclusive logging rights via
TFLs 6, 19, 24 and 25 (28, 30). 
Coastal First NationsÕ communities have tradition -
ally relied heavily on hunting, as well as fishing for
salmon and other marine resources, for subsistence
and income. Forest use has also historically and 
currently supported the gathering of medicinal plants
and other non-timber resources by coastal Nations.
Ongoing logging by Western Forest Products is cur -
rently diminishing the resources of 27 First Nation
communities in coastal British Columbia, including
significant cultural heritage resources (67). 
FSC Criteria 3.3 
Sites of special cultural, ecological, economic or 
religious significance to indigenous peoples shall be 
clearly identified in cooperation with such peoples, 
and recognized and protected by forest managers. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
Culturally Modified Trees (CMTs) are trees, generally
cedars, which at some time in the last 500 years or so,1 3 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T
 Nuxalk chief Qwatsinas, part 
of the hereditary leadership of the
Nuxalk Nation, who oppose 
WFP logging on their traditional,
and unceded, lands. ( G P / W i e s s e n )

have had some of their bark harvested for various
uses by the local First Nation. The tree is not killed,
and evidence of past harvest and use patterns is there -
fore maintained in the forest on the trunks of the
trees. These CMTs are of tremendous cultural impor -
tance to First Nations, and legal importance as well,
as their presence proves the customary use of an area
by that Nation. The Heritage Conservation Act obliges
logging companies to identify these cultural sites. 
However, an independent survey of CMTs in three
coastal inlets where WFP proposes to log found that
whereas WFP listed CMTs as being absent, more 
than 130 such features were found in these areas (6).
A further study revealed that in the case of cutblock
229H in the Aaltanhash, WFPÕs surveyors recorded
only 25 CMTs, while independent research found 
50 such features. 
FSC Criteria 3.4 
Indigenous peoples shall be compensated for the 
application of their traditional knowledge regarding the
use of forest species or management systems in forest
operations. This compensation shall be formally agreed
upon with their free and informed consent before forest
operations commence. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance.
The Criteria acknowledges that traditional knowledge
is of value and that it should be applied when develop -
ing forest management plans. In British Columbia,
the value of this approach was recognized by the
Scientific Panel for Clayoquot Sound, which was co-
chaired by a scientist and a First Nation representative
(12). The recommendations of the Scientific Panel
were shaped both by the traditional knowledge and
ecological insights accumulated by the Nuu-chah-
nulth people and the scientific basis for ecosystem
based forest management as developed for these 
forest types. The PanelÕs recommendations were
accepted in their entirety by the government of 
British Columbia.No similar process has been or is even close 
to being applied in any of WFPÕs tenures. WFP only
lightly discusses indigenous peoplesÕ traditional
knowledge regarding the use of forest species or 
management systems in their forest operations (21,
22). Indeed, it appears that WFP has little interest in
indigenous peoplesÕ knowledge. There is no evidence
that traditional knowledge has been assessed 
or incorporated in any meaningful way into WFPÕs
planning, or that indigenous peoples have been com -
pensated for their knowledge before forest operations
commence. Indigenous elders and chiefs warn of 
forest mismanagement in letters and other testimony,
but WFP fails to incorporate their knowledge into 
its management plans. ( Appendix 4, 4, 6, 16). 
F S C  P R I N C I P L E  # 4 :  
Community Relations and
Workers’ Rights 
Forest management operations
shall maintain or enhance the
long-term social and economic
well being of forest workers and
local communities. 
Local community well being is not maintained over the
long-term by WFP as the timber supply is being exhausted
by an unsustainable rate of cut. As the primary forest is
cleared, the plantations are not maturing fast enough to
produce timber at volumes that can support sustainable
cutting (even though BC law theoretically requires sustain-
ability). Some regions will wait 50 years without logging
before there is sufficient timber available again (26).
The short-term economic well being of some forest workers
may exist. However, the long-term social and economic
well being of forest workers and local communities are not
maintained or enhanced by WFP forest management 
operations. For example, according to a socio-economicW F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 1 4
“We do not support the clearcutting of old growth in the Ingram-Mooto. WFP is ignoring our request for a one-year 
deferral even though the Delgamuukw and Gladstone cases acknowledge that First Nations people have the right to 
financially share in the benefits of development in their homelands. We want the logging of old growth to stop 
for the sake of all British Columbians. ” — h e r e d i t a r y chief Chief Harvey Humchitt

review of employment in the Mid-Coast Timber Supply
Area of the BC coast, 89% of the timber industry workers
who rely on timber from the region are non-residents (11).
All of the processing of timber cut in this region by WFP ,
as well as on the Queen Charlotte Islands, is shipped
either to Vancouver Island or to the lower mainland (30).
H e r e d i t a r y chiefs and community members of the Heiltsuk
Nation have written directly to WFP to express their 
concerns over how little benefit their community derives
from logging in their traditional territories (appendix 4).
The Oweekeno-Kitasoo-Nuxalk First Nations elected 
councils have also expressed their concerns over the lack
of employment in their communities while their traditional
territories continue to be logged (79). Nuxalk Hereditary
Chiefs have voiced similar concerns. Finally, a 1996 draft
discussion paper by the Central Coast Regional District 
(an area in which WFP holds forest tenure) stated that
“Our bottom line and the bottom line of those actively
involved in forest logging are vastly different and not to
the benefit of our communities”(80). 
FSC Criteria 4.1 
The communities within, or adjacent to, the forest 
management area should be given opportunities for
employment, training, and other services. 
Western Forest Products: 
Non-conformance. 
WFP occasionally employs First Nations people in 
the short-term, for example, on silvicultural projects:
however, WFP employs very few First Nations people
on a full-time basis and provides training for only a
small percentage of First Nations people living in
areas adjacent to where WFP operates. For example,
no people from the Nuxalk Nation are employed 
full-time by WFP and only approximately 20 people
from the Heiltsuk Nation have been trained and 
given job opportunities by WFP. FSC Criteria 4.2 
Forest management should meet or exceed all 
applicable laws and/or regulations covering health and
safety of employees and their families. 
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information. 
FSC Criteria 4.3 
The rights of workers to organize and voluntarily 
negotiate with their employers shall be guaranteed as 
outlined in Conventions 87 and 98 of the International
Labor Organization (ILO). 
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information. 
FSC Criteria 4.4 
Management planning and operations shall incorporate 
the results of evaluations of social impact. Consultations
shall be maintained with people and groups directly 
affected by management operations. 
Western Forest Products: 
Non-Conformance. 
As is outlined in documents contained in Appendix 4 ,
a number of First Nations have stated that concerns
expressed to Western Forest Products have not been
incorporated into WFP management plans.    
Social impact analyses of broader industry trends
have been produced by both government as well as
independent researchers and writers which are highly
critical of the tenure system in BC, due to the con -
centrated control of only a few large companies over
the vast majority of forested Crown lands. Similarly,
the lack of a developed value-added sector within 
the industry has been profoundly criticized, as BC
continues to export minimally processed wood 
products (81). There is no indication that WFP has
incorporated the results of such analyses into their
operations (21, 22).1 5 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

FSC Criteria 4.5 
Appropriate mechanisms shall be employed for resolving
grievances and for providing fair compensation in the case
of loss or damage affecting the legal or customary rights,
p r o p e r t y , resources, or livelihoods of local peoples.
Measures shall be taken to avoid such loss or damage. 
Western Forest Products: 
Non-Conformance. 
We were unable to find evidence of any effective
mechanism employed by WFP to resolve grievances
or for providing fair compensation in the case of loss
or damage affecting the legal or customary rights,
property, resources or livelihood of local peoples.
Virtually all lands on which WFP logs are within
unceded First Nations territories. Clearcut logging on
these lands causes numerous losses and damage. 
The evidence indicates that WFP ignores such loss or
damage on an ongoing basis (6, 14, 16, 39, 42).
There is currently no existing policy either within
the BC government or within the policies of WFP to
provide compensation to indigenous peoples whose
customary rights to the land have not been adequately
addressed. Although treaty negotiations for lands 
contained in the vast majority of WFPÕs operations are
now underway, no compensation or royalties are 
paid to First Nations or to escrow accounts by govern -
ment or industry for the extraction of timber from
their traditional territories.F S C  P R I N C I P L E  #  5 :
Benefits From the Forest 
Forest management operations
shall encourage the efficient use of
the forest’s multiple products 
and services to ensure economic
viability and a wide range of 
environmental and social benefits. 
Compliance with this Principle requires assessments 
of the full range of forest products and services using
wholistic ecosystem planning approaches (12, 13, 39, 42).
Such multiple products and services include fish, game,
food plants, medicines, cultural and spiritual sites, 
soil, riparian and overall ecosystem functioning, forest
p r o d u c t i v i t y , ecotourism, wildlife and fish habitat, 
b i o d i v e r s i t y , wildcrafting, conservation areas, wilderness,
recreation, and other forest products. Efficient use of 
multiple products and services implies that only when they
are all recognized and sustained can an environmentally
and socially beneficial, viable long-term economy emerge
(12, 47). Current WFP planning is driven by a too narrow
focus on maximizing timber values at the expense 
of seriously compromising other values. WFP is using
clearcutting as the logging methods in 95% of the 
cut-blocks reviewed (21, 22, 39, 42). 
Overall, we find WFP’s on-the-ground plans are diametri-
cally opposed to the efficient use of the forest’s multiple
products and services. WFP’s plans are to convert areas
containing such multiple products and ecosystem ser v i c e s
into areas where many of these will no longer be main-
tained (21). 
FSC Criteria 5.1 
Forest management should strive toward economic 
v i a b i l i t y , while taking into account the full environmental,
social, and operational costs of production, and ensuring
the investments necessary to maintain the ecological 
productivity of the forest.W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 1 6

Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
The full environmental, social, and operational costs
of production are not measured by WFP. A review 
of FDPs and SPs indicates that WFP practices are 
in conflict with maintaining the ecological integrity 
and hence productivity of old growth forests and 
their values because WFP operations remove trees
faster than they can be replaced and because the 
predominant harvesting practice of clearcutting does
long-term damage to soils, wildlife, fish, and riparian
habitats which underpin ecosystem functioning
(19Ð22, 39, 42). 
Areas logged by WFP are not intended to be
allowed to mature into late-successional forests. WFP
plans to log them again in 8 0Ð100 years, whereas 
the ancient forest they are replacing is generally over
250 years old (21, 39, 40). Furthermore, 80% of the
worldÕs original primary forests have already been
destroyed, impacted or converted to plantations, and
80% of the pristine rainforest valleys on the BC Coast
have already been impacted by logging (32, 33, 34).
WFP plans to develop five of the remaining pristine
valleys in the next two years (21, 22).
Stumpage paid by WFP in most circumstances is
significantly lower than market rates in BC, and lower
than stumpage rates paid by companies logging in
similar forest types in the Pacific Northwest of the
United States. These rates do not ensure resources for 
investments necessary to maintain the ecological 
productivity of the forest, and the full environmental
and social costs are largely ignored (10, 38, 42). 
ÒFor instance, studies have determined that the 
government-run Small Business Forest Enterprise
Program, which is based on competitive prices, 
produces a rate of return 2.5 times as high to the 
government. Additional comparisons of stumpage
prices in BC with the adjacent National Forest 
in the United States, where timber is sold at public
auction, demonstrates that differences in values are
up to 10 times higherÓ(10). This strongly indicates
that forest management in BC is not economically
viable, and the full environmental, social, and operational costs of production are not ensuring 
the investments necessary to maintain the ecological
productivity of the forest.
FSC Criteria 5.2 
Forest management and marketing operations should
encourage the optimal use and local processing of the 
forest's diversity of products.
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
Many of WFPÕs logging operations are located 
hundreds of kilometers away from their pulp and
sawmill processing facilities (30). For example, WFP
logs 460,000 cubic metres of timber annually in 
the Mid-Coast Timber Supply Area, yet it does not
operate a processing facility in the area and so ship 
all the logs hundreds of kilometres south to the
Vancouver/southern Vancouver Island region (11, 30). 
Unemployment in the Mid-Coast region is 
extremely high; the region has the highest percentage
of aboriginal population in the Province, and the 
lowest per capita income of any region in the
Province. The average wage is extremely low: average
annual earnings in the region in 1995 were $9,823
per year, compared to the provincial average of
$19,508 (31). 
FSC Criteria 5.3 
Forest management should minimize waste associated
with harvesting and on-site processing operations and
avoid damage to other forest resources.
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.
FSC Criteria 5.4 
Forest management should strive to strengthen and 
diversify the local economy, avoiding dependence on a 
single forest product. 1 7 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

Western Forest Products: 
Non-Conformance. 
Studies done of the Provincial Fish and Forestry
guidelines found that WFP was in non-compliance
with these guidelines on numerous occasions, under -
mining fisheries values as well as tourism potential 
in regions where WFP operates (14).
FSC Criteria 5.5 
Forest management operations shall recognize, maintain,
and, where appropriate, enhance the value of forest 
s e rvices and resources such as watersheds and fisheries. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
Watersheds are basic functional ecological units in
coastal temperate rainforests (12). Of the 353 coastal
rainforest watersheds found on the West Coast of
Canada, around 80% of these have been degraded or
are under current development by logging companies. 
In WFPÕs case, they have plans or licenses to log 21 of
the key ecological areas. Pristine, unlogged temperate
rainforest watersheds in BC are endangered landscape
features whose conservation, along with a number 
of other key ecological areas, has been identified as a
very high regional and global priority (eg, 33, 34, 50,
60, 69, 70, 71, 72). This has received further endorse -
ment from numerous scientists (75). 
The most thorough assessment to date on impacts
of forestry-related activities on fisheries was a series
of reports commissioned by the BC Ministry of
Forests, principally authored by Derek Tripp. In this
series, WFP was found to have been in non-compli -
ance with Provincial Fish and Forestry Guidelines in
more than 80% of the stream reaches evaluated 
on the North Coas t Ñthe highest percentage of all
companies examined. In one study more than 70% of
streams logged by WFP had reduced stability (14). 
A recent assessments of WFPÕs FDP for Ingram Lake
found that although the first draft of the FDP classi -
fied some streams as being fish-bearing, subsequent
drafts unjustifiably downscaled the streams and 
classified the streams as non-fish-bearing (19, 20, 21).Under the Forest Practices Code, non-fish-bearing
streams (classes S5 and S6) are not afforded any
riparian zone protection, in which trees must be left
standing in a buffer zone strip next to the stream. 
FSC Criteria 5.6 
The rate of harvest of forest products shall not exceed 
levels which can be permanently sustained. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
Setting current logging levels that cannot be perma -
nently sustained is the norm in British Columbia
(26). This policy is designed to aggressively and
quickly convert primary forests across the landscape
into second-growth tree farms and plantations which
yield a lower volume of timber (42). For example, a
review of the Timber Supply Area analyses found that
in all areas where WFP operates, the current level 
of the Annual Allowable Cut is higher than what the
Chief Forester of British Columbia has determined 
to be the level that can be permanently sustained. In
some cases, such as in the Mid-Coast Timber Supply
Area, the current level of cut is almost double that
which the Chief Forester deems can be permanently
sustained. In essence, the model of forestry which is
practiced by WFP is derived from old-school forest
management policies established by the Sloan
Commission in 1945 whose vision was to rapidly con -
vert BCÕs primary forests into Ònormalized forestsÓ
which maximize the production of timber (61).
The Clayoquot Sound Science Panel recommended
that timber planning be ecosystem-based, rather 
than volume-driven as is currently practiced by WFP.
Planning focuses as the first priority on forest reten -
tion, at all scales, in order to sustain the ecological
integrity and functioning of the forest ecosystems.
ÒThe flow of forest products must be determined in a
manner consistent with objectives for ecosystem sus -
tainability. This entails abandoning the specification
of Annual Allowable Cut as in input to local
planning .Ó (CSSP Recommendation 7.1).W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 1 8
In 1997 Western Forest Products commissioned a report which concluded that logging would not damage the habitat 
of the rare Kermode or Spirit bear. However, according to Dr. Brian Horesji, a well-respected Canadian wildlife scientist,
“The report fails to address many significant issues in bear conservation, including impact of degraded habitat 
effectiveness associated with roads and human activity, mortality risk, suppression of the old-growth understory with
clearcut logging and closed canopy effects of forage production as regeneration advances. ”

The shift to ecosystem area-based planning is 
Òcritical to successfully implement other Panel recom -
mendations and to achieve sustainable ecosystem
managementÓ(12). The BC-based Silva Forest
Foundation also requires ecosystem-based planning
processes in its Timber Management Standards for
British Columbia (13).
F S C  P R I N C I P L E  # 6 :  
Environmental Impact 
Forest management shall conser v e
biological diversity and its associ-
ated values, water resources, soils,
and unique and fragile ecosystems
and landscapes, and, by so doing,
maintain the ecological functions
and the integrity of the forest. 
Coastal temperate rainforests are a unique and rare forest
type. They are found only in narrow bands along coastlines
backed by mountain ranges with high rainfall levels. 
Under natural conditions they are characterized by very
large, old trees with multi-story canopies, an abundance of
riparian habitats, and ecosystem productivity among the
highest on Earth (40, 60). Major community or landscape
level disturbances are rare, with the exception of clearcut
logging (12, 60).
G l o b a l l y , coastal temperate rainforests are rare, originally
covering only 31 million hectares or 0.2% of the earth’s
land surface. Principal ranges are on the west coasts of
North America, Chile and New Zealand, each with its own
unique species composition. T o d a y , one half of these 
original forests have already been destroyed. The largest
extent of unprotected ancient temperate rainforest, 
which remains, is found in British Columbia. These forestsprovide home to grizzly and black bears, to eagles and
wolves, and to threatened species such as the marbled
murrelet seabird, which depend on the ancient forests for
their survival. 
Species-area relationships from Conservation Biology 
science indicate that protecting 35–50% of the natural
forests in disturbed temperate regions is needed to 
c o n s e r ve biodiversity (36, 39, 42). WFP cannot maintain
the unique, fragile ecosystems, the ecological functions, 
or the integrity of the primary temperate rainforest, nor
c o n s e r ve biological diversity and its associated values by
clearcutting and converting the primary forests to short
rotation tree farms — yet almost all WFP planning incor-
porates these techniques (21).
Effective conservation of biological diversity and its 
associated values in BC’s coastal temperate rainforests
requires full protection of key ecological areas in large
r e s e r ves, and fundamental changes to forest practices 
outside of these reserves. The independent Clayoquot
Sound Science Panel’s recommendations provide a particu-
larly important benchmark for FSC certification standards
in coastal temperate rainforests in British Columbia. The
mandate of the Science Panel from the BC Provincial
Government was to create a plan for “world-class” logging
for the coastal temperate rainforests in Clayoquot Sound. 
It was the first time that temperate rainforest forestry 
practices had been so carefully analyzed in British
Columbia with a primary focus on maintaining ecosystem
integrity and long-term social and economic needs. The
CSSP produced five reports and more than 120 recommen-
dations, built on an ecosystem-based approach to forest
management planning. In fulfilling its mandate, the CSSP
“is widely credited with having turned logging on its 
head in British Columbia”(47). In this regard, the CSSP
recommendations are much more consistent than the 
BC Forest Practices Code with the FSC’s guiding Principles
and Criteria (12). 1 9 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T
“One in ten species of vertebrate animals and plants are threatened or endangered in British Columbia. 
Logging poses the second greatest threat to vertebrate animals. ”
—British Columbia Ministry of Environment, Lands and Parks

FSC Criteria 6.1 
Assessment of environmental impacts shall be com-
p l e t e d — appropriate to the scale, intensity of forest 
management and the uniqueness of the affected
r e s o u r c e s — and adequately integrated into management
systems. Assessments shall include landscape level 
considerations as well as the impacts of on-site processing
facilities. Environmental impacts shall be assessed prior
to commencement of site-disturbing operations. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
There is no evidence in WFP documents that the
environmental impact of clearcutting on ancient rain -
forests are considered or debated, nor is there 
evidence that WFP recognizes the uniqueness of
affected resources in the ecological sense (9, 12, 13, 17,
19, 20, 22, 36, 65, 75). Clearcutting is virtually the
only logging practice used by WFP and yet the
Clayoquot Sound Science Panel report included a 
significant critique of conventional clearcutting for
these forest types (12). The Panel found that clear -
cutting Òchanges hydrological patterns, leads to 
instability and soil erosion on steep slopes, causes 
soil loss, removes habitat for old-growth dependent
species, reduces species diversity, changes the 
structure of the forest to the detriment of certain
species, damages areas of cultural significance and is
unattractive to many people.Ó(12, 49).
Landscape level considerations rightly include
broader regional assessments of the uniqueness of
affected resources, such as pristine watersheds 
and other key ecological areas, given the scale and
intensity of WFPÕs operations (54, 55), but indepen -
dent scientific conservation gap assessments are not
integrated into WFP planning and operations (32, 36,
75). WFPÕs own wildlife surveys are extremely 
preliminary and limited in comparison to the scale
and intensity of forest operations and the uniqueness
of affected resources. These include in WFP opera -
tions, habitat for various threatened, endangered and
rare populations of species (73). FSC Criteria 6.2 
Safeguards shall exist which protect rare, threatened and
endangered species and their habitats (e.g., nesting and
feeding areas). Conservation zones and protection areas
shall be established, appropriate to the scale and intensity
of forest management and the uniqueness of the affected
resources. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
Conservation safeguards, if they are to avoid putting
species at risk from timber extraction activities, must
use what is known about the ecology of the species,
and then build in additional Òmargins of safetyÓ to
buffer against Òknowledge gapsÓ and scientific uncer -
tainties (46). When uncertainty is high, conservation
measures must be more robust. 
There are several levels of uncertainty. First is 
the uncertainty which arises from a lack of adequate 
data, such as that arising from the very minimal 
set of biological surveys of rare, threatened and
endangered species which have been conducted in
WFP tenures to date (see 6.1 above). Second is the far
from complete scientific understanding of the 
biological communities, ecological functioning and
ecosystem dynamics in primary temperate rainforests
as habitats for populations of these species and for 
the individual species themselves (52). Further, each
watershed has entirely separate biological characteris -
tics (47). Finally, there are additional long-term 
uncertainties arising through the anticipated impacts
on North American temperate rainforests induced 
by climate change from global warming. Forests
recovering from clearcut logging are considered to 
be more vulnerable than those which are relatively
intact (48). 
As a management response to scientific uncer -
tainty, the Clayoquot Sound Science Panel adopted a
ÒconservativeÓ or Òprecautionary approachÓ to
resource management. These are Òdefined respective -
ly as: ÔConservative management means giving the
benefit of the doubt to the resource rather than to its
extraction or development (12) ,Õ and Ôthe Òprecaution -W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 2 0
“Recognizing the ecological importance of rainforest of British Columbia, and the fact that current management is ignoring
and sacrificing a wide range of present and future values and uses, we the undersigned scientists recommend that the 
governments of British Columbia and Canada . .. apply a moratorium on industrial logging and development in the remaining
intact valleys of British Columbia. “ —Letter to the Prime Minister of Canada and the Premier of BC from 50 renowned scientists

ary principleÓÉapplies when there is uncertainty
about possible cumulative effects, irreversible
changes, adverse interaction, or negative long-term
effectsÉÕÓ(12, 49). 
Populations of rare, threatened and endangered
species which are or will be significantly impacted by
WFP logging activities and plans in primary forests
include: marbled murrelets; grizzly bears; the white
Kermode Bear, or Spirit Bear; a number of popula -
tions of wild salmon species; tailed frogs and
Roosevelt Elk. As discussed elsewhere throughout this
document, while these issues are referenced in WFP
documents, little is done on the ground that will 
protect rare, threatened and endangered species and
their habitats (9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 39,
40, 41, 42). The limited measures implemented by
WFP are completely inconsistent with the precaution -
ary approach. For example, while WFP is aware that
marbled murrelets have been observed flying into
watersheds that it plans to log (45), it conducts no
appropriate ground surveys to determine their nesting
patterns, and in fact plans to clearcut stands which
contain highly desirable nesting habitat characteristics
for the species.  
Similarly, WFP plans to clearcut log in a number 
of pristine watersheds which provide important 
core habitat and feeding areas vital for the long-term 
survival of coastal populations of grizzly bears, yet
WFP lacks reliable basic field data on even the age
and gender composition of these populations. There
is, however, significant evidence based on past 
experiences to indicate that WFP logging operations
will create both cumulative negative effects, adverse
interactions, potentially irreversible changes in 
population viability and threaten their long-term 
survival (51). Again, the measures WFP proposes to
implement fail to provide adequate safeguards for 
this threatened species, its habitat or feeding areas.
Rather, it places populations of this species at 
greater risk.
Both these examples are indicative of a much wider
pattern of serious non-conformance with this Criteria
by WFP. (See also, 1.3) The threats to endangeredspecies and wildlife posed by the failure to fully
implement the BC Forest Practices Code (and the 
limitations of the Code in this regard, even if fully
implemented), under which WFP operates, are 
discussed in detail in a Sierra Legal Defense Fund
briefing. It offers a useful reference for more 
detailed assessments of WFPÕs operations under this
criteria (24).
FSC Criteria 6.3 
Ecological functions and values shall be maintained intact,
enhanced, or restored, including: 
a) Forest regeneration and succession.
b) Genetic, species, and ecosystem diversity. 
c) Natural cycles that affect the productivity of the forest
ecosystem. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
The Clayoquot Sound Science Panel found that 
ecological functions and values of primary temperate
rainforests in BC are not maintained intact, enhanced
or restored by conventional clearcutting and manage -
ment driven by timber extraction, as practiced 
by WFP (12). Wide use of clearcutting, burning and 
herbicides, and short rotations nullify important 
ecological functions of natural forest regeneration and
succession throughout WFP operations (21, 39, 41,
42, 43). Genetic, species and ecosystem diversity is
put at significant risk by WFPÕs planning approach
which puts timber extraction over ecosystem values
(12). WFPÕs clearcutting fails to correspond to natural
disturbance cycles which occur in this forest type.
Openings are larger, frequency is greater, removals
are higher, and WFP rotation cycles are shorter than
those which occur in natural disturbance regimes,
and this degrades the overall productivity of the forest
ecosystem (12, 52, 53). Late successional stages are 
not regenerated by WFP. Natural cycles that affect the
productivity of forest ecosystems have provided no
such disturbances to the primary forest for thousands
of years. Presently, clearcutting and burning provide
enhanced conditions for many of the plant species2 1 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

that WFP later claims it needs to spray with 
herbicides (21, 43). (See also 5.5 for impacts on the
productivity of the riparian components of the 
forest ecosystem.)
FSC Criteria 6.4 
Representative samples of existing ecosystems within the
landscape shall be protected in their natural state and
recorded on maps, appropriate to the scale and intensity of
operations and the uniqueness of the affected resources. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
Establishment of a representative network of coastal
temperate rainforest reserves in the areas where WFP
is operating has yet to be completed. The ecological
basis for effective reserve planning involves a nested
approach, which identifies conservation needs in 
the landscape starting at the regional level, then sub-
regional, watershed and finally within the forestry
operation units (12, 13, 49, 54, 55, 63, 64). In British
Columbia, maintaining the ecological integrity of 
traditional cultural uses, resources and sites of First
Nations should also be factored into the reserve strate -
gies before defining timber extraction zones (12, 13,
56, 57). (see also Principle 3 and related criteria)
At the regional scale, WFP is operating or planning
to operate intensive logging operations in 21 key 
ecological zones on the BC mainland coast alone
which have been identified as regionally and globally
important conservation priorities. These areas should
be protected under this FSC criteria. WFPÕs plans 
to implement operations in these high conservation
value areas have sparked high-profile regional, 
national and international protests.    
Some small representative samples of existing
ecosystems within watersheds are planned for 
protection in their natural state and recorded on FDP
maps (21, 22). However, the scale and intensity of
WFPÕs operations of widespread clearcutting adjacent
to these representative samples will make these
islands ineffective to maintain the uniqueness of the
affected resources (12, 13, 39, 40, 42). For example,WFP plans a Forest Ecosystem Network (FEN) 
near Ingram Lake but by completely removing the
surrounding forest, the FEN is too small to maintain
unique resources. The few wildlife corridors that 
exist in WFPÕs FDPs will be ineffective to conserve
wildlife movement because they are too small and
placed in areas of insufficient vegetation and slope to
be useful to most wildlife species which reside in
these areas. For example, only 50 8haof operable 
forest is proposed to be conserved in the Forest
Ecosystem Network planned for the Ingram Lake area
of some 14,00 0ha, yet the entire area has high 
conservation values (32), is adjacent to Fiordland
Provincial Park, and contains an array of endangered,
threatened, and sensitive species that conservation
biologists believe will require both the park and the
entire Ingram area to survive as healthy populations
(21, 36, 39, 40, 75). 
WFP planning and operations, which focus on 
timber extraction rather than forest retention, stand in
stark contrast to the ecosystem-based planning
approach recommended by the CSSP and Silva Forest
Foundation standards (12, 13).
FSC Criteria 6.5 
Written guidelines shall be prepared and implemented to:
control erosion; minimize forest damage during har v e s t i n g ,
road construction, and all other mechanical disturbances;
and protect water resources. 
Western Forest Products: 
Non-Conformance. 
Some written guidelines are prepared, as required
under the BC Forest Practices Code, but they have
proven ineffective in protecting water resources (19,
20, 21, 22, 58) (See also, FSC criteria 5.5). Similarly,
written guidelines to control erosion and landslides,
as required under the BC Forest Practices Code, 
are either being ignored, not effectively implemented,
or are simply inadequate to achieve soil erosion 
objectives (59). For example, the Clayoquot Sound
Science Panel severely restricts logging on steep 
landslide-prone slopes, but the Code, under whichW F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 2 2

WFP is operating, does not incorporate any of the
Science PanelÕs recommendations. More detailed 
discussion of these issues can be found in relevant
Sierra Legal Defense Fund reports (58, 59).
Few measures are taken by WFP to maintain or
improve soil structure, fertility, or biological activity
(21). Rate of logging, road and trail construction and
maintenance, slashburning, herbicides, and the
choice of species to be replanted will result in long-
term soil degradation and adverse impacts on water
quality and quantity, and will result in substantial
deviation from stream course drainage patterns 
(12, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 39, 41). The use of large-scale 
equipment in both logging and yarding will 
exacerbate negative impacts on soil structure as 
found by the CSSP and other studies.
FSC Criteria 6.6 
Management systems shall promote the development 
and adoption of environmentally friendly non-chemical
methods of pest management and strive to avoid the use of
chemical pesticides. World Health Organization Type 1A
and 1B and chlorinated hydrocarbon pesticides; pesticides
that are persistent, toxic or whose derivatives remain 
biologically active and accumulate in the food chain
beyond their intended use; as well as any pesticides
banned by international agreement, shall be prohibited. 
If chemicals are used, proper equipment and training shall
be provided to minimize health and environmental risks. 
Western Forest Products: 
Non-conformance. 
WFPÕs clearcutting practices create conditions which
lead to the use of herbicides, whereas alternative 
logging helps avoid the use of herbicides (42).
Herbicides are used to eradicate around four-fifths of
forest plants which are enhanced by the practice of
clearcutting (43). The use of herbicides is not avoided
by WFP but promoted (21,41). A review of WFPÕs 
SPs reveals that the herbicide Vision/Roundup is
named as the acceptable brushing tool in the manage -
ment of 95% of the planned plantations, whereas 
the chemical has been shown to damage or eradicateseveral non-target, rare or endangered vertebrate
species from treatment areas (41). Integrated pest
management or biological or other non-chemical 
control methods are not proposed by WFP in 
management plans (21, 22). 
FSC Criteria 6.7 
Chemicals, containers, liquid and solid non-organic 
wastes including fuel and oil shall be disposed of in an
environmentally appropriate manner at off-site locations. 
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information. 
However, a recent field audit of a WFP operations 
in the Mid-Coast region found unattended barrels of
aviation fuel stored in wetland areas and without 
soil berms to prevent water contamination in case of
accidental spills or leakage (74).
FSC Criteria 6.8 
Use of biological control agents shall be documented, 
minimized, monitored and strictly controlled in accordance
with national laws and internationally accepted scientific
protocols. Use of genetically modified organisms shall be
prohibited. 
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.
FSC Criteria 6.9 
The use of exotic species shall be carefully controlled and
actively monitored to avoid adverse ecological impacts. 
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.2 3 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

F S C  P R I N C I P L E  # 7 :   
Management Plan 
A management plan — a p p r o p r i a t e
to the scale and intensity of the
o p e r a t i o n s — shall be written,
implemented, and kept up to date.
The long-term objectives of 
management, and the means of
achieving them, shall be clearly
stated. 
FSC Criteria 7.1 
The management plan and supporting documents shall 
provide: 
a) Management objectives. 
b) Description of the forest resources to be managed, 
environmental limitations, land use and ownership status,
socio-economic conditions, and a profile of adjacent lands. 
c )Description of silvicultural and/or other management
system, based on the ecology of the forest in question and
information gathered through resource inventories. 
d) Rationale for rate of annual harvest and species 
selection. 
e) Provisions for monitoring of forest growth and 
dynamics. 
f) Environmental safeguards based on environmental
assessments. 
g) Plans for the identification and protection of rare,
threatened and endangered species. 
h) Maps describing the forest resource base including 
protected areas, planned management activities and land
ownership. 
i) Description and justification of harvesting techniques
and equipment to be used. Western Forest Products: 
Non-conformance. 
While WFP has a management plan, as required
under the BC Forest Practices Code, the intent and
content of WFPÕs management plan, and the process
by which it was developed, do not correspond to 
the ecosystem-based planning, management and
monitoring framework recommended by the
Clayoquot Sound Science Panel (12). The long-term
objectives of management, although stated, are 
untenable, given scientific knowledge of ancient 
forest life cycles and the functioning of rainforest
ecosystems (12, 13, 21, 36, 39, 40, 42, 52, 53, 69). 
As discussed elsewhere in this report, WFPÕs 
management plans are inadequate since they fail to
effectively achieve the objectives of many of the 
elements listed above consistent with the FSCÕs
Principles and Criteria. For example, while WFP has
ÒplansÓ for the identification and protection of rare,
threatened and endangered species, their effective -
ness in achieving this objective is not scientifically
credible or rigorous (see FSC Criteria 6.2, 36). The
Management Objectives for almost all WFP SPs
researched are Òto produce a mixed stand with an
average diameter of 45 cm within an anticipated
90Ð120 year rotation ,Ó even though the natural forest
is 3Ð4 times that age and the life history of cedar 
is such that few cedar trees will mature to produce
natural forest recruitment before short rotations 
are planned to remove them (21).
FSC Criteria 7.2 
The management plan shall be periodically revised to
incorporate the results of monitoring or new scientific and
technical information, as well as to respond to changing
environmental, social and economic circumstances. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious non-conformance. 
The use of new scientific and technical information,
as well as any indications of a responsiveness to
changing environmental, social and economic circum -
stances, are seriously lacking in WFPÕs Five YearW F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 2 4

Development Plans reviewed (21). Again, a significant
benchmark is the findings of the Clayoquot Sound
Science Panel and its recommendations, but they are
not incorporated in WFPÕs management plans or
planning process. Results of independent monitoring,
reviews of the effectiveness of management measures
for achieving environmental objectives and scientific
assessments of conservation needs in the areas where
WFP is operating are not incorporated into manage -
ment plans (9, 17, 24, 36, 58, 59, 60). Polling of BC
residents in 1997 found 69% of those surveyed felt
that, with alternative logging practices available,
clearcutting should not be allowed to continue.
Seventy-seven percent of British Columbians believe
that logging of BCÕs old growth forests should be
stopped immediately or phased out (37, 61). Despite
this shift in social values, WFP continues to use
clearcutting as its predominant logging practice in
primary forests on publicly held Crown lands (21, 22).
FSC Criteria 7.3 
Forest workers shall receive adequate training and 
s u p e r vision to ensure proper implementation of the 
management plan. 
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information. 
FSC Criteria 7.4 
While respecting the confidentiality of information, forest
managers shall make publicly available a summary of the
p r i m a r y elements of the management plan, including those
listed in Criterion 7.1. 
Western Forest Products: 
Conformance. 
WFPÕs five-year forest development plans are made
publicly available by the BC Ministry of Forests on a
cost basis. F S C  P R I N C I P L E  # 8 :  
Monitoring and Assessment 
Monitoring shall be conducted —
appropriate to the scale and inten-
sity of forest management — t o
assess the condition of the forest,
yields of forest products, chain 
of custody, management activities
and their social and environmental
impacts. 
FSC Criteria 8.1 
The frequency and intensity of monitoring should be 
determined by the scale and intensity of forest manage-
ment operations as well as the relative complexity 
and fragility of the affected environment. Monitoring 
procedures should be consistent and replicable over 
time to allow comparison of results and assessment 
of change. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-conformance. 
WFPÕs frequency and intensity of monitoring on 
the ground is insufficient to provide the monitoring
data required to assess the ecological complexity 
and fragility of the biological resources at the range of
scales required to make scientifically meaningful
assessments which can detect changes to populations
of sensitive species, ecosystem dynamics and 
environmental impacts resulting from their opera -
tions in primary forests (12, 21, 22, 39, 40, 42). Most
WFP monitoring is related to timber production,
while the social and environmental impacts of WFP
operations are not rigorously monitored. Nor is the
precautionary approach applied where there is a lack
of appropriate monitoring data and/or where there
are scientific uncertainties, as recommended by the
Clayoquot Sound Science Panel and IUCN (12, 65).2 5 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

FSC Criteria 8.2 
Forest management should include the research and data
collection needed to monitor, at a minimum, the following
indicators: 
a) Yield of all forest products harvested. 
b) Growth rates, regeneration and condition of the forest. 
c) Composition and observed changes in the flora and
fauna. 
d) Environmental and social impacts of harvesting and
other operations. 
e) Costs, productivity, and efficiency of forest manage-
m e n t .
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-conformance. 
See Criteria 8.1, above.
FSC Criteria 8.3 
Documentation shall be provided by the forest manager 
to enable monitoring and certifying organizations to trace
each forest product from its origin, a process known as 
the "chain of custody. ”
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.
FSC Criteria 8.4 
The results of monitoring shall be incorporated into the
implementation and revision of the management plan.
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information. 
FSC Criteria 8.5 
While respecting the confidentiality of information, forest
managers shall make publicly available a summary of the
results of monitoring indicators, including those listed in
Criterion 8.2. 
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.F S C  P R I N C I P L E  #  9 :  
Maintenance of Natural Forests 
P r i m a r y forests, well-developed
s e c o n d a r y forests and sites 
of major environmental, social or
cultural significance shall be 
c o n s e r ved. Such areas shall not be
replaced by tree plantations or
other land uses. 
A new version of Principle 9 is being prepared for FSC
endorsement, and should be available by November, 
1998. Pending the outcome of this process, FSC accredited
certifiers are restricted from certifying large-scale inten-
sive logging operations in primary forests such as those of
W F P. As WFP operations are clearly failing to conserve 
p r i m a r y forests and sites of major environmental, social
and cultural significance throughout their tenures, they are
in fundamental non-compliance with Principal 9 as it 
currently stands. 
FSC Criteria 9.1 
Trees planted in natural forests may supplement natural
regeneration, fill gaps or contribute to the conservation of
genetic resources. Such plantings shall not replace or 
significantly alter the natural ecosystem. 
Western Forest Products: 
Serious Non-Conformance. 
WFP significantly alters and replaces the natural
ecosystem in almost all their operations as multi-
aged, structurally diverse, ancient forest stands are
converted to short-rotation, simplified tree-farms (21).
Ancient cedar/hemlock forests are replaced with
younger, short-rotation, planted stands, whereas
important wildlife species predominantly use old
cedar/hemlock, much older than the planned rotation
age (12, 21, 39, 40, 42). Rather than limited plantingW F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 2 6

to supplement natural regeneration, stands are 
frequently intensively planted with limited natural
regeneration. 
WFPÕs selection of species for planting is generally
based on their overall suitability for the site. However,
there is a tendency for WFPÕs SPs to accept species
such as spruce/balsam for planting when the natural
forest is dominated by cedar/hemlock: this is likely
attributable to the fact that spruce/balsam lend 
themselves to shorter rotations to reach logging age
and are of more economic interest to industry than
cedar/hemlock (21). 
The ÒgapsÓ which are created by WFP clearcuts are
significantly larger than the typical gaps which occur
through typical disturbance regimes of the natural
ecosystem (CSSP). 
FSC Criteria 9.2 
The use of replanting as a technique for regenerating
stands of certain natural forest types may be appropriate
under certain circumstances. Guidelines on the acceptable
intensity and spatial extent of tree planting will be
addressed in national and regional forest management
standards to be approved by the FSC. In the absence of
such national or regional standards, guidelines developed
by the certifier and approved by the FSC will prevail. 
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.F S C  P R I N C I P L E  #  1 0 :  
P l a n t a t i o n s
Plantations shall be planned and
managed in accordance with
Principles and Criteria 1– 9, and
Principle 10 and its Criteria. While
plantations can provide an array of
social and economic benefits, and
can contribute to satisfying the
world's needs for forest products,
they should complement the man-
agement of, reduce pressures on,
and promote the restoration and
c o n s e r vation of natural forests.
Principle 10 should only apply to Western Forest Product
tenures to the extent that it is relevant to the management
of its holdings which it has converted from primary forest
to stands meeting plantation definitions as a result of past
activities. Any new conversions are explicitly prohibited
under FSC Principle 9. A strong case can be made that
WFP is converting many primary forest stands into planta-
tion-like stands under its current management plans.
Nonetheless, given that conversion of primary forest to
plantations is prohibited, and as virtually all of WFP’s 
logging operations are in primary forests, Principal 10 and
related criteria should not apply and were not a focus of
this report. However, restoration objectives and standards
for existing plantation areas of WFP’s holdings (as well 
as other previously harvested areas) will need to be 
established by SGS and the FSC-BC Committees. Improved
management of these areas is important for restoring 
forest ecosystem health and integrity damaged by past 
logging activities. In this regard, the restoration related
criteria below are significant.2 7 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

FSC Criteria 10.1 
The management objectives of the plantation, including
natural forest conservation and restoration objectives,
shall be explicitly stated in the management plan, and
clearly demonstrated in the implementation of the plan.
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.
FSC Criteria 10.2 
The design and layout of plantations should promote the
protection, restoration and conservation of natural forests,
and not increase pressures on natural forests. Wildlife 
corridors, streamside zones and a mosaic of stands of 
different ages and rotation periods, shall be used in the
layout of the plantation, consistent with the scale of 
the operation. The scale and layout of plantation blocks
shall be consistent with the patterns of forest stands 
found within the natural landscape.
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.
FSC Criteria 10.3 
Diversity in the composition of plantations is preferred, 
so as to enhance economic, ecological and social stability.
Such diversity may include the size and spatial distribution
of management units within the landscape, number 
and genetic composition of species, age classes and 
structures. 
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.
FSC Criteria 10.4 
The selection of species for planting shall be based on
their overall suitability for the site and their appropriate-
ness to the management objectives. In order to enhance
the conservation of biological diversity, native species are
preferred over exotic species in the establishment of plan-
tations and the restoration of degraded ecosystems. Exotic
species, which shall be used only when their performanceis greater than that of native species, shall be carefully
monitored to detect unusual mortality, disease, or insect
outbreaks and adverse ecological impacts.
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.
FSC Criteria 10.5 
A proportion of the overall forest management area, 
appropriate to the scale of the plantation and to be 
determined in regional standards, shall be managed so 
as to restore the site to a natural forest cover. 
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.
FSC Criteria 10.6 
Measures shall be taken to maintain or improve soil 
structure, fertility, and biological activity. The techniques
and rate of harvesting, road and trail construction and
maintenance, and the choice of species shall not result in
long term soil degradation or adverse impacts on water
q u a l i t y , quantity or substantial deviation from stream
course drainage patterns. 
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.
FSC Criteria 10.7 
Measures shall be taken to prevent and minimize out-
breaks of pests, diseases, fire and invasive plant introduc-
tions. Integrated pest management shall form an essential
part of the management plan, with primary reliance 
on prevention and biological control methods rather than
chemical pesticides and fertilizers. Plantation manage-
ment should make every effort to move away from 
chemical pesticides and fertilizers, including their use in
nurseries. The use of chemicals is also covered in 
Criteria 6.6 and 6.7.
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 2 8

FSC Criteria 10.8 
Appropriate to the scale and diversity of the operation,
monitoring of plantations shall include regular assessment
of potential on-site and off-site ecological and social
impacts, (e.g. natural regeneration, effects on water
resources and soil fertility, and impacts on local welfare
and social well-being), in addition to those elements
addressed in principles 8, 6 and 4. No species should be
planted on a large scale until local trials and/or experience
have shown that they are ecologically well adapted to the
site, are not invasive, and do not have significant negative
ecological impacts on other ecosystems. Special attention
will be paid to social issues of land acquisition for 
plantations, especially the protection of local rights of
ownership, use or access.
Western Forest Products: 
Insufficient Information.2 9 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

D I S C U S S I O N  A N D  C O N C L U S I O N S
This document compares and contrasts Western
Forest Products (WFP) forestry practices with Generic
Forest Stewardship Council Principles and Criteria
(FSC P&C), the Generic Societe Generale de
Surveillance Forestry Checklist (SGS P&C), the
Scientific Panel for Sustainable Forest Practices in
Clayoquot Sound (CSSP) and the Silva Forest
Foundation Standards For Ecologically Responsible
Timber Management (SFF). 
The assessment finds that WFP logging plans are
seriously in non-conformance with 22 individual 
FSC Criteria, are in less serious non-conformance
with 8 Criteria, and are in conformance with only 
2 Criteria, using five-year development plans 
(FDPÕs), Silviculture Prescriptions (SPÕs), scientific,
government, and other reports, correspondence
among various stakeholders, interviews with
WFP/MOF staff and environmentalists, and other 
criteria. Additionally, WFP plans are inferior to the
Clayoquot Sound Scientific Panel Forest Practices
Standards as well as the Silva Forest Foundation
Standards For Ecologically Responsible Timber
Management. The information required to adequately
address WFPÕs conformance or non-conformance
with 20 of the FSC Criteria was not available.WFPÕs performance standards must be raised to
include stronger conservation, relevant consultation
with first Nations, more diverse socio-economics, and
better maintenance of ancient rainforest ecosystems
and their biodiversity as conditions for certification.
Globally rare and endangered ancient rainforest
ecosystems will be destroyed, severe threats to biodi -
versity of fish, wildlife, and other species are eminent,
and protected areas are inadequate to maintain 
the primary forests within WFP operating areas. 
WFP certification is doubtful in our opinion without
significant changes in logging practices, amount 
of cut, and changes to reforestation practices.W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 3 0

R E F E R E N C E S
(1) Blood, D. 1997. Potential Impacts of Logging on Princess Royal
B e a r s . R e p o r t .
(2) Delgamuukw Judgment. 1997. Supreme Court of Canada. 
(3) Ministry of the Environment, Land & Parks, Enfor c e m e n t
Emergencies Branch, 1997. Charges & Penalty Summary for Identified
C o m p a n i e s , Jan. 85– M a r.98. 
(4) Forest Action Network Updates and Newsletters, 1994–98. 
(5) FSC, 1997. Sample Certification Standards for the Forest
Stewardship Council’s Principles and Criteria.
(6) Garrick, D. 1997. P r e l i m i n a r y Surveys of Culturally Modified T r e e s
( C M T ’ s) in Green Inlet, Khutze Inlet and Aaltanhash Inlet. 72 p. 
(7) Greenpeace Canada. 1995. C l e a r cut Free: Just Did It. 20p. 
(8) Greenpeace Canada. 1998. Jobs and T r e e s . 6p. 
(9) McAllister, P . 1996. North Coast Tragedy: Poaching, clear c u t t i n g ,
and grizzly bears. Watershed Sentinel 6(5):13–15.
(10) McDade, G. 1993. Report on Compensation Issues Concerning
Protected Areas. Sierra Legal Defense Fund. 55p. 
(11) Ministry of Forests. 1994. Socio-Economic assessment of T i m b e r
Supply Scenarios: Mid-Coast TSA.
(12) Scientific Panel for Sustainable Forest Practices in Clayoquot
Sound. 1994–95. Series of five reports. Cortex Consultants Inc.,
V i c t o r i a .
(13) Silva Forest Foundation. 1998. Standards For Ecologically
Responsible Timber Management.
(14) Tripp, D. 1994. The Use and effectiveness of the coastal fisheries
f o r e s t r y guidelines in selected forest districts of coastal British
C o l u m b i a .
(15) United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 1992.
Convention on Biological Diversity.
(16) Valhalla Wilderness Society. 1998. Last Stand for the Spirit Bear
C o n s e r vancy Proposal. Educational Bulletin No. 32.
(17) Valhalla Wilderness Society. 1997. Scientists Refute Logging
C o m p a n y ’ s Kermode Bear Study.
(18) World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED).
1987. Our Common Future. Oxford Univ., NY. 
(19) Werring, J.H., 1997. Review of WFP’s draft 1997–2001 5-year
development for Ingram Lake FLA16845. 30 October letter to WFP
from SLDF. (20) Werring, J.H., 1996. Review of WFP’s draft 1997–2001 5-year
development for Ingram Lake FLA 16845. 25 November letter to WFP
from SLDF.
(21) WFP FDP’s and SP’s for Griffin Passage 1998–2003, Ingram Lake
1998–2002, MacNair Creek 1998, Oweekeno Lake 1999–2003, Piper
River 1998–2002, Tom Bay 1998-2002, Yeo Island 1998–2004. 
(22) WFP Information Circulars, Annual Reports, Stream
Classification Reports.
(23) Forest Alliance of British Columbia newsletter, volume 5, 
number 12.
(24) Sierra Legal Defense Fund. 1997. Wildlife at Risk: The lack of
protection for endangered species, wildlife, and biodiversity under the
BC Forest Practices Code. S L D F , Va n c o u v e r . 30 pp.
(25) Round River Conservation Studies. 1996. Heiltsuk/Hidden Coast
Rainforest Project.
(26) Ministry of Forests, misc. Timber Supply Analyses.
(27) Hogben, D. 1998. Western seeks certification to satisfy European
b u y e r s . Vancouver Sun, June 5. 
(28) Supreme Court of British Columbia. 1997. Council of the Haida
Nation vs Minister of Forests et al.
(29) Department of Indian and Northern Affairs, Union of B.C. Indian
Chiefs. 1997. Maps delineating the traditional territories of First
N a t i o n s .
(30) Doman Industries. 1997. Annual Statutory Report for 1997.
(31) Ministry of Finance and Corporate Relations, B.C. Statistics.
1995, 1996. Per Capita Income and Government Flows.
(32) World Wildlife Fund. 1997. A Conservation Assessment of the
Terrestrial Ecosystems of North America, Volume I.
(33) Sierra Club of British Columbia. 1997. Satellite mapping of
British Columbia’s coastal temperate rainforest.
(34) World Resources Institute. 1997. The Last Frontier Forests:
Ecosystems and Economies on the Edge.
(35) Ministry of the Environment, Land and Parks, 1998. Charges
filed against Western Pulp for spill at Port Alice mill.
(36) Soule, M. and Sanjayan, M. 1998. C o n s e r vation Targets: Do They
H e l p ? Science 279 (5359):2060.3 1 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

(37) Comquest Research, a division of BBM Bureau of Management.
1997. Polling data on British Columbians attitudes towards forestry 
in B.C.
(38) Mascall, M. 1994. Public Investment by Governments in the BC
Forest Industry 1991/92.
(39) Cadrin, C., E. Campbell, and A. Nicholson. 1991. A bibliography
on Old-Growth Forests in British Columbia. BC MOF Land Manage
Rep No. 72.
(40) Meidinger, D. and J. Pojar. 1991. Ecosystems of British
C o l u m b i a . BC MOF Special Rep. No. 6.
(41) Zammuto, R. 1998. Does Roundup Damage Non-Target Species?
Watershed Sentinel 7(6):14-16.
(42) Hammond, H. 1991. Seeing the Forest Among the T r e e s .
P o l e s t a r .
(43) FRDA. 1991. Prescribed Fire for Forest Vegetation Management.
Synopsis Memo No. 198. 
(44) BC Ministry of Environment, Land and Parks, Victoria, 1998.
Charges and Penalty Summary for Identified Companies, J a n u a r y
1985 to March 1998.
(45) Henderson, C, Bindernagel, J. and Blood, D., 1996. W i l d l i f e
S u rveys in TFL 25, Block 5, 1994–95. D. Blood and Associates Ltd.,
Nanaimo, BC.
(46) O’Riordin, T. and Cameron, J. (eds.). 1994. Interpreting the
P r e c a u t i o n a r y Principle. Earthscan Publications, London.
(47) Ecotrust Canada, 1997. Seeing the Ocean Through the Trees: 
A conservation-based development strategy for Clayoquot Sound.
Ecotrust Canada, V a n c o u v e r .
(48) Franklin, J. et al, 1992. Effects of Global Climatic Change on
Forests in Northwestern North America, in, Global Warming and
Biological Diversity, Peters, R. and Lovejoy, T. (eds). Yale University
Press, New Haven.
(49) Friends of Clayoquot Sound, 1998. Implementing the Scientific
Panel: Three Years and Counting. Friends of Clayoquot Sound, T o f i n o .
(50) Greenpeace, 1997. The Great Bear Rainforest: A report on the
ecology and global significance of Canada’s temperate rainforest.
Greenpeace, T o r o n t o
(51) Rainforest Conservation Society, 1996. The Grizzly Bears of the
Coastal Rainforest Valleys of British Columbia. R a i n f o r e s t
C o n s e r vation Society, Victoria.
(52) Maser, C. 1989. Forest Primeval: The Natural History of an
Ancient Forest. Sierra Club Books, San Francisco.(53) Kellog, E, (ed.) 1992. Coastal Temperate Rain Forests: Ecological
Characteristics, Status and Distribution W o r l d w i d e . Ecotrust, Pacific
GIS, and Conservation International, Portland, Oregon.
(54) Noss, R. 1998. A Big-Picture Approach to Forest Certification, A
report for World Wildlife Fund’s Forests for Life Campaigns in North
A m e r i c a , in, Kessler, K, DellaSala, D, and Hackman, A. (eds), D e f i n i n g
a Vision: World Wildlife Funds North America Forests for Life
C o n f e r e n c e . W W F , Washington DC.
(55) DellaSala, D. and Hackman, A., 1998. Protection and
Independent Certification: A shared vision for North America’s diverse
f o r e s t s . I b i d .
(56) Curran, D, and M’Gonigle, M. 1997. Aboriginal Forestr y :
Community Management as Opportunity, and Imperative. D i s c u s s i o n
Paper D97-7. Faculty of Law and Environmental Studies, University of
Victoria, Victoria.
(57) Pinkerton, E. 1998. Integrated management of a temperate 
montane forest ecosystem through wholistic forestry: a British
Columbia example, in, Berkes and Folke (eds), Linking Social and
Ecological Systems: Management Practices and Social Mechanisms
for Building Resilience. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
(58) Sierra Legal Defense Fund, 1997. Stream Protection Under the
Code: The Destruction Continues. S L D F , Va n c o u v e r .
(59) Sierra Legal Defense Fund, 1997. Going Downhill Fast:
Landslides and the Forest Practices Code. S L D F , Va n c o u v e r . 26pp.
(60) Moore, K. 1991. Coastal Watersheds: An inventory of watersheds
in the coastal temperate watersheds of British Columbia. E a r t h l i f e
Canada Foundation and Ecotrust/Conservation International.
(61) Greenpeace, 1997. Broken Promises: the truth about what’s hap -
pening to British Columbia’s forests. Greenpeace, V a n c o u v e r .
(62) Clark, T. 1995. Timber Supply and Endangered Spaces. W W F -
Canada, T o r o n t o .
(63) WWF-Canada, 1995. A Protected Areas Gap Analysis
Methodology: Planning for the Conservation of Biodiversity. W W F -
Canada, T o r o n t o
(64) Noss, R., 1995. Maintaining Ecological Integrity in
Representative Reserve Networks. W W F - C a n a d a / W W F - U S .
(65) Glowka, L., et al, 1994. A Guide to the Convention on Biological
D i v e r s i t y .IUCN Law Centre, IUCN, Gland.
(66) Harmon, M.E., Ferrell, W.K. and Franklin, J.F., 1990. Effects on
Carbon Storage of Conversion of Old-Growth Forests to Y o u n g
F o r e s t s . Science 247:699-702
(67) WFP, presentation to Greenpeace forest campaigners, December
1 9 9 7W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 3 2

(68) FSC, 1998. FSC Accreditation Manual. FSC, Oaxaca.
(69) Schoonmaker, P, Von Hagen, B., and Wolf, E, (eds), 1997. T h e
Rainforests of Home: Profile of the North American Bioregion. I s l a n d
Press, Washington DC
(70) Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society, 1995. BC Wildlands,
Mid-Coast including Haida Gwaii Region.
(71) Ecotrust, Pacific GIS, Conservation International, 1995. T h e
Rainforests of Home: An Atlas of People and Place, Part 1. Natural
Forests and Native Languages of the Coastal Temperate Rainforest.
Portland, Oregon
(72) WWF-Canada, 1997. Public statement on the Great Bear
R a i n f o r e s t . W W F , To r o n t o .
(73) Henderson, C., Bindernagel, J., and Blood, D., 1996. W i l d l i f e
S u rveys, Central and North Coast Region of British Columbia.
Western Forest Products, V a n c o u v e r .
(74) Aikman, P , Consultant to Greenpeace, personal communication
based on field observations of East Main section of WFP’s Mooto-
Ingram operations, August 27, 1998.
(75) Soule et al, 1998. Letter from scientists to the Prime Minister of
Canada and the Premier of BC.
(76) Sierra Legal Defense Fund et al, 1998. Betraying our T r u s t .
(77) Canadian Rainforest Network, 1997. Letter from member envi-
ronmental groups to Land Use Coordination Office, Province of BC.
(78) Land Use Coordination Office, Province of BC, 1997. R e v i s e d
Study Areas for the Central Coast LRMP Area.
(79) Oweekeno-Kitasoo-Nuxalk First Nations, 1997, Review the Mid-
Coast Forest District.
(80) McKim-Fletcher P., 1996. Bella Coola Valley Community Forest
Tenure discussion paper, first draft.
(81) Province of BC, 1992. Select Standing Committee on forests,
e n e r g y , mines and petroleum resour c e s .
(82) Forest Stewardship Council. Principles and Criteria for Forest
S t e w a r d s h i p . FSC, Oaxaca, Mexico.
(83) Forest Stewardship Council. FSC Public Statement: Use of FSC
Name and T r a d e m a r k . Document 3.5.2. August 7, 1998. FSC, Oaxaca.
(84) CBC radio interview with WFP chief forester, Bill Dumont, June
10, 1998.3 3 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

A P P E N D I X  1
Forests Certified by FSC-Accredited Certification Bodies 
as of August 1998
Total Forest Area Certified: 10,518,381 hectares
C O U N T R Y
C o m p a n y , Location, Size of holding (ha), Plantation vs. Natural
Forest, Certification Body.
BELGIUM 
• Zoniënwoud, Groenendaal, 2452ha. Government. Plantation/Natural.
Soil Association. 
• Heverleebos, Leuven, 4684ha. Government. Plantation/Natural. Soil
Association. 
• Meerdaalwoud, Leuven, 3146ha. Government. Plantation/Natural.
Soil Association. 
BELIZE 
• Programme for Belize. 95,800ha. Natural. Rainforest Alliance. 
BOLIVIA 
• Central Intercommunal Campesina del Oriente de Lomerio (CICOL),
Santa Cruz. 52,000ha. Natural. Rainforest Alliance. 
BRAZIL 
• Florestas Rio Doce (FRD), Minas Gerais state. 1,734ha. Plantation.
SGS. 
• Eucatex S.A., Salto and Botucatu region. 29,340ha. Plantation. SCS. 
• Duratex S.A., Botucatu, Lencois Paulistas and Agudos region.
47,904ha. Plantation. SCS. 
• Floresteca Agroflorestal Ltda, 3,000ha. Plantation. SGS Forestry. 
• Mil Madeireira Itacoatiara Ltd., Itacoatiara District, Amazonas.
80,571ha. Rainforest Alliance. 
CANADA 
• Haliburton Forest and Wildlife Reserve. 19,184ha. Natural.
Rainforest Alliance. 
C O S T A RICA 
• Portico S.A. 3,900ha. Natural. SCS. 
• FUNDECOR. 14,928.7ha. Group Certification. Plantation/Natural.
SGS. 
• Flor y Fauna, S.A. 2,788ha. Plantation. Rainforest Alliance. 
• Fundación TUVA. 500 ha. Natural. Rainforest Alliance. 
• Tropical American Tree Farms. 1 380ha. Plantation. Rainforest
A l l i a n c e .
CZECH REPUBLIC 
• Masaryk Forest, Krtiny. 10,441ha. Natural. Soil Association. G E R M A N Y
• Umweltbehörde Hamburg.Governmental. 4,938ha.
Plantation/Natural. Skal.
HONDURAS 
• Proyecto Desarrollo Bosque Latifoliado (Broadleaf forest
Development Project), La Ceiba. 12 certified communities. 25,000ha.
Natural. Rainforest Alliance. 
• Cooperativa Agroforestal Colon, Atlantida. 7,970ha. Group
Certification. Natural. Rainforest Alliance. 
I TA LY 
• Magnifica Comunita' di Fiemme ASL (MSF ASL), Val di Fiemme.
11,000ha. Natural. SGS. 
M A L A YSIA 
• Deramakot Forest Reserve, Sandakan, Sabah. 55,000ha. Natural.
SGS. 
MEXICO 
• Sociedad de Productores Forestales Ejidales de Quintana Roo,
Chetumal, Quintana Roo.
• Four Ejidos (Caoba,Petcacab,Noh Bec,Tres Garantias). 86,215ha.
Natural. Rainforest Alliance
• Union de Communidades Forestales Zapotecas-Chinantecas
(UZACHI). Communities Calpulalpam de Mendez, Santiago
Comaltapec, la Trinidad Ixtlan and Santiago Xiacui, Oaxaca. 
24,996ha. Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
• El ejido colectivo San Juan de Aguinaldos, Durango. 3,000ha.
Natural. Rainforest Alliance. 
• El ejido colectivo forestal Echeverria de la Sierra, Durango. 
3,000ha. Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
THE NETHERLANDS 
• Koninklijke Houtvesterij Het Loo. 8,058ha. Plantation/natural. Skal.
• Gemeentebossen Ede. 2,044ha. Government. Plantation/natural.
S k a l .
• Gemeentebossen Arnhem. 1,304ha. Government. Plantation/natural.
S k a l .
• Gemeente Apeldoorn. 571ha. Government. Plantation/natural. Skal.
• Gemeente Renkum. 283ha. Government. Plantation/natural. Skal.
• Gemeente Lelystad. 465ha. Government. Plantation/natural. Skal.
• Staatsbosbeheer, Regio Flevoland-Overijssel.Government. 18,200ha.
Plantation/natural. Skal.
• Staatsbosbeheer, Regio Groningen-Drenthe. 21,714ha. Government.
Plantation/natural. Skal.
NEW ZEALAND 
• Craigpine Timber Ltd., Waitane, Rugged Hills, Castledowns and
Wether Hills. 2,305ha. Plantation. SGS.
• Rayonier New Zealand Ltd., South Resources District. 42,720ha.
Plantation. SGS. W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 3 4

PA N A M A
• Futuro Forestal, S.A San Felix, Chiriqui. Panama. 23ha. Plantation.
Rainforest Alliance.
PA R A G U A Y 
• Yaguarete Forest L.P. 16,000ha. Natural. SCS. 
POLAND 
• Gdansk Regional Directorate of State Forests. 294,000ha. Natural.
SGS. 
• Katowice Regional Directorate of State Forests. 635,000ha. Natural.
SGS. 
• Szczecinek Regional Directorate of State Forests. 622,563ha.
Natural. SGS. 
• Krakow Regional Directorate of State Forests. 173,166ha.
Government. Natural. SGS. 
SOLOMON ISLANDS 
• SWIFT with Iriquila Community, North-west Vella Lavella. 200ha.
Natural. SGS Forestry.
• SWIFT with Nairobi Community, Sikuni 1 Land. 200ha. Natural. SGS
F o r e s t r y.
• SWIFT with Ozanga Lavata Milling Project, Karukate, V a n g u n u
Island. 200ha. Natural. SGS Forestry.
• SWIFT with Tomba Tuni Eco-timber project, Tomba Tuni Island.
25ha. Natural. SGS Forestry.
• SWIFT with Avos Kevu (Rove Family), Burape on New Georgia.
38ha. Natural. SGS Forestry.
• SWIFT with Lilihina Project, at Ziata Road, near Makuhae. 8ha.
Natural. SGS Forestry.
SOUTH AFRICA 
• Bracken Timbers, Kwazulu-Natal Province. 4,500ha. Plantation. SGS
F o r e s t r y.
• SAFCOL, Forest plantations in Kwa-Zulu Natal Province. 51,922ha.
Plantation. SGS Forestry.
• SAFCOL, Forest plantations in Mpumalanga South Region. 51,196ha.
Plantation. SGS Forestry.
• Soetmelk Boerdery (Edms) Bpk in partnership with African Char c o a l ,
Vaalkop farm. 300ha. Plantation. SGS Forestry.
• Kanhym Landgoed, 7 farms. 602ha. Plantation. SGS Forestry.
• Majuba Hill Farms in partnership with African Charcoal. 1,458ha.
Plantation. SGS Forestry.
• SAFCOL, Eastern Cape Region. 42,714ha. Plantation. SGS Forestry.
• Mondi Forests North, Mpumulanga Province. 214,031ha. Plantation.
SGS Forestry.
• SAFCOL, West Cape Region. 53,530ha. Plantation. SGS Forestry.
• SAFCOL, Mpumalanga North Region. 64,378ha. Plantation. SGS
F o r e s t r ySRI LANKA 
• Dipped Products Ltd., Kelani Valley Plantations. 4,582ha. Plantation.
SGS Forestry
• RPK Management Services (Pvt) Ltd., Kegalle Plantations. 5,476ha.
Plantation. SGS Forestry.
• Horana Plantations Ltd., Horana Plantations. 2,668ha. Plantation.
SGS Forestry.
SWEDEN 
• AssiDomän Skog & Trä, Värmland & Karlskoga forest management
districts. 60,700ha. Natural. SGS Forestry.
• Korsnäs Aktiebolag Skog: Gimo, Ljusdal and Dala Regions.
664,200ha. Natural. SGS Forestry.
• Stora, Ludvika forest management district. 300,000ha. Natural. SCS.
• AssiDomän Skog & Trä, Älbsvyn region. 676,000ha. Natural. SGS
F o r e s t r y.
• AssiDomän Skog & Trä, Kalix region.Private or industrial.
778,000ha. Natural. SGS Forestry.
• Stora, Mora forest management district. 300,000ha. Natural. SCS.
• Stora, Sveg forest management district. 285,000ha. Natural. SCS.
• Stora, Strömsberg forest management district. 92,000ha. Natural.
S C S .
• AssiDomän Lycksele Region, Lycksele Region. 727,000ha. Natural.
SGS Forestry.
• AssiDomän Skog & Trä, Värnamo region. 141,000ha. Natural. SGS
F o r e s t r y.
• AssiDomän Ostersund Region. 180,000ha. Natural. SGS Forestry.
• Skogssällskapet AB, Group Certification. 72,000ha. Natural. Soil
A s s o c i a t i o n .
• AssiDomän Skog & Trä AB, Växjö Management Region. 171,000ha.
Natural. SGS Forestry.
S W I T Z E R L A N D
• Soluthurn Government. 2,095ha. Natural. SGS Forestry.
• Foundation Rollirain. 17ha. Natural. IMO 17
UNITED KINGDOM 
• Dartington Hall Trust, Dartington Home Woods, Devon, England.
92ha. Plantation/Natural. Soil Association.
• Dyfed Wildlife Trust, Pengelli Forest, Dyfed, Wales. 65ha. Natural.
Soil Association.
• Duchy of Cornwall, Cornwall, England. 1,004ha. Plantation/Natural.
Soil Association.
• National Trust, Hatfield Forest, Essex, England. 240ha.
Plantation/Natural. Soil Association.
• Camphill Village Trust, Oaklands Park, Gloucestershire, England.
13ha. Natural. Soil Association.
• Bioregional Charcoal Company Limited (group certification of 21
woodlands in Britain). 2,037ha. Plantation/Natural. SGS Forestry.3 5 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

• Big K Charcoal Merchants Limited (group certification of Shadwell
Estate, Thompson Common, Foxley Wood, Hoe Rough and Scales
Park State). 862ha. Plantation/Natural. Soil Association.
• Elveden Farms Ltd. Norfolk. 1,600ha. Plantation/Natural. Soil
A s s o c i a t i o n .
• Plashett Wood, Sussex. 150ha. Plantation/Natural. Soil Association.
• Coed Cymru, Wales. 140ha. Group Certification. Natural. SGS
F o r e s t r y
• Wrekin District Council. United Kingdom. Government. 452ha.
Plantation/Natural. Soil Association.
UNITED STATES 
• Big Creek Lumber Company, Santa Cruz County, California. 2,720ha.
Natural. SCS.
• Collins Pine Company, Collins Amanor Forest, Chester county, CA.
37,600ha. Natural. SCS.
• Edward A. Tunheim, Resource Manager. Santa Cruz, California.
8,094ha. Plantation. Private. Rainforest Alliance.
• Darcie Mahoney, California. Resource Manager. 353ha. Natural.
Rainforest alliance.
• Blencowe Managed Forest Lands, North Coast, California. 4,878ha.
Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
• Kane Hardwood Division of Collins Pine Company, Kane,
Pennsylvania. 46,400ha. Natural. SCS.
• Keweenaw Land Association, Ironwood, Michigan. 63,000ha.
Natural. Rainforest Alliance. 
• McClellan Mountain Ranch, Bridgeville, CA. 133ha. Natural.
Rainforest Alliance.
• Menominee Tribal Enterprises, Keshena, Wisconsin. 95,122ha.
Natural. SCS and Rainforest Alliance.
• Seven Islands Land Company, Pingree Family Forest, Bangor, Maine.
390,000ha. Natural. SCS.
• Tree Shepherd Woods, Thurston County, Washington. 8ha. Natural.
Rainforest Alliance.
• Two Trees Forestry, Coopers Mills, Maine. 3,572ha. Natural.
Rainforest Alliance.
• Northeast Ecologically Sustainable T i m b e r , Dover, New Hampshire.
1,366ha. Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
• Wylatti Timber Management company, Ltd., Mendocino County,
California. 365ha. Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
• Our Lady of the Redwoods Abby, Inc. Whitethorn, California. 163ha.
Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
• Surface Road Associates, Seattle, Washington. 12ha. Natural.
Rainforest Alliance.
• Metropolitan District Commission's Quabbin Reservoir Lands,
Massachusetts. Government. 23,577ha. Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
• Red Hills Lumber, Boston, Massachusetts. 2,945ha. Natural.
Rainforest Alliance.
• SW-FM-025Individual Tree Selection Management, Inc., Portland,
Oregon. 2,042ha. Natural. Rainforest Alliance.• Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resour c e s ,
Bureau of Forestry. Pennsylvania. Government. 485,615ha. Natural.
S C S .
• Minnesota Aitkin County Land Department.Government. 89,876ha.
Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
• Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, Division of Forestry
Management of State Lands in Aitkin County. Government. 146,719ha.
Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
• Collins Lakeview Forest, Oregon. 29,150ha. Plantation/natural. SCS.
• Maine Forestry, Maine. 1,402ha. Group certification. Plantation.
S C S .
• The Brown Tract, Oregon. 110ha. Natural and Plantation. Rainforest
Alliance. 
• The Kan Property. California. 17ha. Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
• The Krantz-Kahan Property. Whitehorn, California. 24ha. Natural.
Rainforest Alliance.
• Randy Jacobszoon. California Resource manager. 1,545ha. Natural.
Rainforest Alliance.
• Arcata City Forest. California. Government. 486ha. Natural Forest.
Rainforest Alliance.
• Still Waters Farm. Shelton, Washington. 60ha. Natural. Rainforest
A l l i a n c e .
• Ecoforestry Management Associates. Oregon. Resource Manager.
142ha. Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
• Ecoforestry Institute. Oregon. 170ha. Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
• Forest, Soil and W a t e r. California. Resource Manager. 182ha.
Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
• Vermont Family Forests. Middlebury. Vermont. 2,666ha. Resour c e
M a n a g e r . Natural. Rainforest Alliance.
Z A M B I A
• Muzama Crafts Ltd. 1,273,700ha. Natural. Soil Association.
Z I M B A B W E
• Durawood Products, Pumula Protected Woodland, Matabele land
North. 24,850ha. Natural. SGS Forestry.
S o u r ce: http://www . f s c o a x . o r g / f r a m e n e g . h t m lW F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 3 6

A P P E N D I X  2
List of SGS Technical Committee for WFP assessment standard
Hammish Kimmins, Faculty of Forestry, University of British Columbia
George W a t t s , Imhahup Consulting Group, BC
B ryan Evans, Dovetail Consulting, BC
Ilan V e r t i n s k i , Faculty of Forestry, University of British Columbia, BC
Neid Judd, SGS Qualifor, Oxford, England3 7 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

A P P E N D I X  3
FSC ANAL Y S I S
The FSC provides the following Introduction of its purpose and
i n t e n t :
“It is widely accepted that forest resources and associated lands
should be managed to meet the social, economic, ecological, cultural
and spiritual needs of present and future generations. Furthermore,
growing public awareness of forest destruction and degradation has
led consumers to demand that their purchases of wood and other 
forest products will not contribute to this destruction but rather 
help to secure forest resources for the future. In response to these
demands, certification and self-certification programs of wood 
products have proliferated in the marketplace. 
The Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) is an international body 
which accredits certification organizations in order to guarantee the
authenticity of their claims. In all cases the process of certification
will be initiated voluntarily by forest owners and managers who
request the services of a certification organization. The goal of the
FSC is to promote environmentally responsible, socially beneficial and
economically viable management of the world's forests, by establish-
ing a worldwide standard of recognized and respected Principles of
Forest Management. 
The FSC’s Principles and Criteria (P&C) apply to all tropical, 
temperate and boreal forests, as addressed in Principle #9 and the
accompanying glossary. Many of these P&C apply also to plantations
and partially replanted forests. More detailed standards for these 
and other vegetation types may be prepared at national and local 
levels. The P&C are to be incorporated into the evaluation systems
and standards of all certification organizations seeking accreditation
by the FSC. While the P&C are mainly designed for forests managed
for the production of wood products, they are also relevant, to 
v a rying degrees, to forests managed for non-timber products and
other services. The P&C are a complete package to be considered as
a whole, and their sequence does not represent an ordering of 
p r i o r i t y . This document shall be used in conjunction with the FSC’s
Statutes, Procedures for Accreditation and Guidelines for Certifiers. 
FSC and FSC-accredited certification organizations will not insist 
on perfection in satisfying the P&C. However, major failures in any
individual Principles will normally disqualify a candidate from 
certification, or will lead to decertification. These decisions will be
taken by individual certifiers, and guided by the extent to which 
each Criterion is satisfied, and by the importance and consequences
of failures. Some flexibility will be allowed to cope with local 
c i rcumstances. The FSC recognizes that there is a continuum of forest management
intensity and resulting forest condition. This continuum includes 
p r i m a r y, undisturbed natural forest, (with all or most of the character-
istics and functions of the natural forest ecosystem), well-developed
s e c o n d a r y and semi-natural forests (with many or some of the 
characteristics and functions of the natural forest ecosystem), and
plantations (with few or no characteristics of the natural forest
ecosystem). The decision to categorize and evaluate a managed forest
(a management regime applied to a specific forest type) as a “natural
forest” or as a “plantation” must be made at a local level, and should
be guided by clearly articulated FSC-endorsed regional standards,
when such standards exist. These standards may include further 
conditions and restrictions on plantation management. The FSC also
recognizes differences between plantations of exotic species and
those of native species. Plantations composed of exotic species 
inherently pose more risks than those of native species, and will
require additional ecological and social safeguards. These safeguards
are to be articulated in FSC regional standards. In order to be 
considered for certification, all forests, including plantations, must
meet Principles and Criteria 1 through 9. Plantations, however, 
must also satisfy Principle 10 and its Criteria.
The scale and intensity of forest management operations, the 
uniqueness of the affected resources, and the relative ecological
fragility of the forest will be considered in all certification assess-
ments. Differences and difficulties of interpretation of the P&C will be
addressed in national and local forest management standards. These
standards are to be developed in each country or region involved, and
will be evaluated for purposes of certification, by certifiers and other
involved and affected parties on a case by case basis. If necessary,
FSC dispute resolution mechanisms may also be called upon during
the course of assessment. More information and guidance about the
certification and accreditation process is included in the FSC Statutes,
Accreditation Procedures, and Guidelines for Certifiers. 
The FSC P&C should be used in conjunction with national and 
international laws and regulations. FSC intends to complement, not
supplant, other initiatives that support responsible forest manage-
ment worldwide. 
The FSC will conduct educational activities to increase public 
awareness of the importance of the following: 1) improving forest
management; 2) incorporating the full costs of management and 
production into the price of forest products; 3) promoting the highest
and best use of forest resources; 4) reducing damage and waste; 
and 5) avoiding over-consumption and over - h a rvesting. The FSC will
also provide guidance to policy makers on these issues, including
improving forest management legislation and policies. ”W F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 3 8

A P P E N D I X  4
Letter from Hereditary Chiefs
H E I L TSUK CHIEFS TELL WESTERN FOREST PRODUCTS 
TO “DEFER LOGGING OUR LAND”
In early April, 70 Heiltsuk representatives sailed to Ingram-Mooto to
request that Western Forest Products immediately stop logging the
Ingram-Mooto. With support from the community, the Hemas Council
of hereditary chiefs asked for a one year deferral on all new logging in
Heiltsuk territory to allow the community to make informed decisions
and develop sustainable short and long term plans for all logging
activities in their homeland. Although WFP stopped temporarily, they
sent the road building crew in after 10 days without consultation 
with the community. Since then WFP has continued road building and
plans to log the pristine valleys using conventional clear c u t t i n g
despite concerns of the Hemas Council.
“ We have watched our resources and economic opportunities being
taken away and yet we depend on these for our food and survival. Our
salmon, abalone, halibut, cod, sea cucumbers and now our trees are
being removed, ” said Hemas spokesperson Harvey Humchitt. The
Heiltsuk have been here since time began and will remain here until it
ends. “We want the logging of the Ingram-Mooto and all removal 
of resources to stop until we can have a voice in determining what
happens in our homeland. We owe this to our future generations and
to the land and sea which provide for us. We want the logging of 
old growth to stop for the sake of all British Columbians. ”
Western Forest Products is one of the largest logging companies
which operate in Heiltsuk territory. They remove huge amounts of
timber every year and yet provide only a few jobs for the Heiltsuk
people. Recently, WFP stated their wish to become certified as being
an environmentally and socially responsible logging company under
the Forest Stewardship Council. However, the FSC clearly states that,
“indigenous peoples shall control forest management on their lands
and territories unless they delegate control with free and informed
consent to other agencies. ” The hereditary chiefs sent a letter to the
FSC protesting WFP's activities.“ We do not support the clearcutting of old growth in Ingram-Mooto.
This is wrong. ” said Chief Harvey Humchitt, “WFP is ignoring our
request for a one-year deferral even though the Delgamuukw and
Gladstone cases acknowledge that First Nation people have the right
to financially share in the benefits of development in their homelands. ”
“ We are not against logging— we support sustainable development
which doesn’t destroy the delicate balance and interconnectedness of
l i f e, ” said Chief Humchitt. “In the past, our voices were unheard—
we are now exercising our responsibility to be stewards of this land.
Our ancestors made decisions which all British Columbians now 
benefit from. We owe this to future generations for the sake of our
common good. ”
The ancient forest stands have been here for thousands of years —
one year is a small fraction to review all options.3 9 A N  I N D I C A T I V E  A S S E S S M E N T

A P P E N D I X  5
Contact Information
1. SGS
2.1 SGS Qualifor
SGS Qualifor
Oxford Centre for Innovation
Mill Street
Oxford, OX2 OJX
Tel: +44 1865 202345
Fax: +44 1865 790441
E-mail: forestr y @ s g s g r o u p . c o m
2.2 SGS contact in British Columbia
Len Apedaile
Tel: +1 250 337 5246
Fax: +1 250 337 5246
E-mail: apedaile@oberon.ark.com
2. Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
2.1 FSC Secretariat.
FSC Secretaria
Avenida Hidalgo 502
68000 Oaxaca, Mexico
Tel: +52 951 46905
Fax: +52 951 62110
E-mail: FSCOAX@fscoax.org
Web: HYPERLINK http://www . f s c o a x . o r g
w w w .fscoax.org 
2.2 FSC in British Columbia
Lara Beckett 
FSC Canada, FSC BC Steering Committee
14305 Westbe Rd
Prince George, BC
Canada V2N 5C2
Tel/Fax: +1 250 560 5556
E-mail: druid@pgweb.comTamara Stark
Forests Campaign
Greenpeace Canada
1726 Commercial Drive
Va n c o u v e r , BC
Tel: +1 604 253 7701
Fax: +1 604 253 0114
E-mail: tstark@yvr . g r e e n p e a c e . o r g
Bill Bar c l a y
Forests Campaign
Greenpeace International
965 Mission St, Suite 450
San Francisco, CA, USA
Tel: +1 415 512 7136
Fax: +1 415 512 8699
E-mail: HYPERLINK
m a i l t o : b b a r clay@sfo.greenpeace.org bbar-
clay@sfo.greenpeace.org 
4. Other FSC-Accredited Certifiers
Ashley W e l d
Rainforest Alliance, Smart Wood Programme 
3 Millet Street, Goodwin Baker Building
Richmond, VT 05477, USA
Tel: +1 802 434 5491
Fax: +1 802 434 3116
E-mail: aweld@smartwood.org 
Website: http://www.smartwood.org 
Debbie Hammel
Scientific Certification Systems, Forest
C o n s e r vation Program 
Park Plaza Building 1939 Harrison Street,
Suite 400
Oakland, CA 94612-3532 U.S.A
Tel: +1 510 832 1415
Fax: +1 510 832 0359
E-mail: dhammel@scs1.com 
We b s i t e : h t t p : / / w w w .scs1.com Jan-Willem Heezen 
Skal, Forestry Certification Programme 
Stationsplein 5, P.O. Box 384
8000 AJ Zwolle, The Netherlands.
Tel. +31 38 4226 866 
Fax: +31 38 4213 063 
E-mail: skal@euronet.nl 
Jim Sandom 
Soil Association, Woodmark Scheme 
Bristol House 40-56 Victoria Street
Bristol BS1 6BY, UK. 
Tel. +44 117 929 0661 
Fax: +44 117 925 2504
E-mail: rfp@gn.apc.org 
Website: http://www.earthfood.co.uk 
D r. Rainer Bächi
IMO, Institut für Marktökologie 
Poststrasse 8
CH-8583 Sulgen, Switzerland
Tel: +41 71 642 3616 
Fax: +41 71 642 3663 
E-mail: IMOCH@compuserve.com 
We b s i t e : h t t p : / / w w w. I M O . C H
5. Other Certification Agencies
Susan Hammond
Silver Forest Foundation
P.O. Box 9
Slocan Park
British Columbia
Canada  V0G 2E0
Tel: +1 250 226 7222
Fax: +1 250 226 7446
E-mail: silvafor@netidea.com
Website: http://www . s i l v a f o r. o r gW F P  L O G G I N G  P R A C T I C E S 4 0



The Kermode, or Spirit Bear, is a
rare subspecies of black bear found
in an area of Canada’s rainforest
where WFP has licenses to log. One
out of every 10 black bears in this
area are born with this unusual
white colouration. ( M c A l l i s t e r )International protest against 
Doman Industries, parent company
of WFP, for continuing to clear c u t
C a n a d a ’ s rainforest valleys.
( G P / B e r g h e z a n )
G r e e n p e a c e
Founded in Canada, 1971
Fondé au Canada, 1971
Va n c o u v e r
1726 Commercial Drive
Va n c o u v e r
British Columbia
Canada  V5N 4A3
&604 253-7701
FA X604 253-0114
To r o n t o
185 Spadina A v e n u e
6th Floor
Toronto, Ontario
Canada  M5T 2C6
&416 597-8408
FA X416 597-8422
M o n t r é a l
2444 Notre-Dame ouest
Montréal (Québec)
Canada  H3J 1N5
&514 933-0021
FA X514 933-1017